# 1.   Reach Beyond the Best

divides, and showcase the hidden glory of Iraq’s rich heritage. To this
end, Paul reduced the orchestra’s reliance on musical excellence and a
sophisticated European repertoire, and eliminated renowned guest
soloists and guest conductors, which dramatically dropped its cost
structure.
In its place, Paul and Zuhal assembled a group of youthful musicians
who would play original Iraqi music of both Kurdish and Arab origin
and put it on an equal footing with the likes of Haydn, Beethoven, and
Schubert, which they also played. Much to the disbelief of many, NYOI
brought together young men and women musicians who were Sunni and
Shia, Arab and Kurdish. In this way, Paul and Zuhal built an orchestra
that demonstrated the young Iraqis’ hope and commitment to building a
brighter future together out of the destruction of war. As NYOI member
Mohammed Adnan Abdallah put it, “Music is the language of peace, and
it makes people love each other. When musicians sit and play together,
they communicate that.”1
The result: NYOI became known as the “Bravest Orchestra in the
World,” a title first bestowed on it by the British broadcaster Sky News.
It might not be the most technically accomplished group of young
musicians. But it was, perhaps, the most inspired. It broke away from
other national youth orchestras, winning accolades, standing ovations,
and attention across the globe. It attracted new audiences who had never
gone to classical music concerts before and enjoyed one of the largest
social media followings of any youth orchestra. More than that, it
showed young Iraqi people they could create a different narrative for
their country other than one of destruction, hate, and war—one of peace,
hope, and solidarity.2
Paul MacAlindin is smart and a fine conductor. He is hardworking,
strives to do his best, and has a passion for making a difference. He will
be the first to admit, though, that he is not a genius or your typical
entrepreneur. In many ways, Paul is just like most of us. Yet, despite
organizational constraints, ranging from scant resources to limited top
talent, Paul and his young orchestra members developed a strategy that
was both creative and low cost, allowing the orchestra to stand apart
from fierce, entrenched competition.
Paul and NYOI’s youthful musicians are not alone.


From Orchestras to French Fry Makers
Take Groupe SEB, the French multinational founded in 1857. Like most
large, well-established multinationals, Groupe SEB is run by
professional managers, many of whom have been with the company for
years, with an established culture and its share of bureaucracy and
internal politics. Like most small appliance makers at the time, its
businesses were facing increasingly intense competition and margin
pressure. In particular, its electric French fry makers, struggling to stand
apart in a market that was shrinking 10 percent a year in value, were a
case in point.
Recognizing the need to break out of this intense competition,
Christian Grob, the head of electric cooking at the time, and his team set
out to turn the situation around. The professional managers of Groupe
SEB were somewhat skeptical. After all, what could you do with a
French fry maker when price was the only thing that seemed to drive
sales?
Christian and his team reasoned differently. What if all the players in
the industry were operating under the same set of assumptions, but those
assumptions limited the attractiveness of and the demand for their
products? What would happen if those assumptions were rethought?
Christian and his team set about to do just that—to identify and
challenge the industry’s most basic assumptions. When they did, they
had a revelation.
Christian’s team discovered that there were two facts that everyone
accepted without question—two facts that in essence defined the
industry. The first was that making fresh French fries required frying.
The second was that frying required a lot of oil.
Obvious? Yes. However, these unexamined assumptions drove the
industry to overlook a host of problems. The 2.5 liters of cooking oil that
were required were expensive. Once hot, the oil makes fryers dangerous.
When the fries are done, it’s hard to dispose of the cooking oil, making
cleanup difficult. To top it off, all that oil makes fries both unhealthy and
incredibly fattening.
Challenging this accepted wisdom led the team to redefine the
problem from the one the industry focused on—how to make a best-in-
class fryer—to how to make mouthwatering, healthy, fresh fries without
frying. The result was ActiFry—a whole new type of French fry maker,


first launched in France in 2006 and since rolled out globally. ActiFry
requires no frying, and uses only one tablespoon of oil to make two
pounds of fries, with roughly 40 percent fewer calories and 80 percent
less fat than the same size serving of traditional fries. What’s more, the
appliance is easy to clean and has no safety or oil disposal issues. The
fries are great, too—crunchy on the outside and soft on the inside. The
winning combination of healthy, lower-calorie, yet yummy fries inspired
Oprah Winfrey to tweet about how much she loves her ActiFry. “This
machine… actifry has changed my life,” she tweeted, “And they’re not
paying me to say it.”3 Not only did demand outstrip supply across
Europe, but after Oprah’s comments, Groupe SEB’s stock price jumped 5
percent based on this one product. It took competitors five years to dive
into the market, and even so they didn’t succeed in capturing a
significant share, since they couldn’t match what ActiFry offered, thanks
to the patents Groupe SEB secured. To this day, more than ten years out,
ActiFry remains the global market leader. With the launch of ActiFry, the
industry also grew by nearly 40 percent in value, pulling into the market
brand-new customers who had never bought an electric fry maker before.
The industries of national youth orchestras and French fry makers are
clearly worlds apart. They deliver different offerings, compete in
different ways, and have completely different sets of players. The two
organizations are also different. The National Youth Orchestra of Iraq is
a new nonprofit, essentially a start-up. Groupe SEB is a for-profit
multinational with over 150 years of history behind it.
As different as these two organizations and their industry settings are,
however, they succeeded in the same way. Both shifted from competing
in crowded existing markets to creating new market space. And while
both faced organizational hurdles—as all organizations do—they
overcame them by winning people’s confidence and cooperation. This is
what we call blue ocean shift. Blue ocean shift is a systematic process to
move your organization from cutthroat markets with bloody competition
—what we think of as red oceans full of sharks—to wide-open blue
oceans, or new markets devoid of competition, in a way that brings your
people along.
To deepen our understanding of blue ocean shift, let’s look at another
example, this one launched by government, arguably one of the most
bureaucratic, resistant-to-change entities, and one that few would
describe as creative or innovative.


The Gift of a Second Chance
Many countries today face rising crime, overcrowded prisons, and high
recidivism rates. The implications of this situation are huge. It is costly
to taxpayers. It threatens the security of citizens. It is debilitating to
people who have turned to crime and can’t break out of its vicious cycle.
It is also heartbreaking for their families.
Most governments deal with overcrowded prisons in conventional
ways: by building more of them, or maximizing utilization by mixing
petty criminals in with harder-core inmates. Neither option works very
well. Building more prisons is expensive and time-consuming, and
mixing petty and harder-core criminals turns prisons into crime schools.
Either way, the focus is mainly on incarceration and providing a strict
security environment, not on rehabilitation. California, for instance, has
built 22 prisons since 1980. Its annual prison budget is now some US$9
billion. Yet its prisons remain massively overcrowded, and its recidivism
rate hovers at a whopping 65 percent. In short, the existing strategies for
managing prisons may succeed at punishment, but they fail at what
society needs most—rehabilitating inmates to become productive
members of the community.
When the government of Malaysia faced this precise challenge in
2010, it recognized that only a shift in strategy and organizational focus
could break the vicious cycle of incarceration and reduce crime. To that
end, the government turned to the National Blue Ocean Strategy (NBOS)
Summit. The government had created the NBOS Summit in 2009 to
pioneer innovative strategies and new practices that could achieve high
social impact at low cost. Each month the NBOS Summit brings together
national leaders like the prime minister, the deputy prime minister, and
other top ministers, as well as the highest-level civil servants, including
those from the nation’s security forces. Depending on the issue, Summit
participants vary and relevant private sector leaders are also involved.
In seeking a creative solution to the prison problem, the Summit
stopped using global best practices as the benchmark. Instead, as Paul
MacAlindin did at NYOI and Christian Grob did at Groupe SEB, it
sought to identify and challenge the industry’s fundamental assumptions.
Chief among these was the long-held assumption that all criminals need
to be put in prisons. Was there an alternative to very costly, high-security
prisons, which could have high impact at far lower cost?


As the Summit explored these questions, it saw an opportunity that
the ministers and security professionals had never previously recognized.
Many military bases around the country had idle land. These bases had a
robust security infrastructure, meant to keep trespassers out. But it was
equally well suited to keeping prisoners in. For petty criminals, who
were the largest inmate population, this idle land could be converted into
an effective, low-cost security environment.
Summit participants also surfaced a second long-held practice that
was 
keeping 
the 
government 
from 
recognizing 
rehabilitation
opportunities; that is, the key expertise to rehabilitate prisoners lay
outside the domain of the ministry in charge of prisons. Traditionally,
prison officials were put in charge of rehabilitation, but their expertise
was in confinement and high security—not in education, training,
employment, and family needs. These were the keys to rehabilitation,
and they could be much better provided by other ministries.
As the Summit challenged and overturned these long-held
assumptions, it made a blue ocean shift, and the Community
Rehabilitation Program (CRP) was born. Instead of building more
expensive prisons, the Summit created CRP centers for petty criminals
on the military bases’ idle land, a first in the world. CRP offered a
solution to overcrowding that could be delivered quickly and cheaply,
and it ensured that petty criminals would be separated from, and not
influenced by, hardened criminals. That was just the start.
At the CRP centers, the Ministries of Agriculture and Higher
Education were brought in to provide high-value vocational training in
cultivating fish and growing high-yield crops, which are then sold in
open markets. The inmates earn and save money through the sale of the
products they produce. Such training not only teaches valuable skills, but
also shows these minor offenders a financial alternative to crime. CRP
also reaches out, via the human rights commissioner, to inmates’ family
members, encouraging more regular contact and even providing housing
facilities nearby to allow visiting families to stay longer.
Visitation at conventional prisons normally occurs behind a glass
window for 30 minutes. By contrast, at the CRP centers, inmates and
their spouses and children are allowed to not only hug and hold each
other but also play together. This heals wounds and reminds inmates how
much they are loved and how important their rehabilitation is. Upon
release, the Ministry of Human Resources provides departing prisoners


with job-matching services, and loans are available from the Ministry of
Women, Family and Community Development, should they wish to start
their own business.
The result: CRP delivered a leap in value to prisoners, their families,
and society while keeping costs to the government low. Here are the
facts: Since the CRP centers started in 2011, the recidivism rate for petty
criminals has dropped around 90 percent and stands at some 0.6 percent
of California prisons. Their families are thrilled. Society is safer. As for
cost, compared with a conventional prison, a CRP center is 85 percent
cheaper to build and 58 percent cheaper to run. Based on the current
rehabilitation level, CRP is expected to deliver over US$1 billion in
reduced costs and benefits to society in its first decade.
Perhaps the greatest gift, however, is how CRP transforms the lives of
former inmates, giving them hope, dignity, and the tools to restart their
lives and become productive members of society. As one former CRP
inmate put it, “I really feel like I’ve been given a second chance. I’ve
learned new skills and have been able to set up my own motorcycle
repair business with the funds I made at CRP. I now see a new future for
myself.”
From Market Competing to Market Creating
Organizational leaders often accept and act on two fundamental
assumptions. One is that market boundaries and industry conditions are
given. You cannot change them. You have to build your strategy based
on them.4 The other is that, to succeed within these environmental
constraints, an organization must make a strategic choice between
differentiation and low cost. Either it can deliver greater value to
customers at a greater cost and hence a higher price, or it can deliver
reasonable value at a lower cost. But it can’t do both. Hence, the essence
of strategy is seen as making a value-cost trade-off.5
Is it, though? Can’t organizations shape the market boundaries and
industry conditions they face? Can’t organizations create strategies that
break the value-cost trade-off in pursuit of differentiation and low cost?6
Think about CRP. Did the NBOS Summit accept the industry or
environmental conditions of escalating prison costs, high recidivism
rates, and rising crime as givens? No. It redefined the boundaries of what


it means to incarcerate and rehabilitate criminals. It looked across
prisons, police, military, and other ministries, and made a strategic and
organizational shift that changed and reshaped these environmental
conditions.
As for differentiation and low cost, CRP didn’t make the value-cost
trade-off. It broke it. It created a leap in value for petty criminals,
families, and society at low cost to the government. By not
benchmarking and following the existing global best practices, CRP
made a blue ocean shift beyond what the prison industry had ever known
while winning the confidence and support of all members of the relevant
ministries.
Figure 1-1 captures this dynamic visually. The solid curve shows the
productivity frontier depicted by Michael Porter, which defines the
existing boundary of an industry, the sum total of all its best practices.7
The curve represents the highest levels of value and the corresponding
costs an organization can achieve, given currently available technology
and business best practices. As such, the frontier is the edge at which
strategy in an existing market space, or red ocean, takes place. On this
edge, all industry players have equal productivity—the ratio of value to
cost. Hence changes in buyer value and cost are positively related: More
of one necessarily means more of the other. What this means is that for a
market-competing or red ocean strategy to succeed, an organization has
to make a value-cost trade-off: It can stand out either in value, which is
called differentiation (position 1), or in low cost (position 2). But it
cannot stand out in both.8 If an organization’s offering is positioned
behind its industry’s productivity frontier it will inevitably be
outperformed by its competitors positioned on the frontier. Hence, the
strategic focus is on how to compete and win in existing market space.
Figure 1-1
From Market Competing to Market Creating


This strategic logic doesn’t stand, however, when we consider CRP.
In business terms, CRP did not take the existing industry boundary as a
given and stake a claim on the productivity frontier of existing prison
best practices. Instead, it made a blue ocean shift that broke the value-
cost trade-off. It pioneered a new strategy that opened up a new value-
cost frontier through a step change in the kind and degree of value
offered. This is how new market space is created. The dashed curve in
figure 1-1 captures this alternate dynamic. Here strategy is in pursuit of
both differentiation and low cost. By opening up a new value-cost
frontier that is a leap beyond the existing industry productivity curve, a
blue ocean is created and competition on the existing frontier is made
irrelevant.9
While achieving a blue ocean shift may seem like magic, it is not.


There is actually a systematic process that is accessible to everyone,
whether you see yourself as particularly creative or not. The process not
only maps out the path from red to blue oceans, but does so in a way that
inspires people’s confidence and brings them along from the beginning,
so that they understand it and feel invested in the shift. Groupe SEB’s
ActiFry, the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq, and the Malaysian
government’s Community Rehabilitation Program are just a few of the
blue ocean shifts made by organizations across the globe that have been
applying this process, either in whole or in part.
Our Journey to the Blue Ocean
Our understanding of blue ocean shift and the process to achieve it did
not come overnight. It is the result of a nearly 30-year research journey
that we ventured together, often against all odds. Three decades ago we
witnessed a disconcerting phenomenon that captured our minds and
hearts and set us on this path. Back in the mid-1980s, global competition
was heating up as never before, and, for the first time in history,
American companies were fast losing ground in industry after industry.
From motorcycles to cars, from earthmoving equipment to consumer
electronics, they were being overtaken by a new set of competitors—
Japanese corporations.
As researchers based in Ann Arbor, Michigan, at the time, we not
only read about this, we witnessed it firsthand. The auto capital of
America, just next door in Detroit, was devastated. The Big Three—
General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler—were hemorrhaging jobs.
Businesses were shutting down. People were scared. In Michigan, some
had even taken to vandalizing Japanese cars on the street out of fear and
anxiety over the onslaught of the new, strong competitors. Never was
this more apparent to us than when we drove into Detroit. Street after
street felt like a ghost town, slowly falling to ruin. We were both broke at
the time, driving beat-up old cars. The city felt beat up, too—both its
spirit and its economy.
Essentially, the economy of the developed world was easing into a
new phase that posed a new challenge. It was shifting from a situation of
demand outstripping supply following World War II to a tougher game of
supply outstripping demand, which meant ever-greater competition.
American companies may have been the first to feel the brunt of this


emerging challenge, but we were convinced it was only a matter of time
before companies throughout the developed world would face it too—
including the Japanese. Unless prepared, they would fall like once-
powerful Detroit.
With this perspective, and disheartened by what we saw, we set out to
understand not how to cope with or slow this emerging reality, but what
it would take to thrive, not merely survive, as competition heated up
across the globe. With growing clarity and focus, our research questions
emerged. Specifically, how can a company break out of this red ocean of
bloody competition and generate strong, profitable growth? What does it
take to reach beyond the best, to create new market space and make the
competition irrelevant?
The initial results of our research were a series of articles on strategy
and management published in Harvard Business Review as well as
academic journals.10 They culminated in our first book, Blue Ocean
Strategy. Originally published in 2005, and updated and expanded in
2015, Blue Ocean Strategy was translated into 44 languages and became
a bestseller across five continents. Long years of dogged focus, struggle,
and persistence are the true story behind this “overnight” global
bestseller.
In a nutshell, Blue Ocean Strategy articulated a view of the market
universe as composed of two types of oceans—red oceans and blue
oceans. Red oceans are all the industries in existence today that most
organizations fight over. Blue oceans are all the industries yet to be
created, where profit and growth increasingly come from. Based on our
study of 150 strategic moves, spanning more than 100 years and 30
industries, the book laid out the conceptual differences and underlying
patterns that separate market-competing moves—what we call red ocean
strategy—from market-creating moves—what we call blue ocean
strategy. It provided analytic tools to create blue oceans and highlighted
why red ocean strategy is a theory of market competition and blue ocean
strategy is a theory of market creation that makes competition irrelevant.
The terms red oceans, blue oceans, and blue ocean strategy soon entered
the business vernacular.
With a speed we hadn’t expected, a tidal wave of interest grew as
individuals, governments, companies, and nonprofits around the globe
started to look at their world through the lens of red and blue oceans.
Established organizations saw themselves as in a red ocean, with a call to


action to get out and create blue oceans. Entrepreneurs argued for the
need to seek blue ocean opportunities and avoid red oceans altogether.
The focus of interest and discussion moved to a whole new level: from
“What is blue ocean strategy?” to “How do we actually apply its theory
and tools to shift from red to blue oceans?”
Entrepreneurs and start-ups were looking for concrete steps and a
systematic process they could follow to create and capture blue oceans at
minimal risk. Established companies stuck in the red ocean sought to
understand how to move to open water. Their reasoning went like this:
Our culture is bureaucratic and resistant to change. Where do we start
this process? And how do we get people to buy into the idea and bring
them along, when all they know and are comfortable with is how to
compete within established industry rules? Past experience had taught
them that however creative their ideas and change efforts, no shift would
happen unless the human element was addressed. To ensure a successful
shift, they wanted to know how to win their people’s confidence and
cooperation, despite facing organizational hurdles.
To meet this new research challenge, we set out to study those who
had applied our theory and methodology to their organizations to create
and capture blue oceans. They included individuals and organizations
like Paul MacAlindin and the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq, Christian
Grob and his team at Groupe SEB, and the Malaysian government’s
NBOS Summit, which has created and implemented more than 100 blue
ocean national projects since its commencement in 2009.11 We analyzed
the patterns of their successes and failures and drew lessons from their
experiences to understand what worked, what didn’t work, and how to
avoid potential pitfalls.
Many of these individuals and organizations came to us or to
members of our blue ocean global network for guidance. They wanted to
know how and where to start the journey, how to apply the tools to new
opportunities, how to scope a meaningful blue ocean initiative, and how
to put the right team together to make it happen. They also wanted to
know how to build people’s trust and confidence in the process, because
only with these could they create the will and commitment to make the
needed shift. As you will see later, one of them is Kimberly-Clark Brazil,
a consumer-goods company that swam out of the bloody red ocean of the
hypercompetitive US$1.5 billion–plus Brazilian toilet tissue industry and
set the new industry standard with its blue ocean “Compacto” format.


Others applied our blue ocean theory and methodology on their own.
We came to know them through word of mouth, correspondence, or
reading about their experiences in the press, and reached out to them.
CitizenM Hotels, the affordable luxury chain, is one of these. It is
currently expanding globally from its home base in Amsterdam and
enjoys among the highest guest satisfaction ratings in the field of
hospitality while having the lowest costs. HealthMedia, is another—a
struggling company in 2006, with a mere US$6 million in sales—which,
under Ted Dacko’s leadership, created the new market space of digital
health coaching and in two short years was sold to Johnson & Johnson
for US$185 million. And then there’s Wawa, the American
convenience/food/gas chain, the 36th largest private company in
America, which achieved explosive growth under its former CEO and
current vice chairman Howard Stoeckel using the tools and ideas of a
blue ocean approach. With its blue ocean offering, Wawa continues to
grow under the leadership of its current CEO Chris Gheysens.
Overall, our analysis encompassed cases from Business to Customer
(B2C) and Business to Business (B2B) as well as the public and
nonprofit sectors. Through these field applications and our follow-up
studies, we learned not only the common factors leading to a successful
blue ocean shift but also the pitfalls and hurdles that got in the way.
To assess the validity and general applicability of our findings on a
larger scale, we also analyzed and compared the patterns behind the
strategic moves of other organizations that made the shift from red to
blue oceans, based on their own processes. The aim here was to continue
to broaden and deepen our understanding of how to escape cutthroat
competition and create new markets. Studying both organizations that
made the shift explicitly using our tools and ideas and those that did not
is key to grasping a more complete picture of the pattern and dynamic
process of market creation.
So, after over a decade of new study and analysis, we have arrived at
a deeper understanding of what it takes to succeed in the blue ocean shift
process. It comes down to three key components.
The Three Key Components of a Successful Blue Ocean Shift
The first component is adopting a blue ocean perspective, so that you
expand your horizons and shift your understanding of where


opportunity resides.
Organizations that open up new value-cost frontiers think differently.
That is, they think about different things than those that are focused only
on competing in their current markets. They raise fundamentally
different sets of questions that enable them to see and understand
opportunities and risk in fresh and innovative ways. This allows them to
conceive of different kinds and degrees of value to offer customers that
others either can’t see at all or dismiss as impossible or irrelevant. With
an expanded field of vision, they can, for instance, imagine creating a
national youth orchestra worthy of global praise, even though it lacks
highly trained musicians or quality instruments, by reconceiving it as a
showcase for bridging cultural divides and promoting peace. They can
imagine building rehabilitation centers on military bases for petty
criminals, even though that defies the historical separation of the
military, police, and prison administrations. They can imagine creating a
new kind of home French fry maker that produces fresh, tasty, and
healthier fries without frying.
Too many organizations are wedded to industry best practices even as
they strive to break away from them. Adopting the perspective of a blue
ocean strategist opens your mind to what could be, instead of limiting it
to what is. It expands your horizons and ensures that you are looking in
the right direction. Without expanding and reorienting your perspective,
striving to open up a new value-cost frontier is like running west looking
for the sunrise. No matter how fast you run, you’re not going to find it.
While the right perspective is critical, for most of us it is not
sufficient to actually conceive of and open up a new value-cost frontier.
This is one of the greatest challenges organizations face. They want to
get out of the red ocean. They want to make a blue ocean shift. They
may even have a blue ocean perspective. However, they lack market-
creating tools and guidance to turn their blue ocean perspective into
reality.
The second component, therefore, is having practical tools for market
creation with proper guidance on how to apply them to translate a blue
ocean perspective into a commercially compelling new offering that
creates new market space.
If the right perspective is a matter of shifting one’s strategic thinking
by asking different questions, market-creating tools and guidance enable


you to ask the right questions at the right point in the process and to see
the significance of the answers. Taken together, they build people’s
creative competence and provide the structure and parameters within
which to organize your thinking so you can conceive and discover what
others don’t see, and avoid the potential pitfalls that trip up most
organizations. Step-by-step, they guide you through the central questions
for opening up a breakthrough value-cost frontier: How do you challenge
the explicit and implicit assumptions you hold regarding your business
and your marketplace? How do you go about identifying the ocean of
noncustomers to create new demand? How can you systematically
redefine market boundaries to open up a new value-cost frontier that
makes the competition irrelevant? How can you create offerings that
stand apart while simultaneously achieving lower costs? And how do
you go about building a supporting business model that your
organization will follow to profitably bring your strategic vision to
market?
What makes these tools and frameworks so powerful is that they are
visual, which renders them easy to understand and apply, no matter what
an individual’s level of education or creativity. By showing in a single-
page graphic or diagram how the critical factors relate to one another,
each tool enables everyone to see the answer to each question emerge,
thus keeping everyone, well, on the same page.
Our book Blue Ocean Strategy introduced these tools, but the devil,
as they say, is in the operational details. Here we delve deeply into those
details: We show you how to put the right team together, set up the
process, and systematically apply each tool, in what sequence, to
produce results and avoid and overcome potential stumbling blocks
along the way. We are not talking about offering lessons from a 30,000-
foot perch. Instead, what we do here is empower managers with
practical, hands-on guidance at every step of the journey from the red
ocean to the blue.
Making a blue ocean shift is a transformational journey. It requires
more than a clear idea and strategy to open up a new value-cost frontier.
To move toward the new frontier, you have to bring people along.
Without people’s voluntary cooperation, you will be stopped dead in
your tracks, as every professional of a certain age knows. While most
strategy work does not delve into the human side of organizations, yours
should.


Accordingly, the third component is having a humanistic process,
something we have come to call “humanness” in the process, which
inspires and builds people’s confidence to own and drive the process
for effective execution.
Most organizations face internal hurdles to change. This might be a
cognitive hurdle, because people are wedded to the status quo. Or a
political hurdle created by deep divisions or structural silos that breed
internal tensions and infighting. Or a motivational hurdle, because
people focus on doing what it takes to get by, but lack the energy,
passion, and drive to make a real difference. Paul MacAlindin and the
National Youth Orchestra of Iraq, for example, faced the daunting hurdle
of bringing people who had been divided by years of fratricidal war
together as a team. In Groupe SEB, ingrained ways of doing things and
skepticism presented tough organizational hurdles to get over. The
Malaysian government faced the classic hurdles stifling most
governments today—ministerial silos and cross-ministerial tensions, not
to mention the motivational hurdle of a bureaucratic, civil servant
mentality.
Ironically, our research shows that the two most common practices
organizations rely on for execution are also the reason most
transformative efforts fail. First, most organizations treat strategy
creation and execution as separate and sequential activities. One group of
people devises a strategy and then hands it off to another to execute. For
the most part, academic research on strategy and innovation reinforces
this bifurcation and sequence. Second, when it comes to execution, most
of the time and attention get focused on making structural changes and
using carrot and stick approaches, such as changing spans of control,
aligning incentives, setting up key performance indicators, and the like.
While carrots, sticks, and structural shifts have their roles to play,
they do little to inspire and build people’s confidence, which is critical to
creating transformative change. To do that, organizations should
essentially do the opposite of what they commonly do.
Instead of treating execution as something that happens after the
strategy has been set, it needs to be built into the strategy from the start
or people won’t own it. Also, you need to focus on the emotions and
psychology of your people, instead of putting most of your energy into
manipulating the mechanistic levers of structure, punishments, and
rewards. If you can move people by inspiring and building their


confidence to own and drive your new strategy, they will be committed
to seeing change through and overcoming the organizational constraints
you confront.
How can you capture people’s hearts and minds and align them with
your new strategy? Change, after all, is threatening, and asking people to
make a blue ocean shift does just that by asking them to move away from
what they know to a new frontier. Yet surprisingly, as we studied
organizations that had made successful blue ocean shifts, we saw that
people became more creative and more energized, and that execution
wasn’t questioned—precisely what you want to achieve, but what’s
typically so elusive. Why would that be? The longer we thought, the
more clearly we could see that there was something about the process
that recognized people, acknowledging their fears, their insecurities,
their need to be treated with dignity, their desire to matter. We struggled
to figure out what word could capture this something and best describe
it. The closest we could get was what we came to term humanness.
What we came to understand is this: At its core, a successful blue
ocean shift is fundamentally a humanistic process. It does not deny but
instead embraces our humanness in such a way that it makes us more
competent and confident than we ever imagined. Humanness inspires us
to inch along. It recognizes our skepticism and vulnerabilities, our fear
that we can’t do it, our doubts over whether there even are blue oceans,
our need for intellectual and emotional recognition to make us feel
valued. By building humanness into the process, an organization can
shift its team’s psychology and create an emotional landscape for
change, whether you have 5 people or 10,000.
The blue ocean shift process accomplishes this not by demanding that
anyone change but by easing people’s fears and building their confidence
at every step of the way. It does this by weaving atomization, firsthand
discovery, and fair process into the entire journey. These elements are
key to humanness, our research found, because they touch people at a
fundamental level. The good news, as you will learn later, is that they are
reproducible in any organization.
Figure 1-2 captures the essence of making a successful blue ocean
shift in one picture. The three components shown in the figure are
complementary and work together to produce a shift. Make no mistake,
however. We were able to identify the three key components of a
successful blue ocean shift—a blue ocean perspective, practical tools for


market creation with proper guidance on how to apply them, and
humanness in the process—not because we got the components right
every time. In fact, organizations often faced frustrations and troubles as
we got them wrong. We learned from lots of mistakes, most of which
caused us to place even greater emphasis on the need to reinforce all
three key components throughout the process.
Figure 1-2
The Three Key Components of a Successful Blue Ocean Shift
Shifting an organization from a red to a blue ocean does not happen
in one day or after one off-site. But it also doesn’t take years. While the
final market launch of Groupe SEB’s ActiFry took over two years,
because of the time required to secure complex patents, the blue ocean
shifts of the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq and even the Malaysian
government’s large-scale Community Rehabilitation Program were made
in a year or so. As organizations start to see tangible evidence of
opportunities to open up breakthrough value-cost frontiers, energy
climbs and momentum to move from the red to the blue ocean is
unlocked in a powerful way.
Why Blue Ocean Shift Should Matter to You
There is no doubt that many, many industries are in need of new value-
cost frontiers. The health-care industry, for one. Energy, for another.
Public education in the United States, although not traditionally viewed
as an industry per se, needs to be rethought. Its performance is


unacceptably low, while costs have risen steeply. The auto industry,
while currently not in free fall, clearly needs new ways to tackle
environmental concerns that are not cost-prohibitive. Banking and other
financial institutions beg for new strategies to achieve sustainable high
performance.
UN scenarios suggest that, if current population and consumption
trends continue, we will need the equivalent of two earths by the 2030s
to generate sufficient resources and fresh air for all of us.12 We need to
open up new value-cost frontiers in areas as basic and diverse as the
production and supply of municipal water, electricity access and use, and
the way our cities are designed and run to avert what many see as
otherwise unavoidable crises.
Pick any existing industry you can think of and ask if it isn’t in need
of a blue ocean shift. How does its demand pair against its supply?
Today tighter profit margins, rising costs, stagnant or declining sales, and
market share battles are hitting industries across the board, from
construction to hair salons, advertising to law firms, paper mills to
publishing. Even in public and nonprofit sector industries, like post
offices, museums, libraries, charities, and classical orchestras, demand is
down, costs and competition are up, and organizations are struggling
financially.
In short, we are all paying for the red oceans around us. To turn
things around, we need to produce more creative strategies that can
unlock new value-cost frontiers and with them profitable new growth
horizons. We need blue ocean shifts.
How about you?
Perhaps you are like Paul MacAlindin and the National Youth
Orchestra of Iraq. You run or are part of a young organization, essentially
a start-up, or a small Main Street business. You know you need to break
out of the red ocean of head-to-head competition to grow profitably, but
you don’t know how. Or maybe you are part of a large, established
organization with ingrained routines, culture, and its share of typical
bureaucracy, as Christian Grob and his team had faced at Groupe SEB.
Your organization is stuck in a red ocean of bloody competition but you
doubt how, or if, it can shift away from the commoditization and price
competition that is haunting it. People’s mindsets seem locked in old
ways of thinking, yet you know that to seize the future a strategic shift is
necessary. Or you may be part of a government department, or ministry,


or other public sector organization whose policies and practices are no
longer cutting it. You know fundamental shifts are needed to deliver a
leap in value at lower costs, but you can’t even begin to imagine pulling
that off.
If you can relate to any one of these situations, blue ocean shift is
right for you.
What to Expect
Before diving into how to make a blue ocean shift happen, chapter 2
spells out the core concepts and mechanisms you need to know about
market creation. It clarifies the existing confusion over what market-
creating strategy really is and how it works. Here we address key issues,
such as why focusing on creative destruction and disruptive innovation is
limiting and captures only a partial picture of how new markets are
created. How there’s a whole other universe of market-creating
opportunities that are often overlooked, but shouldn’t be, based on
nondisruptive creation. And why the innovations that economists
applaud and promote are not always synonymous with what it takes to
create commercially compelling new markets that open up new value-
cost frontiers, and why you need to understand what differentiates the
two.
Chapters 3 and 4 then lay the foundations of blue ocean shift. Chapter
3 delineates the mindset of blue ocean strategists and their distinctive
ways of thinking, so you can embrace the mental framing required to
make a blue ocean shift. Chapter 4 outlines how the blue ocean shift
process works. It expounds on the important concept of humanness and
how it inspires and builds people’s confidence in the process so that they
own and drive the process and results. It also shows how the process
builds people’s creative competence along the journey.
Subsequent chapters then discuss the five steps involved in making a
blue ocean shift. In each step, we introduce a new tool or tools that will
provide structure and analytic guidance as your organization moves step-
by-step to the blue ocean. We walk you through how to apply the tool to
your situation, explain how to interpret the results, highlight the potential
pitfalls in working with it, and discuss how to overcome those pitfalls to
ensure your success. At the same time, you will learn how to build
humanness naturally into each step, so your team will have the


confidence to explore new possibilities and own the process and its
results as it unfolds. In this way, execution is built into the process, so
people are willing to drive the blue ocean shift as it is set in motion.
Specifically, the first step shows you how to get started by setting the
right scope for your blue ocean initiative and constructing the right team.
The second step addresses how to get a clear picture of the current state
of play in your industry and align everyone around the need to make the
shift. Here people learn how to get out of their functional and
hierarchical silos and see the big picture. In the third step, the process
pivots from what is to what could be, so a compelling future can be built.
Here you learn how to uncover the hidden pain points buyers suffer and
the points of intimidation limiting the size of your industry—both of
which you can overturn. You also learn how to identify the landscape of
noncustomers waiting to be unlocked. At this step, a blue ocean becomes
more than a metaphor or an abstract concept. It becomes something you
can see and feel—something whose potential you can define.
This brings us to the fourth step, where you learn how to go into the
field and apply six systematic paths to create new market space. This
step shows you how to reconstruct market boundaries and create new
demand. In this step the process also drills down into how to convert the
field insights you’ve gained into concrete blue ocean opportunities that
both stand apart and deliver low cost. This brings us to the fifth and final
step of the process. Here, we show you how to select your blue ocean
move, conduct rapid market tests, and finalize, launch, and roll out your
move to ensure that your value proposition and business model are
delivering both differentiation and low cost. Here you learn how to
choose and make your move in a way that creates a win for buyers and
for yourself.
In the epilogue we pull everything together. We take you on a deep
dive into a bureaucratic, conventional, and change-resistant organization
—a national government—on its blue ocean shift journey. We show you
how even in such an organization, characterized by formidable silos, a
blue ocean shift is possible, transforming the way work is done and
resulting in billions saved. In fact, today a common verb applied to
emerging challenges is to blue-ocean it. Through the shift process, the
government has augmented its ability not only to achieve high impact at
low cost, but also to bring out the creativity and energy of the people
who execute it. Through it, they are discovering the thrill of creating and


capturing blue oceans of economic and social opportunity as they open
up new value-cost frontiers. And if they can do it, we assure you, so can
you.
Now, join us to learn step-by-step how to break away from the tired
red ocean and seize your own blue ocean of new growth opportunities.


CHAPTER 2
The Fundamentals of Market-Creating
Strategy
BEFORE SHOWING YOU HOW to make a blue ocean shift—how to
move your organization from market competing to market creating—we
first need to clarify what market-creating strategy really is and how it
works.
We’ve seen a lot of confusion on this through the years, as some
people have difficulty understanding how various perspectives on market
creation fit together. Some equate market creation with creative
destruction or disruption. They think you need to destroy or disrupt an
existing market in order to create a new one. Others regard market
creation as a matter of innovation, and often see technology as the key to
unlocking new markets. Still others view market creation as synonymous
with entrepreneurship and believe it to be the domain of entrepreneurs.
All these views are partly right. But they are also partly wrong,
because each offers an incomplete picture of how markets are created.
Without having a complete picture, efforts to make a blue ocean shift
will miss many opportunities and may even be misdirected. So here we
build a holistic model of market-creating strategy that shows not only the
available strategic options and how they produce blue ocean shifts, but
also their corresponding growth consequences. Using this model, we can
understand how these existing partial views fit together in the big
picture.
