# 2.   The Fundamentals of Market-Creating Strategy

Creative Destruction and Disruptive Innovation Are Only Part of
the Picture
In speaking with executives, entrepreneurs, and government leaders, one
consistent pattern we’ve observed is how often they associate market
creation with the concepts of creative destruction or disruption. Creative
destruction is the iconic term coined by the Austrian economist Joseph
Schumpeter, who observed that although competition in existing markets
is good, diminishing returns eventually set in as buyers’ needs are
satisfied and profits are competed away.1 The real engine of economic
growth, he argued, is therefore the creation of new markets. But, in his
view, this creation is dependent on destruction.2
Destruction occurs when an innovation displaces an earlier
technology or an existing product or service. The word displacement is
important here because without displacement, creative destruction does
not occur. For example, the innovation of digital photography creatively
destroyed the photographic film industry by effectively displacing it. So
today digital photography is the norm, and photographic film is seldom
used.
The concept of disruption echoes Schumpeter’s insight.3 The most
well-known study on disruption directly relevant to market creation is
the influential idea of disruptive innovation.4 Whereas creative
destruction occurs when a superior technology, product, or service comes
along and destroys the old with the new, disruptive innovation begins
with the arrival of an inferior technology, which then crosses the line
from inferior to superior and, in doing so, displaces market leaders. The
classic example here is the disruption and eventual displacement of
leading disk drive players, which were caught off guard by bottom-up
disruptors that initially entered the scene with simpler technology and
inferior performance.5
The distinguishing insight here is that the technology waltzing into an
industry need not be superior, as Schumpeter suggests, but instead can
come in as a Trojan horse whose initial inferiority does not appear to
threaten the mainstream market. As a result, established players ignore
the newcomer until it’s too late. What these ideas have in common,
however, is their shared focus on the displacement of existing players


and markets.
As business history shows that there are ample cases of both forms of
displacement, focusing singly on either creative destruction or disruptive
innovation in discussions of market creation would be partial and
misleading. Hence, to describe the act of market creation that embraces
both forms of displacement, we coined the term disruptive creation.6
This broader term captures the full, not partial, opportunity space of
market creation driven by displacement.
Important as disruptive creation driven by either creative destruction
or disruptive innovation is, however, it still misses another universe of
market-creating opportunities. As our research shows, many new
markets have also been created without disrupting existing ones.7
Nondisruptive Creation Also Generates New Markets and Growth
If you have children and live in any one of 147 countries around the
world, from the United States, to Afghanistan, to Germany, Japan, or
Yemen, you have heard of Sesame Street. Big Bird, Elmo, Ernie, and
Bert are just a few of the lovable Muppets that teach preschool children
how to count, name their colors and shapes, and recognize the letters of
the alphabet. And the best part is that children have so much fun
watching the program they don’t even realize how much they’re
learning. But parents do, which is why they love it too. It’s the antithesis
of what many people associate with education. It seduces and amuses as
it educates the very young.
Sesame Street didn’t disrupt any prior market for early childhood
education. It didn’t destroy and replace preschools, or libraries, or
parents reading bedtime stories to their children. Rather, Sesame Street
opened up a new value-cost frontier that unlocked the new market of
preschool edutainment that, for the most part, had never existed before.
In contrast to “disruptive creation,” Sesame Street is the result of what
we call “nondisruptive creation,” as it created new market space without
disrupting an existing market.
Now put children aside and turn to men. Many men’s lives were
revolutionized through Pfizer’s market-creating move of Viagra. But did
Viagra disrupt another market? Again, the answer is no. It was
nondisruptive creation. By alleviating erectile dysfunction, Viagra solved


a prevalent and previously unaddressed problem and took the world by
storm. Demand for it rapidly grew into a multibillion-dollar business,
creating a new market space of lifestyle drugs.
Now think of the more than 3 billion people who live on only a few
dollars a day. Here, too, nondisruptive creation stepped in to solve an
unaddressed problem: the lack of access to capital that was driving the
poverty cycle. In 1983, Grameen Bank began offering microloans
without requiring collateral, enabling people to start businesses or
engage in agriculture and climb up the income ladder while paying off a
small debt. This strategic move created the new market of microfinance
without replacing any other market. Until then, conventional banks had
simply ignored the poor, whom they deemed unsuitable as borrowers.
Microfinance has since ballooned into a multibillion-dollar industry with
plenty of room for future growth. While climbing, it still reaches less
than 20 percent of the potential new market, which today is served by
both nonprofit and for-profit organizations around the world.
Online dating, health clubs, crowdfunding, ringtones, and routers,
switches, and network devices are just some of the myriad multibillion-
dollar industries that have been created in the last few decades through
nondisruptive creation. Today, in fact, the fastest-growing profession in
the United States, second only to information technology, is based on
nondisruptive creation. It’s life coaching. Just 25 years ago, the industry
did not exist. Now it boasts annual revenues north of US$2 billion. The
advent and growth of the life-coaching industry have not come at the
expense of any existing industry. Tens of thousands of new coaching jobs
have been created without destroying any other jobs. Rather, the industry
has created new demand, as people flock to life coaches to become more
effective in both their personal and professional lives.
As these examples illustrate, our research indeed demonstrates that
growth has always been generated by market-creating moves based on
both disruptive and nondisruptive creations.8 To illustrate, consider the
evolution of industrial classification standards in the United States. In
1997, the North American Industry Classification Standard (NAICS)
replaced 
the 
more 
than 
half-century-old 
Standard 
Industrial
Classification (SIC) system published by the US Census. In the new
system, industries were not only merged or replaced but also created,
with the number of sectors doubling from 10 to 20. The services sector
under the old system, for example, was expanded into 7 industry sectors,


ranging from information to health care and social assistance.
Since 1997, the NAICS system has been revised several times to keep
up with the pace of industry creation, re-creation, and growth. For
example, while the information sector was expanded significantly in the
2002 version, the 2017 version included changes to 6 out of the 20
NAICS sectors to reflect new market creation. In both these new
versions, some existing industry classifications were replaced, while
entirely new categories were also created to recognize the emergence of
brand-new industries. Given that these systems are designed for
standardization and continuity, such changes underscore the impact that
both disruptive and nondisruptive creations have in shaping existing
industry boundaries and creating new ones.
Getting the Full Picture
Try this short exercise. Ask a group of people to look around a room for
30 seconds and make a mental note of every red item they see. As soon
as the time is up, ask them to close their eyes and recall every blue item
they saw. That’s right blue. People will have trouble recalling many
items at all. What we look for determines what we see. When we assume
that the only way we can create a new market is by disrupting an old one,
opportunities for nondisruptive creation can be easily missed. People
tend to focus their attention on the core of existing markets and what it
would take to disrupt the existing order. This narrows their vision and
blinds them to the wealth of nondisruptive market-creating moves they
could make.
Consider 
the 
potential 
advantages 
of 
expressly 
including
nondisruptive creation in your strategic thinking. First, take start-ups.
When entrepreneurs set out to disrupt an existing market, they often face
established players with many, many times the financial and marketing
resources the start-ups have. While it’s true that David sometimes beats
Goliath, and the emotional pull of the story looms large, more often than
not it’s the other way around. As a new start-up, do you really want to be
up against well-entrenched leaders? Maybe. And that’s certainly one way
to go. But you don’t have to—that’s the important point. The
opportunities for nondisruptive creation loom just as large, and
entrepreneurs would be unwise not to take them into account as well.
Second, consider established players. In established organizations,


fear of losing one’s job or current status through creative destruction or
disruptive innovation can prompt managers to undermine their
organization’s market-creating efforts. They may starve such projects of
resources. Or allocate undue overhead costs to them. Or relegate the
employees working on them to corporate Siberia, which inevitably
makes them want out. Microsoft and many other established
organizations struggle with issues like these. Growth through
nondisruptive creation is less threatening, because it doesn’t directly
challenge the existing order and the people who make their livelihoods
through it. So, by framing their market-creating strategy in a broader
context that embraces both disruptive and nondisruptive creations—as
blue ocean shift does—established organizations can better manage their
organizational politics and the anxieties of their key people.
Finally, consider new jobs. When disruptive creation occurs, new jobs
are created. Often, a lot of jobs. But old jobs are lost. So, when the
cassette tape replaced the 8-track, which was replaced by the CD, which
was later challenged by the MP3 player, each successive new market
created new growth and employment. But they came, in part, at the
expense of jobs from, and sometimes the very existence of, the preceding
businesses. By contrast, nondisruptive creation produces both growth
and employment without necessarily displacing existing businesses or
industries.
We do not raise these points to stress the advantages of nondisruptive
over disruptive creation. Rather, we wish to show you why nondisruptive
creation should also be incorporated into your strategic thinking. We
need a holistic model of market-creating strategy that embraces both
disruptive and nondisruptive creations, since they are complementary.9
They separately and together open up new value-cost frontiers that are
key to growth. Focusing on only one will lead to an incomplete and
biased assessment of potential market-creating opportunities and limit
your efforts to make a blue ocean shift.
A Holistic Model of Market-Creating Strategy
By now you may be asking yourself, “Which market-creating strategies
result in disruptive creation and which result in nondisruptive creation?”
In our research over the last 10 years, we found that the answer to this
question comes down to the type of issue an organization sets out to


address in making a market-creating strategic move.
Our research revealed three basic ways in which market-creating
strategies—and hence blue ocean shifts—are made. You can:
• Offer a breakthrough solution for an industry’s existing problem.
• Redefine an industry’s existing problem and solve it.
• Identify and solve a brand-new problem or seize a brand-new
opportunity.
Each of these approaches involves a different balance between
disruptive and nondisruptive creation. The most effective way to show
these relationships is through a graphic. Accordingly, figure 2-1 presents
a holistic model of market-creating strategy. We call this graphic a
“growth model of market-creating strategy” because it shows which
strategic approach produces which kind of growth.
Let’s run through each of these in turn.
Figure 2-1
A Growth Model of Market-Creating Strategy
Offer a Breakthrough Solution for an Existing Industry Problem
When an organization creates a breakthrough solution for an existing


industry problem, it strikes at the core of existing firms and markets,
whether at the outset or over time. Let’s go back to our music example.
CDs were a breakthrough solution to the problem of how best to store
and replay sound recordings, which is a central challenge for people
trying to enjoy music. In contrast to its predecessor, the CD offered
“perfect sound forever,” skipping effortlessly from one song to another
with none of the crackling and gumming up of twisted cassette tapes.
Not surprisingly, in a short time, the CD replaced the cassette as the
standard music medium. For years, people were thrilled with CDs—
until, that is, Apple’s MP3 player, the iPod, came around and offered yet
another breakthrough solution to the problem of storing and playing
music. Again, people rushed in droves to replace their old, now passé
and unwanted, CDs with Apple’s iPod and other MP3 players, which
gave them easy access to their entire music library. In each case, the
existing product was essentially replaced through disruptive creation.
In the same way, the internal combustion engine replaced the steam-
powered engine by offering a breakthrough solution to power generation
for motorized transport. Ditto for digital photography, which effectively
replaced film photography with a far better way to take, develop, share,
and store photos.
The main effect, therefore of developing a breakthrough solution to
an existing industry problem is the displacement of existing offerings
and jobs, as the old is disrupted by the new. Existing markets are re-
created from their core and expanded beyond their previous boundaries,
turning red oceans into blue. Growth occurs with this market re-creation
and boundary expansion as the breakthrough solution pulls in new
demand, converting once noncustomers into customers. Just think, for
example, of how many more people today take photos with digital
photography than took pictures with film in the past.
Identify and Solve a Brand-New Problem or Seize a Brand-New
Opportunity
On the other end of the spectrum, organizations that identify and solve
brand-new problems or create and seize brand-new opportunities unlock
new markets beyond existing industry boundaries. Here disruptive
creation is hardly at play. Think back to Viagra and Grameen Bank,
which identified and solved problems that had not previously been


addressed. Or think of Sesame Street and life coaching, which identified
and created brand-new opportunities. All these moves established new
markets beyond the bounds of any existing industry.
Similarly, the multibillion-dollar industry of ringtones has delivered a
brand-new opportunity for people to express their individuality and get a
small boost of pleasure throughout their day, whenever their phone rings
and their favorite song or sound plays. If there’s been any disruption
here, it’s only been in eliminating monotony and boredom. This market
space was created beyond the existing industry boundaries.
As our growth model indicates, solving a brand-new problem or
capturing a brand-new opportunity results in nondisruptive creation
because the new market hardly eats at the core, or even the margins, of
existing industries. This type of growth is nondisruptive to society as
well, because it grows profits, revenues, and jobs—not to mention
society’s imagination—without destroying any others. Areas like
cybersecurity, obesity, life-long learning, virtual reality, the environment,
and health services provide ample new opportunities for nondisruptive
creation. So does the bottom of the pyramid—that is, opportunities to be
found and new problems to be solved among the billions of poor people
at the base of the financial pyramid.10
Redefine and Solve an Existing Industry Problem
In between solving an existing problem and identifying and solving a
brand-new problem or creating a brand-new opportunity are market-
creating strategies that redefine and solve the problem an industry
focuses on. Problem redefinition allows an organization to replace
assumptions and reconstruct industry boundaries in new and creative
ways. Here both disruptive and nondisruptive creations are in full play.
Take the well-known example of Cirque du Soleil. It made a leap in the
kind and degree of value the industry offered by redefining the problem
it focused on, from how to maximize the fun and thrill of the circus, to
how to combine the best of it—clowns, tents, and amazing acrobats—
with the best of theater and ballet—their artistry, music, dance, and story
lines. It created a new market space between these industries, drawing a
slice of demand from each. At the same time, it enlarged the overall pie
by pulling new people into this blue ocean of newly created market
space. Adults without children and corporate clients, who never dreamed


of going to a circus before, became customers of Cirque du Soleil.
André Rieu and the Johann Strauss Orchestra also created a new
market by redefining the problem the classical music industry focused
on, unlocking both disruptive and nondisruptive creation. Dubbed the
“maestro for the masses,” Rieu has consistently appeared on the top-
ranking lists of touring concerts worldwide for the past 20 years, along
with Coldplay, Beyoncé, and the Rolling Stones. Unlike traditional
classical music orchestras, Rieu’s orchestra combines easy listening
classical and waltz music—think the “Blue Danube,” “Barcarolle,” and
“O Mio Babbino Caro”—with contemporary music like Michael
Jackson’s “Ben” or Celine Dion’s hit, “My Heart Will Go On” that many
people find more accessible. Rieu also moved away from pretentious
theaters, choosing instead to hold his concerts in large stadiums with
spectacular light and sound effects and a fun, interactive atmosphere.
While major concert halls can seat, on average, a maximum of 2,000
people, Rieu’s stadiums can easily sell out at 10,000-plus people. While
Rieu wins a slice of customers from classical music concerts, he also
creates huge new demand by drawing a mass of new customers,
including people who were previously put off by the formality and
pretension of classical music. That’s because André Rieu’s orchestra,
like Cirque du Soleil, strikes at the margins of these other industries, not
at their core, by solving a redefined problem that doesn’t go head-to-
head with the problem anyone else is solving.
Groupe SEB’s blue ocean shift, which we talked about in chapter 1,
also belongs here. Groupe SEB redefined the problem its industry
focused on from how to make the best electric French fry maker to how
to make mouthwatering fresh, healthy fries with no frying. While
ActiFry has won a slice of demand from the traditional electrical fryer
market, the leap in the kind and degree of value the ActiFry delivers
inspired people who had never bought a fryer to become customers,
growing overall industry demand by nearly 40 percent in value.
Likewise, by redefining conventional boundaries, the National Youth
Orchestra of Iraq opened up a new value-cost frontier and brought in
new customers. But, it did not replace other kinds of youth orchestras,
although it drew some of the same audience.
Simply put, offering a breakthrough solution for an existing industry
problem generally results in disruptive creation. Identifying and solving
a brand-new problem or seizing a brand-new opportunity most often


gives rise to nondisruptive creation. And redefining and solving an
existing problem draws on elements of both disruptive and nondisruptive
creations.
Focus on Value Innovation, Not Technology Innovation
When we speak to audiences around the world about market-creating
strategy, we often begin by asking them to consider Google Glass,
Motorola’s Iridium satellite phone, and Apple’s Newton personal digital
assistant. “Were these market-creating moves innovation?” And “Were
they commercial successes or failures?” Audiences usually answer “yes”
to the first question and “failures” to the second.
Then we ask another set of questions: “Who invented the personal
computer?” And “Who invented the home VCR?” When it comes to
PCs, people most often reply Apple or IBM. As for VCRs, people come
up with all sorts of consumer electronics companies, the most common
being Sony or JVC. The right answers, we then tell them, are actually
MITS and Ampex, respectively. Most people are not only surprised when
they find that out, but also appear to be unfamiliar with either company.
Putting these conversations together reveals an important point about
market creation. While technology innovators may lay extraordinary
eggs, they are seldom the ones who ultimately hatch them. The focus of
a successful market-creating strategy should be not on how to lay a
technology egg per se, but rather on how to hatch the egg for its
commercial success. Thus although MITS invented the first personal
computer, it was Apple and IBM, among others, that dominated the new
mass market for PCs by adapting the technology to produce a leap in
buyer value. Likewise, although Ampex invented video recording
technology in the 1950s, companies like Sony and JVC dominated the
long-profitable home VCR industry by adopting the technology and
making video recorders easy enough to use and affordable for the mass
of buyers; in essence, converting a technology innovation into what we
called value innovation.11
There’s no inherent reason that an organization can’t capitalize on its
own inventions, and certainly some companies have succeeded in doing
both. But history shows that egg laying and egg hatching are often
performed by different players.12 This, we suggest, may be one reason so


many people don’t even recognize the names of technology innovators
now gone from their markets and instead mistakenly believe the value
innovators—the ones that hatch new markets—are the technology
pioneers as well.
It’s a win for everyone if a market player lays the technology egg,
hatches it, and opens up a profitable and growing new market space that
others may eventually enter. But the key lesson to remember here is that
to succeed in creating a new market, your focus must be on offering a
quantum leap in value for buyers, not on technology innovation per se.13
Google Glass, Motorola’s Iridium, and Apple’s Newton all suffered by
getting this wrong. Google Glass was considered unattractive, nerdish,
expensive, and raised hugely uncomfortable privacy issues. The Iridium
satellite phone was a technological feat that worked in the Gobi desert
but not in buildings or cars, where people needed it most. As for Apple’s
Newton PDA, well, it just didn’t do what it said it would, so it’s not
surprising that buyers didn’t see value in it.
The fact is, successful market-creating strategies often don’t rely on
technology innovation at all. Think of Grameen Bank’s microfinancing,
Starbucks, or the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq—all created new
markets with little or no bleeding-edge technologies. Even where
technology is heavily involved, as with Salesforce.com or Groupe SEB’s
ActiFry, the reason buyers love these offerings isn’t because of the
technology. Buyers adore them because they are so simple, easy to use,
fun, and effective. That is, they love them because the technology is
fundamentally linked to a leap in buyer value.
Economics has long taught us that R&D and technology innovation,
as measured by R&D spending and numbers of patents, are the central
drivers of innovation and growth. This may be true at the macro level of
the economy, which could be one reason people tend to think of
technology innovation first when they think about creating new markets.
But such reasoning does not necessarily hold true when we apply it to
the micro level of the individual organization. To take one example,
Apple’s R&D spending-to-sales ratio has been among the lowest of its IT
peers over the last decade. Microsoft, on the other hand, has one of the
highest rates of R&D expenditures and impressive research centers the
world over. But while Apple has been one of the most—if not the most—
innovative companies in the commercial world, it’s hard to think of a
single market Microsoft created in the last 10 years.


As a prescient article in Time magazine on Dean Kamen, the inventor
of the Segway Personal Transporter, noted at the time of the Segway’s
launch: “One of the hardest truths for any technologist to hear is that
success or failure in business is rarely determined by the quality of the
technology.”14 The Segway was an engineering marvel, one of the most
talked-about technology innovations of its day when it was launched in
2001. But that did not convince enough people to pay US$4,000–$5,000
for a product that left them in a quandary over where to park it, how to
take it in a car, whether it could be brought on a bus or a train, and where
it could be used—on sidewalks or roads? While the Segway was
expected to reach breakeven six months after its launch, the company
continued to lose money until it was sold in 2009.
When companies mistakenly assume new market creation hinges on
breakthrough technologies, their organizations tend to push for products
or services that are either too “out there”—ahead of their time, too
esoteric, too complicated—or, like the Segway, lack the complementary
ecosystem needed to open up a new market. In fact, many technology
innovations fail to create and capture new markets even as they win
accolades for their organizations. Think of TiVo, whose original DVR
garnered a lot of fanfare and is in the US Patent and Trademark Office
National Inventors Hall of Fame, but which left most people wondering
what it did and why they would want it.
Blue ocean shift is built on this insight. Just as value innovation is a
cornerstone of market-creating strategy, a successful blue ocean shift
occurs only when unprecedented buyer value is created by opening up a
value-cost frontier that didn’t exist before. Value innovation anchors
innovation to the value it gives buyers, not to the cleverness of the
technology. It can be achieved with or without new technology. This
holds true whether your blue ocean market-creating efforts set out to
provide a breakthrough solution to an existing industry problem, to
redefine the problem your industry focuses on, or to identify and solve a
brand-new problem or create a brand-new opportunity.
You Don’t Need to Be an Entrepreneur to Create a New Market
Are you true blue or bloody red? That’s the name of a simple but telling
quiz we put together a decade ago. We give it to executives when we
meet to get a sense of the situation they’re up against. It asks questions


about, among other things, the ferocity of their competition, the pressure
on their margins, and the intensity of the commoditization they face.
People’s overriding response: They’re operating in red oceans and need
to get out.15
Yet when we dig deep, we find that even when companies
deliberately set out to create new markets, those efforts are usually
geared less toward getting out of red oceans and more toward making
further investments in existing, overcrowded markets. There is a
mismatch between what organizations aspire and need to do and what
they’re actually doing. Why? Apart from the familiarity of current
markets and the everyday pressure competition poses, the answer, we
believe, comes down to the way people think about and manage market
creation.
Ever since Schumpeter, entrepreneurs have been seen as the chief
drivers of innovation and therefore of market creation. Entrepreneurs
take risks and learn through trial and error as they attempt to seize
opportunities by applying their intuition and ingenuity. But for market
creation to be an integral part of an ongoing organization’s strategy, it
cannot be a random, high-risk endeavor, conducted through trial and
error. It needs to be a reliable process that can be reproduced. Without
that, as much as organizations may need to make market-creating moves,
they will continue to shy away from investing accordingly.
Some progress has been made in this regard over the years.16 But we
still need a market-creation process built on concrete market-creating
tools that systematically link innovation to buyer value and provide
guidance on how to apply them. More than that, the process must
recognize and address people’s fear of trying new ideas and encourage
them to push boundaries and overcome the forces and habits that keep
them where they are. In short, it must be grounded in humanness to
inspire people’s confidence.
As you will see, a humanistic, teachable, and systematic process
makes market creation accessible to everyone, not just highly creative
people or natural-born entrepreneurs. It allows ordinary people like us to
create markets and do extraordinary things. With it, Paul MacAlindin, a
classically trained conductor, was able to create a new type of orchestra
that could inspire peace and hold up to the world a vision of the beauty
of a united Iraq. With it, government leaders and ordinary civil servants
in Malaysia collectively conceived a new way to deal with petty


criminals, which dramatically cuts recidivism and gives these inmates
the gift of a second chance while lowering the government’s costs.
It doesn’t matter what industry you’re in, or whether you consider
yourself to be an entrepreneur. The process we will describe unlocks the
potential all of us possess to see beyond what is to what could be. The
success of such efforts is ultimately a probability game, of course, as all
strategic initiatives are, be they red or blue ocean ones. Still, the whole
point of strategy is to raise the probabilities of success, and that’s
precisely what the blue ocean shift process does.
With that understanding, we are now ready to dive into the mindset of
a blue ocean strategist. Adopting this mindset is essential to setting the
right direction for your blue ocean shift. In the next chapter, we outline
its defining features and explain why those features matter, so you can
grasp the mental framing you will need as you embark on your own blue
ocean shift journey.


CHAPTER 3
The Mind of a Blue Ocean Strategist
HOW DO BLUE OCEAN strategists see new opportunities where
others see only red oceans of declining profits and growth? They don’t
get taken in by what everyone else takes for granted. They embrace a
perspective that allows them to ask fundamentally different sets of
questions, which, in turn, enable them to perceive and appreciate the
fallacies behind long-held assumptions and the artificial boundaries we
unknowingly impose upon ourselves. Their perspective is very different
from the market-competing logic that dominates most executives’ mental
models.
To fully delineate how blue ocean strategists think, let’s explore two
strategic moves—one by a nonprofit B2C, and the other by a classic for-
profit B2B—so you can see how this mindset applies across industries
and sectors.
From Pity Pleas to Doing Something Funny for Money
Can you imagine someone hitching around town carrying a refrigerator?
Or a town where highwaymen and -women dressed only in underpants
accost motorists and passers-by to solicit small donations? Or your CEO
coming into work, holding meetings with a soft squishy red ball the size
of a golf ball affixed to her nose all day? Welcome to Comic Relief, a
UK charity formed in 1985, and Red Nose Day, an event it holds once
every two years. In the 16 Red Nose Days since its founding, the UK
charity has raised more than £1 billion in the UK alone, with its 2017
Red Nose Day raising over £73 million.
Now imagine the UK charity fund-raising industry at the time Comic
