# 3.   The Mind of a Blue Ocean Strategist

Relief was born. It was redder than red. Not only were there thousands of
charities, but for most causes there was huge overlap, including more
than 600 cancer charities and 200 charities for the homeless just in
London. What’s more, in little over a decade, the number of charities had
jumped by over 60 percent. So competition was way up.
At the same time, donor fatigue was setting in, and the number of
British people donating to charities had dropped by more than 25
percent. People were tired of being made to feel guilty, of the continuous
solicitations, of the difficulty in choosing the right charity to support
among the plethora of options. And they were suspicious of how the
funds were actually being used—to cover overhead or to go to the cause?
At the time, fund-raising charities followed a fairly predictable
strategy, a pattern we see played out in industry after industry. Almost in
lockstep, they concentrated on competing more effectively within the
boundaries of their existing industry space. They focused on their biggest
customers, in this case wealthy, educated, mostly older (55–64-year-old)
donors. They invested heavily in year-round marketing and solicitations.
They publicly recognized large donations to encourage the same people
to give more. They organized ever-fancier fund-raising galas, all the
while using serious and depressing campaigns to trigger feelings of guilt.
In short, they fought to capture a greater share of the industry’s already
shrinking demand by focusing on the same customers and factors their
industry had long competed on. This had the decidedly negative effect of
raising their costs at the precise moment demand was going down,
annoying existing donors even further.
Comic Relief took a fundamentally different approach. It created Red
Nose Day, a national day of wacky community fund-raising, together
with a star-studded (and entirely pro bono) comedy telethon, Red Nose
Night, which revolutionized charity fund-raising. Today, Red Nose Day
is almost like a national holiday in the UK, and Comic Relief has built an
amazing 96 percent brand awareness.
To achieve this, Comic Relief redefined the charity industry’s
problem, from how to get the wealthy to give out of guilt, to how to get
everyone to do something funny for money; in essence, crowdsourcing
fund-raising. Whereas most charities hold glamorous special events to
attract the wealthy, Comic Relief eliminated or reduced expensive fund-
raising galas, year-round solicitations and the writing of grants, and
counseling and care services. Nor does it target wealthy donors. It


refuses to limit itself to such a small segment; it targets everyone—the
poor, the rich, the young, the old, even kindergartners! With some
imagination and perhaps a bit of courage, even the poorest person can
make a major contribution. Take the London travel agent with a
reputation as a chatterbox who got her friends to sponsor her to stay
silent for 24 hours, raising over £500 in sponsorships; or the hairy
“man’s man” from Manchester, who had all his body hair waxed off,
raising £500 as well. Taking part is as cheap and easy as purchasing one
of the hard-to-resist little red plastic noses that are sold everywhere and
currently cost £1 apiece. All those connected to the telethon, including
the TV station, donate their services because they love the cause and
generate such goodwill by participating.
By offering star-studded quality entertainment, community “fun”d-
raising where everyone gets the opportunity to go just a little bit mad,
and selling little red noses across the country, Comic Relief creates a
unique, inspiring event that attracts masses of people. And because Red
Nose Day happens only once every two years, there is no time for donor
fatigue to set in. Comic Relief has fans, not supporters. What’s more,
unlike other top UK fund-raising charities that can give roughly 87
percent of their income to their charitable purpose, Comic Relief
guarantees that 100 percent of donations go directly to the cause. Comic
Relief is able to guarantee this Golden Pound Promise, because its costs
are low, thanks to all that it eliminated and reduced, and because
sponsors and investment income cover its far lower administrative costs.
As for marketing costs, they are zero in the UK, as a result of all the free
word-of-mouth advertising generated by the Red Nose Day activities
held across the country. In 2015 Comic Relief formally brought Red
Nose Day to the United States.
Energy Flows Where Your Attention Goes
An inspiring story, no doubt. But what have we learned? Could Comic
Relief have been conceived with a red ocean perspective? To find out,
let’s run through four sets of questions. As we do, ask yourself about
your own state of thinking.
One. If Comic Relief had accepted existing industry practices as a
given, and let the structure of the UK charity fund-raising industry shape
its strategy, would the idea for Red Nose Day ever have been conceived?


Or is it more than likely that, with competition so intense, demand down,
and costs up, it might not even have entered the industry? How about
you? What would you have done in this scenario?
Two. If Comic Relief had focused on benchmarking other charities
and tried to emulate—and better—their best practices, what would the
likely result have been? Would its strategy have been different? Or is it
more likely that the more it focused on benchmarking and outpacing the
competition, the more its strategy would simply have looked like the
competition’s? Is this something your organization does all too often,
too?
Three. Customer satisfaction and understanding customer needs are
hot buttons. Most organizations regularly monitor customer satisfaction
scores. But if Comic Relief had focused on better satisfying existing
wealthy donors, would those customers have given them the idea to ask
everyone—rich and poor alike—to do something funny for money? Or
would they have urged them to do what the industry was already doing,
only better? Do your existing customers keep you focused on what is,
instead of what could be?
Four. If Comic Relief had pursued either differentiation or low cost,
how would its strategy be different? With a differentiation strategy,
wouldn’t they simply have been likely to add bells and whistles to the
industry’s current approach, paying scant heed to what they could
eliminate or reduce to simultaneously achieve low cost? If instead they
had pursued a low-cost strategy, wouldn’t they likely have cut back the
industry’s existing competing factors without creating anything new to
stand apart? How about you? Do you act on the assumption that, to
achieve differentiation you need to spend more, while to win through
low costs you need to compromise on the distinctive value you can
offer?
From Red Noses to Blue Oceans in the B2B Space
Now let’s turn to the corporate B2B sector and consider the customer
relationship management (CRM) software used to manage organizations’
interactions with customers and sales prospects in all areas of their
business. CRM software is a growing multibillion-dollar industry. Not
surprisingly, it’s also highly competitive. Major enterprise resource
planning vendors, such as SAP, Oracle, and Microsoft, had long


dominated the industry. They have what most start-ups don’t have—the
deep resources needed to cover the steep R&D costs associated with
product development.
And yet, despite these impressive vendors, from the customers’ point
of view, all the offerings looked pretty much the same. All these firms
made highly customized software to match their clients’ needs. They all
applied the traditional software business model of selling perpetual
software licenses, which allow customers to use the software
indefinitely. Software was installed, configured, and customized on-site
for each client, which required both significant professional services on
the part of the vendor and significant internal expertise on the part of the
customer. The software also had to be integrated with the client’s legacy
systems, which could entail substantial changes to their work processes
and infrastructure. Overall, CRM software was expensive and time-
consuming to install, with a high total cost of ownership. To stand apart
in the industry and close a sale, vendors normally pursued one of two
strategies: Either they tried to differentiate their product by adding still
more features or they offered big discounts in the final stages of
negotiation. Either way, everyone in the industry focused on selling
CRM software to the businesses that could afford it: large, complex
corporations.
The irony of this is that because the software was complex, expensive
to purchase and maintain, hard to install, and required considerable
middleware and hardware to run, CRM software vendors effectively
limited demand for their own industry.
Enter Salesforce.com. Formed in 1999 by four people, former Oracle
executive Marc Benioff, Parker Harris, Dave Moellenhoff, and Frank
Dominguez, Salesforce.com did not take the existing industry structure
as given, nor did it set out to beat the competition. Instead, it strove to
make the competition irrelevant by removing all the pain points the
industry had traditionally imposed on its clients, pain points companies
ironically had come to accept. This last point is worth mulling over, as it
happens in all too many industries. If we need a vaccination, we take it
for granted that this will usually require a shot, even though most people
cringe at the prospect. If we go to the airport, we take it for granted that
there will be lines, and we’ll feel a measure of stress. And if we fly first
class on a domestic US flight, we take it for granted that the first-class
seats of US carriers will hardly be roomier or recline much further than


those in economy, despite the steep ticket price.
Determined to break out of the red ocean of similar offerings,
Salesforce.com launched a market-creating strategy that unlocked a blue
ocean of new market space. It created a highly reliable, easy-to-use CRM
solution accessible over the web, which worked the moment business
users signed up for it via a monthly subscription. Not having to purchase
a software license or expend resources on infrastructure, deployment,
and maintenance reduced the total cost of ownership by roughly 90
percent. Salesforce.com also significantly reduced the risk of deploying
its software by allowing subscriptions to be canceled at any time. What’s
more, by initially offering only one version of CRM software,
Salesforce.com dramatically lowered its per-unit development costs. It
could also learn which features mattered and which ones didn’t based on
usage rates, allowing it to focus strategically on what mattered most to
users.
The result: In just 10 years since it was founded, Salesforce.com
earned more than US$1.3 billion in annual revenues. It pulled medium-
size and even small businesses into the industry, converting former
noncustomers into customers as it grew overall demand. Today,
Salesforce.com has over 20,000 employees and annual revenues
approaching US$8 billion.
Clearly, the CRM software and the UK charity fund-raising industries
are worlds apart. Yet, here again, we see striking parallels between the
two. First, we see again that players in an industry all too often move in
lockstep with one another. They compete in the same way, invest in the
same things, and focus on the existing customers of the industry, largely
commoditizing and limiting the size of their own industry. Second, we
see again that while industry players fight to capture a greater share of
existing demand, the market universe of total potential demand is often
far greater. And yet, organizations act as though the existing market
boundaries define the de facto universe when in reality these boundaries
are not fixed but are merely products of our minds. They can be
transcended when we apply a new lens to our thinking. Finally, we see
again that organizations can redefine the basis of strategy in an industry
to open up new market space and achieve differentiation and low cost.
But the question is—how do they do it?


Reframing Your Thinking from Red to Blue
We are now ready to deduce the mindset of blue ocean strategists and the
distinctive ways their thinking departs from red ocean logic. The aim
here is for you to understand how blue ocean strategists think so that you
can embrace this logic as you embark on your own blue ocean shift
journey. This mindset acts as a compass to guide your strategic direction.
Without getting it right, the market-creating tools, however good, may be
misapplied in action and fail to produce your intended shift. As we go
through each guiding principle, think about how it allows you to begin to
see opportunities where before only constraints were visible.
Blue ocean strategists do not take industry conditions as given. Rather, they set out to reshape
them in their favor.
When executives develop strategy, they nearly always begin by
analyzing the environment: Is the industry growing, stagnant, or
shrinking? Are raw material prices rising or falling? Are competitors
building new plants, launching major new product lines, laying off
hundreds of employees, or hiring new talent? Is customer demand up or
down? Most executives build their strategies on the basis of these
assessments. In other words, structure shapes strategy.1 This view of
strategy is deterministic in that: (1) It treats an organization’s strategic
options as limited by the environment; and (2) it bounds executives’
imaginations by the industry’s current conditions.
This works fine when industries are attractive. But what if your
industry structure is unattractive, and your number-one competitor is
barely scraping by or even losing money? What will your strategy be
then? To lose less money than everyone else? To pull out? Neither is
terribly inspiring, nor is it a path to strong, profitable growth.
What a blue ocean strategist recognizes, and what most of us all too
often forget, is that while industry conditions exist, individual firms
created them. And just as individual firms created them, individual firms
can shape them too, the way Comic Relief and Salesforce.com did.
Reflect for a moment on many of the greatest industries. Back at the turn
of the 20th century, didn’t Ford create a mass market for the auto
industry, as Xerox did later in the copier industry, followed by Canon in
the personal copier industry? How about McDonald’s in fast food? Apple
in apps? FedEx in express delivery? Or even DryBar, which launched the


“only-blowouts” market space in US hair salons, rather than offering
haircuts, coloring, and perms.
Just as single organizations can drive entire industries with powerful
ideas, single organizations can shape existing industries and create new
ones.2 Industry boundaries are not fixed. They are as fluid as your
imagination. And one of the greatest ironies is that often it is
organizations themselves that contribute to their industry’s declining
conditions. Think of the US Postal Service that today teetters on the
brink as people shift to alternatives like email and express delivery
services, which are significantly more expensive. Why is demand for
government postal services shrinking? Is it simply because these new,
alternative industries are so strong? Partially. But it’s also because the
total postal experience is so poor. How many times have you entered a
US post office and found fast efficient service, with every window open,
no lines, and postal workers who actually seem happy to serve you? Was
the experience a pleasant one you would want to repeat? Probably not.
More likely, you were one of many people standing in line with a
dissatisfied look on your face. Or maybe you were one of those people
who, after waiting five minutes in line, threw up your hands and walked
out, frustrated, with time wasted and nothing accomplished, swearing
never to go back.
Organizations contribute to their own downfall more often than they
realize, and then blame exogenous market forces they don’t control
instead. Blue ocean strategists don’t. They refuse to take existing
industry conditions as givens. Nor do they blame those conditions for
their difficulties. They look to themselves for answers, and don’t let
industry conditions frame their understanding of what is possible and
profitable. While shared industry logic may help you make sense of the
world, it dramatically restricts your creative thinking. It impels you to
leave assumptions unquestioned and ideas unexplored, and to defend the
status quo. It also disempowers you. As Steve Jobs put it, “You tend to
get told that the world is the way it is… But that’s a very limited [view].
Life can be much broader once you discover one simple fact. And that is
everything around you that you call life was made up by people that
were no smarter than you. And you can change it. You can influence it.
You can build your own things that other people can use. And the minute
you understand that you can poke life… that you can change it. You can
mold it. That’s maybe the most important thing—to shake off this


erroneous notion that life is there and you’re just going to live in it.…
And once you learn that, you’ll never be the same again.”3 Blue ocean
strategists act on this insight, which widens their creative palette and
drives them to seriously weigh, rather than instantly write off, ideas that
set out to shape, not merely accept, industry conditions.
Blue ocean strategists do not seek to beat the competition. Instead they aim to make the
competition irrelevant.
Most organizations are stuck in the trap of competing.4 Having accepted
the industry structure as a given, executives proceed to benchmark their
rivals and focus on outperforming them to achieve a competitive
advantage. Indeed, one can hardly speak of strategy without invoking the
idea of building a competitive advantage. But focusing on building a
competitive advantage has an unintended and deeply ironic effect,
because it leads to imitative, not innovative, approaches to the market.
How can this be? This is a critical point to grasp because it’s probably
affecting your organization and what you do more than you know.
Let’s start with the obvious. Every winning organization, by
definition, 
has 
a 
competitive 
advantage. 
Comic 
Relief 
and
Salesforce.com certainly do. So having a competitive advantage is good.
No one is arguing with that. But that competitive advantage explains
what the organization has achieved, the outcome of its strategy. In
statistics, this is known as the dependent variable. The trouble is that,
over time, people have confused the outcome of a winning strategy,
namely a competitive advantage, with the process of achieving it or the
independent variable. So managers have been increasingly urged to build
competitive advantages to beat the competition.
At first glance this appears reasonable. If winning organizations have
competitive advantages, pursuing a competitive advantage would seem
to be the direct path to achieving it. The problem is one of framing.
When managers are urged to secure a competitive advantage, what are
they likely to do? They automatically look to the competition, assess
what their competitors do, and strive to do it better. But, in so doing,
their strategic thinking unknowingly regresses toward the competition.
The competition becomes the defining variable of strategy, not buyer
value. This narrows an organization’s view to the competitive factors and
shared assumptions held among existing competitors, leading it to
improve along the established trajectory.


But should your strategy be driven in this way? Our research suggests
not, especially if you are in an increasingly unattractive industry.
Focusing on building competitive advantages distracts you from
reshaping old industries and creating new ones. It blocks creativity and
keeps you locked in the same way of competing as everyone else.
In direct contrast, blue ocean strategists are keenly focused not on
building competitive advantages but on how to make the competition
irrelevant.5 They have a quiet disregard for what the competition is
doing. They don’t assume that just because competitors are doing
something it’s the right thing to do. The question they obsess about is
this: What would it take to win over the mass of buyers, even with no
marketing? Why the stipulation? Not because these organizations don’t
believe in or use marketing just like everyone else. They do. It’s just that
their aim is to push their organizations to create offerings so compelling
that anyone who sees them or tries them can’t help but rave about them.
As Michael Levie, cofounder of citizenM, which created the new market
space of affordable luxury hotels, put it, “Our aim is not to rely on
marketing to sell hotel rooms. It is to create a hotel experience that in
itself becomes our marketing, because people can’t stop recommending
it and sharing pictures of it on Facebook and Instagram.” That’s precisely
what drove Steve Jobs’s relentless challenge to Apple to create “insanely
great” products and services, not products and services that were better
than competitors’, though, in the end, they were that too.
When organizations frame the strategic challenge this way, the futility
of benchmarking the competition becomes clear. It causes managers to
fundamentally challenge and rethink all the factors an industry competes
on and invests in, and to push for a quantum leap in value. For while an
incremental improvement over what competitors do may give you a
competitive advantage, nothing short of a quantum leap in value will
make the competition irrelevant.
It is this drive to make the competition irrelevant that opens
organizations’ eyes to the difference between what industries are
competing on and what the mass of buyers actually values. Ironically,
although blue ocean strategists are not focused on building a competitive
advantage, they often achieve the greatest competitive advantage in the
end.
Blue ocean strategists focus on creating and capturing new demand, not fighting over existing


customers.
Almost every organization of a certain size regularly engages in some
form of customer satisfaction survey. Even if you run a small business or
nonprofit organization, satisfying existing customers is usually a key
priority. So organizations elicit feedback from customers on what they
like and don’t like, on how they are doing, and on what they need to
improve. As organizations garner insights, this often leads to a richer
appreciation of the nuances in what current customers value. This, in
turn, triggers finer segmentation and greater customization to meet their
customers’ specialized needs. Improved customer satisfaction almost
always follows. “Exactly,” you may think. “That’s what we do. We’re
great at that.” Or “We have a really creative way to tailor our offerings to
best meet our individual customer needs.”
For all its strength, however, this drive to improve customers’
satisfaction scores also tends to keep organizations anchored in the red
ocean of existing market space. In most industries, organizations
converge around a common definition of who their customers are: older,
wealthy, educated donors for the UK charity industry, for instance, or
large complex corporations for enterprise resource planning software.
This common definition then defines whom they expend their resources
and efforts on. While this focus on existing customers is fine when
industries are growing, it starts to impose real limits when demand is
stagnant or in decline. It prevents organizations from seeing the wider
potential of new demand outside their industry that they could tap into.
And as Comic Relief and Salesforce.com show, in many industries,
existing customers are just a drop in the bucket, compared with all the
noncustomers who can be reached through market-creating strategies.6
Moreover, when you ask existing customers, “How can we make you
happier?” their insights tend toward the familiar, such as “Offer me more
for less.” But this focus almost always drives you to merely offer better
solutions to your industry’s existing problem, keeping you trapped in the
red ocean.7 The US retail industry painfully pays for this focus at the end
of every year, when their customers, who have been trained to expect
preholiday sales, ask for the sales to start even earlier and for the stores
to offer ever-larger discounts. Now holiday decorations can be seen in
stores as early as October. As for strong, profitable growth, customers
may be happier with the earlier and larger discounts, but retail sales have
hardly inched up while profit margins continue to shrink.


Instead of fighting to win a greater percentage of existing customers,
blue ocean strategists seek to create new demand by looking to
noncustomers. They recognize that extra demand is out there, waiting to
be unlocked. By looking to noncustomers and what turns them off about
an industry, they begin to uncover the major pain points—like pity pleas
—imposed by their industry that make people choose against it. In this
way, they glean critical insight into how to open up new market space.
As you will discover on your blue ocean shift journey, noncustomers,
not customers, provide the greatest insight into what your industry is
doing to limit demand and how you can overcome this. The opportunity
here is to create new demand where there is no competition, not to
simply get a tad more of a shrinking red ocean.
Blue ocean strategists simultaneously pursue differentiation and low cost. They aim to break,
not make, the value-cost trade-off.
As discussed in chapter 1, for a red ocean strategist, strategy requires
making a choice between differentiation and low cost. By contrast, blue
ocean strategists follow a different path and see market-creating strategy
not as an either-or, but as a both-and approach. In short, they pursue
differentiation and low cost simultaneously.8
Think back to Comic Relief. With its little red noses, its focus on
community “fun”d-raising and mayhem, and its shift from year-round
solicitations to a unique experience once every two years, Comic Relief
is clearly the most differentiated fund-raising charity in the industry. At
the same time, it has a low cost structure. Unlike traditional charities,
Comic Relief doesn’t plow time and money into expensive galas, or
write grants to solicit funds from governments and foundations, or
engage in counseling or care services. Instead, it uses high-street retail
outlets, from supermarkets to fashion stores, to sell its little red noses. By
some estimates, Comic Relief has stripped away more than 75 percent of
traditional fund-raising operations. Comic Relief’s staff costs are also
very low, with ordinary citizens volunteering to do the bulk of the fund-
raising by engaging in silly antics that others sponsor. What’s more,
thanks to the widespread media attention and free word-of-mouth
advertising that Red Nose Day generates, Comic Relief avoids large
advertising costs. The result: Comic Relief broke the value-cost trade-
off, pioneering a new value-cost frontier.
Organizations that pursue differentiation to stand apart from


competitors tend to focus on what to offer more of. Those that pursue
cost leadership tend to focus on what to offer less of. While both of these
are viable strategic options, which a great many organizations currently
pursue, both will keep you stuck in the red ocean, operating on your
industry’s existing productivity frontier. To offer buyers a quantum leap
in value and break the value-cost trade-off, blue ocean strategists focus
as much on what to eliminate and reduce as they do on what to raise and
create. It is the simultaneous pursuit of differentiation and low cost that
allows blue ocean strategists to leapfrog the competition, creating the
positive buzz that drives thumbs-up and five-star ratings on websites,
and attracting not just new customers but fans, who can’t do enough to
sing their praises.
Expanding Your Field of Vision
Adopting the perspective of the blue ocean strategist is like looking up at
the night sky at the single constellation your industry has long been
focused on and then turning your head to see the vast expanse of the
universe that hadn’t been in your field of vision before. It shifts your
thinking from constraints to new opportunities. With it, you will be
guided in the right direction to challenge industry structure, break from
industry logic, look to noncustomers, and craft strategies that achieve
both differentiation and low cost. You can’t expect to create a blue ocean
if you think like a red ocean strategist.
Now let’s dive into the next chapter. There we outline how
humanness is systematically built into the blue ocean shift process and
how that inspires and builds people’s confidence so that they own and
drive the process. The chapter also shows how people’s creative
competence is unlocked in the process and what you can expect at each
step.


CHAPTER 4
Humanness, Confidence, and Creative
Competence
PEOPLE ARE PARADOXICAL. We aspire to make a difference. We
want to change the world for the better. That’s what makes our energies
soar, our hearts beat faster, our adrenaline surge. Yet, simultaneously,
most of us fear we can’t. We need reassurance.
No matter how tough, confident, or polished we may appear, all of us
are tender at our core. When we think about people as people, not as
corporate executives, entrepreneurs, or government officials, and
certainly not as human resources, we realize that, behind our titles, all of
us are incredibly vulnerable. We strive to avert reproach. We want to
avoid making fools of ourselves. We steer clear of revealing what we do
not know. In our organizations, opening ourselves up and putting
ourselves out there all too often trigger fears of losing status, respect,
security, and power. So, our penchant is to cling to what is, instead of
exploring what could be. This includes people at the top, whose egos are
often the most fragile of all.
That is your truth, our truth, and virtually everyone else’s truth. That
does not make us weak. It’s what makes us human. Not addressing these
basic human truths, or assuming them away, is why so many change
efforts and attempts to drive organizations to become more creative and
innovative fail. They have not acknowledged and built what we call
humanness into the process. The process of conceiving and executing a
blue ocean shift does.
Humanness builds psychological understanding into the strategic
process so that people are willing to engage fully at every step—even
when they’re hesitant, may not trust one another, or are skeptical of their
