# 5.   Choosing the Right Place to Start

thereof, and the prospects for growth inherent in your portfolio.
In this chapter you will learn how to create a pioneer-migrator-settler
map for your organization. We will show you how to use the map to
select the right scope for your blue ocean initiative. We will also show
you how the process of creating and using it builds people’s confidence
in and support of the initiative, and how to avoid the traps in plotting it
that can be especially problematic for organizations with histories of
success behind them.
Mapping Today to See Tomorrow
Traditionally, leaders have used two measures to assess the strength of an
organization’s portfolio of offerings: market share and industry
attractiveness. The more attractive the market, the thinking goes, and the
larger the piece of it you have, the healthier you are, and—here’s the
important point for strategy—the less need there is to change course.
But is this so?
Market share is important. And most organizations want more of it.
But market share is a lagging indicator. It’s a reflection of past, not
future, performance. Kodak, for example, was the market leader in the
photographic film industry at the precise moment digital film was taking
off. Its market share was staggeringly large, but its strategic vulnerability
was high. On the flip side, Apple’s share of the smartphone market was
tiny when it launched its iPhone, while BlackBerry’s share was
commanding. Yet we all know what happened. Apple’s small market
share was a product of its recent entry into the industry, not a predictor of
its future success, just as BlackBerry’s large market share was a product
of its history that masked its strategic vulnerability.
A similar argument can be made for industry attractiveness, since
today’s seductively tempting industry may become singularly
unattractive tomorrow if, for example, lots of other organizations decide
to jump in and put lots of resources behind their move.
The pioneer-migrator-settler map largely gets around these issues by
replacing market share and industry attractiveness with “value” and
“innovation.” Value is crucial, because it forces you not to rest on your
laurels but to assess each of your businesses based on the value they
currently deliver to buyers. The value you deliver today drives buyer
behavior, which determines your future growth prospects, whereas the


value you delivered yesterday determines your current market share.
Innovation, on the other hand, is key because it allows you to
overcome existing industry conditions. Without it, companies are stuck
in the trap of competitive improvements. With it, even a once-declining
industry can be turned into a highly profitable growth market. Think of
ActiFry’s strategic move, which turned a highly unattractive commodity
industry—electric home French fry makers, which had been declining in
value 10 percent per year—into a high-growth, high-margin, new market
space. Or citizenM Hotels, which is transforming the stagnant low-profit,
midrange hotel industry into a high-growth, highly profitable, new
market space of affordable luxury accommodations. Industries, in the
end, are what we make them. Do exciting things, innovate, and your
industry will become vibrant. Do more of the same, and watch the
industry’s attractiveness decline.
Assessing your product/service offerings according to how much
innovative value they offer buyers lets you see how strategically
vulnerable or healthy your portfolio really is. What you want to
understand is this: which of your offerings or businesses are “me-toos”
that offer only imitative value; which are better than competitors’ but
only marginally so, delivering improved value; and which, if any, are
value innovations that deliver a true leap in value. To capture this, the
pioneer-migrator-setter map is divided into three segments:
• Pioneers are businesses or offerings that represent value
innovations. They don’t have customers; they have fans. They
offer unprecedented value that opens up a new value-cost frontier.
These are the businesses or offerings that hold the key to renewing
your portfolio. Their strategy breaks away from the competition.
Pioneers are poised for strong, profitable growth.
• Settlers are the other extreme. These are businesses or offerings
that offer value imitation. They compete by making incremental
changes to an offering or its price. Their strategy converges with
the rest of the industry. Unless the industry itself is growing and
profitable, settlers have little or no prospect for growth.
• Migrators lie somewhere in between. They represent a value
improvement over the competition and may even be best in class.
But they do not offer innovative value.


Figure 5-1 shows the filled in pioneer-migrator-settler map of a
consumer appliance company. While each circle represents a different
business, product, or service, for convenience we’ll refer to all of these
as “offerings.” Adding in the current revenues derived from each of the
offerings via the size of its circle shows you not only which are poised
for growth, or vulnerable to decline based on their position on the map,
but also how much is at stake, with a larger circle indicating that more
would be at stake.
Figure 5-1
The Pioneer-Migrator-Settler Map of a Consumer Appliance Company
In the case of the consumer appliance company shown in the figure,
one thing immediately jumps out: This organization is strategically
vulnerable, because it is essentially living off its past success. It may be
profitable today, thanks to its commanding market share in several of its
units. But it is dominated by settler businesses, which means it is playing
off past strategic moves, rather than creating new moves that will


become the bread and butter of the future. In organizations with blue
ocean offerings, you will see pioneers that are planting the seeds for
tomorrow’s profit and growth.
Were you to plot Microsoft’s portfolio on the pioneer-migrator-settler
map, you would see that it is in a similar position. Over the last 10 years
or so, Microsoft has earned more than US$100 billion in profits; yet its
stock price has remained relatively flat, and it is no longer the talent
magnet it once was. Why? Were you to plot its offerings on the map, you
see that almost all of its profit comes from just two products—Microsoft
Office and Windows—both of which are now decades old and settlers.
What the stock market and talent no longer see is the company’s next big
killer app or any other pioneer. Sure its R&D labs are among the most
impressive and well-funded in the world. The trouble is the company is
not translating its advances in technology into value innovation
offerings.
Microsoft is not alone. When we ask organizations to plot their
current portfolios, most resemble the consumer appliance company’s
we’ve mapped out here. How about you? If you were to plot your
organization’s portfolio, how do you think it would stand in value
innovation terms? Are you building your blue ocean growth businesses
for tomorrow? Or not?
Understanding your company’s portfolio in terms of its degree of
value innovation is critical for two fundamental reasons. First, it allows
you to see beyond today’s performance numbers so you can identify
whether you are strategically vulnerable and, hence, need to act. Second,
having an aerial view of your portfolio, based on value and innovation—
the indicators that fundamentally drive buyer behavior—readies you to
begin scoping out your initiative. We say readies because even if your
portfolio is dominated by settlers, as the consumer appliance company’s
is, the last thing you want to do is embark on a corporate initiative to
shift them all. That’s simply too broad a scope. And introducing too
much change at once will lower people’s trust—in you and in the process
—and likely exhaust everyone’s energy.
A successful blue ocean process is based on what we call an “earn the
right to grow” approach. This means selecting one settler offering,
applying the blue ocean shift process to it, seeing the results, and then,
based on this experience, rolling out the process to other businesses or
product/service offerings in your portfolio. In addition to helping size an


initiative properly, this approach can build confidence among your
people and trigger the feeling that you’re being both fair and reasonable,
thereby relaxing them and strengthening their willingness to open their
minds to new ideas.
How to Plot Your Pioneer-Migrator-Settler Map
Now let’s turn to you and your organization’s map. Defining the scope of
your initiative will allow you to create a shared understanding of your
portfolio in value innovation terms, and to see how widespread the need
for change and blue ocean initiatives is across your organization. Here
are the steps you want to follow.
Identify the key businesses or product/service offerings in your portfolio
Start by identifying your key businesses or product/service offerings and
choosing the people who will participate in the process. At a minimum,
the group should include the heads of each of the organization’s units.
Oftentimes, the people selected may wish to bring one or two of their
key people into the group. This can be very helpful, as well as feel
reassuring, because it means they can calibrate their thinking with others
from their unit when it’s time to plot their offering.
Identify which offerings are pioneers, migrators, and settlers
Next, provide each manager with the definitions of pioneers, migrators,
and settlers, as we have above. Be clear that the goal is to arrive at a
reading of where each business or product/service offering stands in
terms of value and innovation and not in terms of market share or
industry attractiveness. It is also important to remind people that each
offering should be assessed from the point of view of buyers, not in
terms of your organization’s other offerings. That is, how would buyers
judge your offering: as a pioneer, a migrator, or a settler, compared to the
other offerings available to them in the market? We’ve seen managers
mistakenly plot an offering as a pioneer because it was the most
innovative one the company had. But when we asked them to articulate
how their offering provided a quantum leap in buyer value, compared to
the available alternatives, it became clear that, from the buyers’ point of


view, it was actually quite similar and should be plotted as a high settler.
This kind of myopia is symptomatic of an organization that is too
internally focused.
In plotting the businesses or offerings, let everyone know that the size
of the circles should be drawn as a function of their revenue, relative to
the organization’s other businesses (that is, the higher the relative
revenue, the larger the circle). If you have a pioneer that does not have a
mass following, and therefore is a small circle, place a question mark
inside it. When an offering delivers unprecedented value, its revenues
should reflect that. When that’s not the case, the question is why. It may
be because the offering was just launched, which would make sense. But
it might be because it’s actually not a value pioneer at all, but a
technology pioneer that few buyers can see the value of. Be sure to
explore this point. Many organizations with significant R&D budgets or
that operate in technology-intensive industries fall victim to this
misconception. When they plot their pioneer-migrator-settler maps, they
show a scattering of pioneers. But the circles are usually small, and that’s
not because they represent new offerings. As we probe, it becomes clear
that, although the managers of these businesses can explain why these
offerings represent breakthroughs in technology, they struggle to
articulate in simple terms how and why these breakthroughs provide a
leap in value for buyers. That’s an important point: It almost always
signals a strong disconnect between the development people and buyers,
which needs to be addressed if the money invested in R&D and
technology development is to translate into commercially compelling
blue oceans.
Plot your portfolio
Now, using a blank pioneer-migrator-settler map, plot your group’s
assessment of each business or offering. To help you perform this task
effectively, relevant materials and templates are provided for your free
download and use at www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates.
Usually, once a top management team has learned the core concept and
workings of the pioneer-migrator-settler map in action, together they can
complete their map with relative ease.
The aim is to capture each offering’s current position on the map.
Notice that we said “your group’s” assessment and not “your”
assessment. Why? As we explained in the previous chapter, firsthand


discovery and fair process are critical components of the blue ocean shift
process. While you may have an instinctive sense of how your
organization’s portfolio should be plotted, that doesn’t mean other key
players will agree. Say the manager of a sizable business or
product/service offering has an inflated view of his or her unit, even
though its offering may have long since become just like everyone else’s.
If you were to plot that business or product/service offering as a settler,
he or she would most likely pull back, resist, and resent you for seeming
to downgrade his or her unit.
The best way to avoid this problem is to have the managers of the
different units plot their offerings collectively. As a starting point, ask
each of the managers to plot their unit’s offerings on the map. Then open
a discussion so that people can probe one another on why the offerings
are plotted as they are. Working together in this way helps keep everyone
honest. As managers hear others’ perceptions, everyone’s knowledge of
the organization’s total portfolio is upgraded, creating a shared
understanding. So, in the end, the offerings that get plotted as settlers or
low migrators get plotted as such by the people running those units. It’s
their call, not yours, which is the outcome you want.
While plotting the pioneer-migrator-settler map, your managers may
say they need additional research to assess their offerings’ positions
accurately. This seems reasonable. Yet in our work we’ve found that
when people are brought together to do the plotting as a group, their
perceptions tend to be close to 80 percent accurate. The aim here is
capturing the relative position of offerings within their industry, not
perfection. In most cases we’ve found that quantitative market research
results in slight, but not dramatic, movements on the map. But that
research does not fundamentally change the relative position of the
offerings. For example, with additional research, what we call a “low
migrator” may be found to actually be a “high settler,” meaning it falls
just below the demarcation line, rather than just above it. However, the
marginal difference does not change the ultimate conclusion. So should
this issue arise, try asking questions like these: “If further research were
done, what would you expect?” “Do you think your current plotting
would shift substantially, or would it be likely to nudge up or down?” “Is
it likely that what appears to be a settler might actually be a pioneer, or
vice versa?” In practice, we’ve found that nudging is almost always the
answer. This tends to put this issue to rest so that the group’s focus can


come back to the big picture.
If disagreements within the group arise about how high or low an
offering should be plotted, get them to challenge one another’s
assumptions by asking what is distinctive about its value and
innovativeness. Is the business or product/service offering really a
migrator or a pioneer? What is the unprecedented value it delivers? Does
it capture the target mass of the market? Alternatively, if people think an
offering is plotted too low, ask, “Is it really a settler?” Check to make
sure that people don’t have an inflated view of their unit’s offering. Or,
conversely, that they’re not underrepresenting its accomplishments.
Continue to challenge people and keep the discussion going until there is
a consensus that every business or product/service offering is properly
positioned. This should allow you to agree on a fairly robust assessment
of your current portfolio.
Developing the pioneer-migrator-settler map is an interactive process.
Although there is often initial dissent about the appropriate assessments,
we find that disagreements very soon become minor and that, after some
shuffling, everyone agrees with the final picture.
Inside an Electronics Service Company
What are pioneer-migrator-settler map discussions really like? Let’s
listen in on the dynamics of a top management team for a US electronics
service company that we’ll call ESC, who were called in by the president
to plot their pioneer-migrator-settler map. ESC has built a successful
business in field repair for the end customers of electronics corporations
and corporate IT and telecommunications infrastructure. Here, we will
show how they interact with each other and build their shared
understanding as they go through the process of plotting the map. Along
with the president, attendees were the business development director,
global operations vice president, IT director, strategic planning manager,
controller, European operations vice president, Asian operations vice
president, and the HR manager.
“As you know, we’ve been doing very well over the last few years,”
the president begins. “We are now approaching US$500 million with
over 5,000 employees in more than 10 locations.” The president turns to
the controller. “And as I can confirm,” the controller adds, “we continue
to earn operating margins notably higher than our parent company [a


multibillion-dollar corporation].” Heads nod. Almost to a fault, people sit
straighter in their chairs on hearing this. People visibly feel good about
their performance and proud.
“Despite good business results so far,” the president continues, “what
are our prospects for future profitable growth? There are a number of
new challenges emerging in the market.”
After receiving an overview of the pioneer-migrator-settler map from
a blue ocean expert, the team sets out to plot their portfolio. Upon first
blush, it looks like the organization is swimming in a blue ocean. “Those
corporate accounts are clearly pioneers,” the business development
director argues as they begin plotting their portfolio. “The margins here
are at the top of our industry.” “We agree,” the Asian and European
operations vice presidents add, nodding their heads. After checking and
verifying sales numbers, the controller confirms, “Globally our pioneers
account for 35 percent of our total business. Not only are margins high,
but so are revenues.” High-fives all around. After more discussion, the
team plots another 30 percent of their portfolio in migrators, with only
35 percent of their business in settlers. The top team is feeling pretty
good.
In presenting the map, the blue ocean expert notes that the team has
plotted their portfolio based on corporate accounts, not based on their
portfolio of service offerings. From the perspective of corporate
accounts, the map looks strong. Only that’s not the point of the map, so
the expert challenges the team. “In our industry,” one member shoots
back, “we think and act based on corporate accounts, not service lines.
That’s how our industry works.”
“When you are in a B2B service industry like ours, the dynamics are
different,” the business development director explains. “It’s all about
chasing RFPs [requests for proposals] for large corporate clients. That’s
where the money is.” Heads nod in agreement. “When corporate
accounts are highly profitable, we’re clearly doing something right. To
us—and probably to the rest of our industry—that’s a pioneer.” The
temperature in the room is rising slowly.
“All true,” the president responds. “Seen from the perspective of
corporate accounts, we certainly have done a good job so far. But we all
know that competition has been heating up. The question is: Are the
services we offer what they need to be to stand apart and win big
accounts in the future without significantly reducing our margins? If not,


why should we expect strong profitable growth in the coming years?”
You could visibly see people register the significance of the president’s
subtle reframing. The industry may focus on chasing large RFPs and
high profit margins, and ESC may have succeeded in doing so with its
existing service offerings. But the prospect of ESC’s future profit and
growth performance needs to be assessed based on how compelling its
portfolio of services are from the perspective of customers. Customers
will go where they can receive a leap in value.
The team agrees to go back and redraw their portfolio from a service
line view of their business. This mapping of their business reveals a very
different picture. No matter how much the top team debates and searches
for what allows each service line to stand apart, the same answer
ultimately comes back. Service line after service line is a me-too settler.
“As far as we can tell,” the team concludes, “we essentially offer the
same services in the same way as everyone else. Roughly the same
quality of repairs, same pricing, same level of customer service, same
turnaround speed…”
The team goes silent. Their pioneer-migrator-settler map looks very
red. “How can the switch from corporate accounts and profitability to
service lines and value innovation paint such a different picture?” one
member asks. “We thought we were largely swimming in a blue ocean.”
As the team probes the discrepancy, a realization hits them. Many of the
corporate accounts originally mapped as pioneers are longtime
customers, whose contracts date back five to seven years, while the more
recent customers of less than two years are the ones the team has plotted
in the settler section of the map.
The standard of what truly constituted a pioneer, or even a migrator,
begins to take shape in people’s minds. The team realizes that they may
hold inflated views of their business. Given the multiyear contractual
nature of the industry, the higher-margin corporate accounts, in fact,
seem to better reflect historical success and customer inertia, rather than
innovative value delivered or future performance. More recent RFPs won
have taken far longer to secure and have profit margins significantly
lower than those of several years back. A new mood has set in. The
atmosphere is somber.
The president breaks the atmosphere. “We are not in the valley of
death,” he reassures the team. “We are still recognized as a leader in the
field. We should feel good about that. But nontraditional players are now


entering the industry, like major consulting companies intent on
chopping the market up. There is also growing talk of some companies
keeping field repair processes in-house as a way to build customer
intimacy.”
“What are our growth expectations for the next five years?” the HR
manager asks.
“Ten percent in real terms,” the controller responds.
“Does our pioneer-migrator-settler map show we have the horses for
that?” the IT head continues.
“I was just thinking along the same lines,” the business development
director says, as he projects the map the group has just collectively
plotted on a wall for everyone to see clearly. The silence in the room
speaks volumes. The team realizes that their efforts are focused on
benchmarking competitors and making operational improvements. ESC
has scant planned investments to rethink and innovate their service line
to make it stand apart.
“Well, now. We have our work cut out for us, don’t we?” the
president concludes.
What Your Plotted Map Reveals
Once your organization’s map is complete, you are ready to discuss its
strategic implications. Is your portfolio settler-heavy—like ESC’s and
that of the majority of companies that are stagnant or declining? Has a
business that was once a pioneer, generating huge profits and growth,
recently become a settler, suggesting that the organization’s growth is
likely to slow if another pioneer is not launched?
The ideal portfolio to aim for depends, of course, on your industry. In
fast-moving industries, for example, you will want and need to have
more pioneers than settlers. In industries with large fixed costs for
organizations and sunk costs for buyers, a portfolio with a few solid
migrators and maybe one pioneer would be the right mix for securing
today’s success while building for tomorrow.
Stress to the group that the objective is not to create a portfolio
dominated by pioneers. It is to create a healthy balance between today’s
businesses—your settlers that provide cash and a measure of earnings
stability—and the pioneers that are the growth engines for tomorrow.
This is the path to profitable growth. Figure 5-2 depicts this path for the


consumer appliance company, showing how its managers have set out to
shift their portfolio’s center of gravity from settlers toward a better
balance of migrators and pioneers.
Figure 5-2
Creating a Healthy, Balanced Portfolio: The Case of the Consumer Appliance Company
If, after this exercise, you find that your current map already has a
healthy balance across pioneers, migrators, and settlers, your
organization is on a solid track to build for the future while seizing the
present. In that case, you can hold off on launching a blue ocean
initiative. To have a strong growth portfolio, a company needs robust
pioneers; but it also needs stable revenues and cash flow to manage
market expectations and provide resources. This is where settlers and
migrators can add great value.
If, on the other hand, the portfolio you’ve plotted presents a situation
not too far from the portfolio in figure 5-1, help the group to appreciate
the strategic implications through questions like these: “What are the
prospects for strong profitable growth from our settler and low migrator
offerings?” “Are their industries growing so rapidly that we can expect


strong profitable growth despite the offerings being settlers and
migrators?”
Ask what might happen if you were to share the map with Wall Street
analysts. Would they expect a positive earnings surprise from the
organization, or would they be likely to rate your stock a hold or
downgrade it? And, finally, discuss how customers might react to the
map. If buyers saw your offerings as settlers or low migrators, would
they be impressed and swear loyalty to your offerings? Or would that
make them more inclined to demand price cuts and put further pressure
on your profit margins?
The point here is to use the map to build a shared understanding of
the likely consequences of inaction. Are the organization’s growth
ambitions consistent with the aggregated pioneer-migrator-settler map
the group has drawn? Or is there is a discrepancy? As the implications
sink in, the team’s motivation to launch a blue ocean shift initiative takes
hold and grows stronger. Now it’s time to catch the wave and share your
intention to select a single business or product/service offering to launch
a blue ocean shift initiative and begin upgrading your overall portfolio.
Defining the Right Scope
As you study the map you’ve created, you may find that, like ESC and
the consumer appliance company in figure 5-1, you still have too many
candidates to choose among. In the face of this common dilemma, we
have found the following criteria to be particularly helpful. Ideally, the
scope of your initiative should be defined by the business or
product/service offering that meets all (or the greatest subset) of these
four criteria.
First, the business or product/service offering is a settler or a low
migrator; that is, it’s only slightly above settler status, making it clear
that it’s currently swimming in a red ocean.
Second, it’s headed by a manager who is eager to break out of the red
ocean and believes that fundamentally rethinking the strategy is key to
doing that. Selecting a unit with such a manager is crucial: The
manager’s enthusiasm and conviction that change is needed are what
people in that unit will feed off during the process. This kind of energy
both builds people’s confidence and signals that waffling will not be
allowed. That goes a long way toward getting everyone on the same


page. By contrast, selecting a manager whose unit may desperately need
to change, but who offers nonstop excuses as to why things are the way
they are, or myriad reasons for why no new idea or approach could
possibly work, is to court failure before the process even starts. These
kinds of managers project the wrong kind of energy, the kind that signals
to those below them that they don’t really believe in the initiative. That,
in turn, will eat at people’s confidence and willingness to give their all.
You can lead a horse to water, but you cannot make it drink. So don’t try.
Third, ideally, no other major initiatives should be underway in the
unit. If the people who support a business or product/service offering are
already stretched by a major reorganization, say, or the implementation
of a new enterprise resource planning system, this is usually not where
you want to start, even if the leader is genuinely interested in
undertaking the initiative. People can do only so much beyond their
regular jobs and do things well.
Fourth, the business or product/service offering has its back against
the wall. While a settler offering may have limited prospects for growth,
as discussed above, that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s losing money. In
fact, it could still be quite profitable. When a settler or a low migrator
offering is not just swimming in a red ocean of competition, however,
but is also operating in the red, or facing an onslaught of all-new
competitors that are gaining traction fast, that situation helps create a
sense of urgency and a willingness to try new ideas to turn the tide. This
natural energy tends to unlock a hunger for a new approach that a blue
ocean initiative can leverage.
Over the next week or weeks, if needed, engage the managers of each
unit in a series of discussions to assess their readiness—and that of their
units. Then select the one that best meets all or the greatest subset of
these four key criteria.
With the right scope for your initiative set, and with credibility and
positive energy building, you are now ready to put the right team
together to make a blue ocean shift happen. That’s the subject of the next
chapter. So let’s get started.


CHAPTER 6
Constructing the Right Blue Ocean Team
“I THINK THE BOX WITH the wide pink stripe looks best. It really
pops. And the bright color gives it a nice edge.”
“I couldn’t agree more. It will definitely catch women’s eyes.”
The trouble is the packaging the marketing team decided on wasn’t
for a women’s product. It was for an iron that didn’t require ironing, and
it was designed principally for men and young adults of both sexes. You
simply hang your wrinkled shirt or pants on a clothes hanger or the back
of chair, run the small handheld device up and down the garment, and
voilà, with the help of a strong burst of steam, the wrinkles fall away—in
less than half the time ironing takes. No skill necessary. No ironing
board, either.
The trouble had started eight months earlier, when the head of
domestic appliances, whom we’ll call “Brad,” spoke with his counterpart
in marketing (let’s call him “Joe”) about including one of his staff on the
team Brad was assembling for a blue ocean initiative. Quickly outlining
how busy marketing was with “major” new product launches and
campaigns, Joe’s attitude was clear: “Just create the new product and
don’t worry. We’ll take it from there. We know the market. That’s our
forte.”
Truth be told, Brad wasn’t exactly keen on bringing someone from
marketing onboard the team, either. Within the division, the commonly
held belief was that “When it comes to the consumer and the market,
marketing never listens to anyone. They don’t think anyone else has
anything to add or knows better than they do.”
To motivate his team, Brad decided not to push it and to forgo getting
marketing involved. It just seemed easier and made everyone—both his
