# 6.   Constructing the Right Blue Ocean Team

division and the marketing team—happier. So the business division
rolled up its sleeves and set about applying the blue ocean shift process
to the humble iron.
The market in Europe for irons couldn’t have been bloodier. The
process revealed a range of similar irons at every price point, with the
number of special features climbing with each jump in price. Convinced
there was most likely no new path to go down, the team was surprised as,
step-by-step, that belief was overturned when new insights began to
emerge. Like how, despite all the cool features added to irons over the
years, no iron addressed the greatest issue of all: People hated ironing.
They didn’t want ironing made better. They wanted no ironing at all.
What’s more, to iron you had to have an ironing board—and a good
one, for the iron to work well. This was an unwelcome added cost.
Ironing boards were also big, clumsy, hard to store, and a hassle to set up
and put away. Those issues had never been addressed, either, since
ironing boards were in another industry and, technically, not the iron
makers’ responsibility.
The team saw a huge opportunity in these unaddressed problems, as
well as a growing ocean of noncustomers: men, who, as they married
later in life and lived on their own longer, were doing more and more of
their own household chores. Men didn’t like going out looking sloppy,
but they hated the tedious task of ironing even more. And most couldn’t
afford to have their clothes professionally pressed. Young adults of both
sexes were also a largely untapped ocean of noncustomers. Yet the
industry generally acted as if it were still the 1950s, and that when it
came to domestic chores like ironing, women should be the focus of their
efforts. And women, it was also believed, wanted to do a meticulous job.
The ironless iron would change all that.
As agreed, the blue ocean team shared the prototype and the results of
the process and rapid market tests with marketing. And, as agreed, the
marketing team took the baton. But not having been part of the process,
marketing was full of doubts.
“It can’t create a crease. Creases are important,” said some of the
marketers.
“They don’t get it. Women buy irons, not men, and rarely young
adults,” added others.
So the marketers decided to do damage control. They knew you had
to target customers, not noncustomers. That was just plain common


sense. So they put the new “device” in a box with a striking pink stripe to
attract existing customers, and they pitched it as a supplemental iron
made for those times when creases weren’t necessary. Packaged and sold
that way, women saw the ironless iron as just one more add-on, another
thing to store in their already crowded cupboards. They never thought it
could replace ironing. It was never sold as if it could. And men and
young adults—the ocean of noncustomers who were the prime targets—
never gave the pink-striped box a second glance.
What the marketing team did went against what the blue ocean team
found mattered. But what the blue ocean team found mattered went
against the accepted wisdom the marketing team had mastered. The
lesson: If people are not part of the process and there to discover
firsthand the power of the ideas that open up new value-cost frontiers,
it’s too easy for them to dismiss those ideas as irrelevant, deny their
validity, and push to bend them right back to the industry’s so-called
“best practices,” even when those best practices may be outdated or just
plain awful.
That’s why putting together the right team to carry out a blue ocean
initiative is incredibly important. When you are shifting—changing what
you are doing and the factors on which your industry has long competed
—all the key players who will make that shift need to be involved.
We’re going to talk here about how to construct the right team in an
established organization or division (be it for-profit, nonprofit, or public)
with typical line and staff positions, where executing a new strategy will
likely depend on the cooperation of people across various functions, and
the usual politics and naysayers will need to be overcome. If you own a
small, family-run business or a single store on Main Street, or you’re an
entrepreneur just starting out, you may well have only a handful of
professionals at most in your organization. But while you may not have
the depth of talent to draw on that a larger organization can bring to bear,
don’t worry. Founders and owners almost always have much more
control in aligning people around their blue ocean vision. By
understanding the dynamics of what makes a team successful, you’ll be
in the best position to know how to leverage your employees or the
people you have access to as you set out on your blue ocean shift
journey.


What Does the Right Team Look Like?
Who, then, should be on this team? As our cautionary example about the
iron suggests, you want representatives from all the functions and
organizational levels that will play a key role in bringing a new offering
to market. In a typical corporate setting, that would usually include
someone from HR, IT, marketing, finance, manufacturing, R&D, and
sales, as well as someone on the front lines, like a call center staff
member or someone who works on the store floor. While organizations
routinely separate functions and hierarchical levels to achieve
efficiencies, these divides create silos, often break trust, and motivate
people to suboptimize when what you need is all the parts working
together so that ideas get built for execution from the start and everyone
owns them.
All in all, you should look to create a team with 10 to 15 people. The
lower limit is to make sure all the major functions and areas are
represented, have a chance to contribute, and discover firsthand the need
for change. The upper limit is to keep the process manageable and the
team flexible and fast. More than that tends to become unwieldy and
frustrating for those involved, unnecessarily sapping the team’s energy
and breaking down the integrity of the process.
When setting up the team, we’ve found that executives can be
hesitant to include people from a particular function who might be
perceived as more trouble than they’re worth, or who could slow the
process down as they struggle to get into the blue ocean mindset. Like
Brad, they may shy away from marketers or want to leave out HR
people, whom they see as benefits administrators with little strategic
vision. However, we caution against this. Have you also heard the refrain
“Finance trumps strategy”? We certainly have. Over the years, many
people have told us how their efforts to innovate were thwarted by
finance staffers inclined to support what they knew and could measure,
not what could be. Not surprisingly, they worry that the same result will
befall their blue ocean shift initiative.
We’ve found otherwise, however, in our research over the last 10
years.
When finance people are included on the team, and go through the
process, just like the other members, they develop firsthand insight into
the need for a strategic shift and the power of the blue ocean strategic


move they’ve helped create. Finance staff members become bean
counters when they are asked to sign off on strategic imperatives they
don’t deeply understand. Like all of us, they simply don’t feel
comfortable putting money behind ideas that are foreign to them. To turn
finance into your ally, put a finance representative on the team from the
start. The team will gain the power and robustness of this functional
discipline, and finance will become your true strategic partner in the
investment decision-making process. All sides learn and grow from the
process.
While you want a cross section of people on the team, be sure that
everyone selected is directly involved in the division or product/service
offering you’re aiming to shift from red to blue and therefore has skin in
the game. This cross section is critical, because it ensures that there’s
someone from every function who can personally and authentically
affirm the credibility of the shift the team is developing. These people
will be the conduits to their functions and to the hierarchy at each step of
the process, relaying firsthand updates on the team’s findings. This is
what makes those findings believable and testifies to the robustness of
the process.
Contrast the experience of the iron manufacturer with this one from a
corporate foreign exchange provider. Before starting the blue ocean shift
process, the company was convinced that account executives were one of
their key competitive advantages vis-à-vis large banks. Not surprisingly,
the account executives agreed, as their swagger and status in the
company showed. But as the team went through the process, one truly
unexpected finding that emerged was that buyers disdained the account
executives’ role and hated wasting their time talking with them. They
saw the account executives as the people who focused on coming up
with creative excuses and smoothing over the problems and frustrations
clients had with the company’s services. What good was attention from
an account executive when wire transfers were frequently executed late,
or customers failed to get confirmation that transactions had been
executed, or they received scant market knowledge to properly hedge
their currency payments. Had the account executives not been on the
team and heard this feedback for themselves, rest assured they would
have vehemently insisted that the process had not been done correctly,
that the team members didn’t know what they are talking about, and that
—to the contrary—account execs were what set the company apart. But


because they were included and heard customers say the same thing time
and time again, they couldn’t deny it.
More telling, this finding led account executives to a realization about
themselves. Yes, they had long been perceived as the company’s
superstars. But now they could see that all too often they were heroes not
because they added real value for clients but because they stopped clients
from leaving by being smart in excusing, apologizing, and calming them
down. And so, the team made the decision—with the support of the
account executives themselves—to phase out the position. Account
executives became sales reps for large, high-value accounts, effectively
tripling the company’s sales force and increasing the company’s revenue
generation capability significantly with no increase in cost.
In organizations with geographically scattered operations, a common
refrain is “Our area is different.” In one company that had a poor track
record of rolling out virtually any initiative globally, subsidiary managers
summed up their take on the head office’s view of the world as “Nuts in
the field, brains in the center.” Not surprisingly the “nuts” took great
pride in quietly derailing and slowing down head office initiatives.
Having someone from each key geographic region included on the team
goes a long way toward remedying this situation. People feel their area is
valued and that they are not viewed as brainless doers to command.
What typically happens first on such international teams is that the
regional members grouse about how their area is different, and how no
new “global” strategy can possibly work there. To which the response we
recommend is, “If that’s true, the process will reveal it. And if it does,
we’ll say sayonara to the aim of creating and rolling out a blue ocean
shift globally.” The clarity of that single statement goes a long way
toward creating openness and engagement in the process. Then, as the
teams get started, what they typically discover is that, if the organization
could shoot the lights out on a few key common concerns voiced by
customers and targeted noncustomers around the world, people would
gladly forgo the majority of their idiosyncratic regional wish lists. This
reinforces real buy-in and excitement in the process. While more than
one team is needed for multinationals with geographically diversified
operations, for the purpose of clarity and simplicity, we will focus on the
one-team situation.


What to Look for in Team Members
So far we’ve been talking about where your team members should come
from. In fact, we’ve equated the individuals with their functions,
referring to “marketing” and “finance” as if the people were their jobs.
Now we’ll shift gears and talk about the individuals themselves.
Human dynamics is something many leaders gloss over. And, true,
setting the right human dynamics does take time and thought up front.
But the rewards are priceless. That’s why, when it comes to whom to
select for the team, job title is not the most important factor. Character is.
What you are looking for are people who are well respected and already
have credibility with others in the organization. That may or may not
overlap with their status in the organization. You want to select people
who are good listeners, are known to be thoughtful, and are willing to
raise questions when others don’t. People who not only can dream big
but also are noted for their commitment to getting things done. These are
the people others will naturally tend to admire and listen to. Such people
elevate the credibility of the team within the organization and the respect
team members have for one another.
At the same time, you will also want to put one (or potentially two)
known naysayers on the team. Though to ensure that they can’t dominate
the team’s dynamics or undermine its positive energy, they must be the
clear minority. Why have them there at all, then? For one thing, putting a
devil’s advocate on the team boosts the credibility of the process and the
team’s findings. It signals your confidence that the process can withstand
their doubts and misgivings. It shows that you intend to scrupulously
examine any idea that challenges the status quo to ensure that potential
downsides are fully considered and not simply glossed over, only to
come back and bite you later. In addition, when skeptics go through the
process and see, feel, and experience for themselves the ways your
current strategy fails to excite the market, they tend to stop complaining.
And when they are convinced, the momentum for change is reinforced
further.
Back in the day, when Bernie Marcus was still running Home Depot
with a viselike grip, the leader of one of its second-tier suppliers of
electric lighting felt his company needed to make a blue ocean shift to
get a bigger slice of Home Depot’s and other major retailers’ business.
But neither argument nor numbers could convince the naysayers in his


company that their products weren’t good enough. They claimed it was
the sales force that needed upgrading. Full stop.
Then the leader took a different tack. He put the two key naysayers
on the initiative team to meet the market. The team started with customer
#1, Bernie Marcus himself. And Bernie let it rip: The product was a me-
too. It was too expensive. It was not reliable. It was a waste of valuable
shelf space. After that naked feedback from Bernie, the naysayers were
visibly ashen. No more urging for a new strategy was needed.
Be prepared for people to be, on the one hand, glad they are chosen
for the team and, on the other, apprehensive about the extra work that
will require. On average, team members will spend 10 percent of their
weekly work time on the initiative, with peak points, when they will
need to set aside around 20–25 percent, scattered over the course of the
project. This work almost always comes on top of their day jobs. But as
they say, “No pain, no gain.” Fortunately, we can also say the gain will
outweigh the pain.
In the process, team members step up to leadership, gain experience
working with people from different functions and hierarchical levels,
learn firsthand and up close about the market, and acquire a big picture
of the organization and the environment (often for the first time)—all
highly valuable exercises for every person involved. Working on a blue
ocean initiative team changes the scope of the members’ day jobs,
shifting their focus away from the routine to more strategic concerns.
People learn to ask future-focused questions about how to create
innovative value, what adds cost but no value (like account executives at
the corporate foreign exchange provider), what could add a little cost but
deliver a leap in value, and who the industry’s noncustomers are and how
to convert them to customers. This transforms everyone on the team,
making them more valuable to the organization and to themselves. You
will want to discuss these benefits with team members up front. People
appreciate knowing that the extra work they’ll take on will be more than
repaid by the new skills, team connections, and ideas about future
opportunities they will gain by participating.
Appoint a Kingpin Team Leader
Job title isn’t everything, but the head of the team, whether it is you or
someone you appoint, does need to outrank the other members. That


simply makes it easier for them to accept and follow the leader. The
disproportionate influence of a strong kingpin, both on the team
dynamics and across the company, will help mobilize large swaths of the
organization to support the initiative.
The team leader is expected to act as the team’s first contact point,
maintaining direction and excitement, keeping everyone informed, and
helping the team navigate through the organization. The leader also
needs to anticipate problems that could hinder the team’s ability to
complete its tasks and address these issues proactively. Organizations are
often tempted to delegate a lot of this work to assistants. However, we
strongly advise against this for a number of reasons. When a team leader
directly undertakes these tasks, it signals that the initiative is important
and not to be taken lightly. It shows respect for team members. And it
keeps the fire burning, closing loopholes for procrastination and
halfhearted efforts. It’s far too easy for people to play games with
assistants, telling them, “We’ll get back to you soon,” only to respond
three weeks later, compromising the process and draining energy from
the initiative.
For Dysfunctional Organizations: Enlist a Consigliere
Is your organization dysfunctional? Ridiculously bureaucratic? Or highly
political so that getting things done feels akin to walking through a
minefield? Large, older organizations may feel this way. So can
government entities. In these situations, in addition to putting the team
together and selecting the right team leader, you also want to think about
enlisting a consigliere. This is particularly important for organizations
that have operated in the same way for a long time or have a strong
institutional culture.
A blue ocean shift initiative can overturn many established industry
and organizational conventions. This may have ramifications for how
work is currently done, which, in turn, may inspire anxiety in the hearts
of the people doing that work now. Where human emotions and behavior
are involved, an ounce of prevention is truly worth its weight in gold. So
you need to be mindful throughout the process of any potential resistance
that may be brewing or poised to arise when it comes time for
implementation.
A consigliere can help you anticipate these issues before they become


intractable. A consigliere is someone in the organization with an ear to
the ground, a master of organizational politics, who knows who the big
players and blockers are, and who’s hungriest for change and likely to be
one of your strongest supporters. As a respected insider, he or she can
advise the team and provide air cover from potential detractors, as well
as garner support from individuals who might otherwise want to thwart
the initiative actively or through passive aggression. The best candidate
is someone who is highly influential, can be a quiet advocate, and also
has the will to get involved, if necessary, to remove obstacles the team
might face.
With the scope of your initiative set and the right team in place,
you’re ready to move on to the second step of the process. Here we’ll
discuss how to get a clear understanding of the current state of play in
the industry, align everyone on the team, and inspire a natural wake-up
call among the team members and the wider organization about the need
to make a blue ocean shift.


Step Two: 
Understand Where You Are Now
