# 7.   Getting Clear About the Current State of Play

for specifics, the discussions are typically fuzzy and full of sound bites
that competitors could just as equally easily use to describe their
products or services.
To address this problem, we developed the strategy canvas, the
diagnostic tool that you will use throughout the blue ocean shift journey.
Drawing the “as-is” strategy canvas for your offering will give the team
—and, through them, the wider organization—an objective picture of
current industry dynamics as well as your own and your competitors’
strategies. Because there is no foregone conclusion about what the
strategy canvas will—or won’t—reveal, the team will be able to discover
for themselves the relevance, or irrelevance, of challenging the status
quo and rethinking the strategic profile of your organization’s offering in
blue ocean terms. This combination of fair process, with firsthand
discovery and atomization, is what ensures that people will own,
internalize, and have confidence in the results of their work.
The Strategy Canvas
The strategy canvas is a one-page visual analytic that depicts the way an
organization configures its offering to buyers in relation to those of its
competitors. It crisply communicates the four key elements of strategy:
the factors of competition, the offering level buyers receive across these
factors, and your own and your competitors’ strategic profiles and cost
structures. And it tells a story: It allows you to see—and understand—
where you and your competitors are currently investing; the product,
service, and delivery factors the industry is competing on; and what
customers receive from existing competitive offerings. Drawing the
strategy canvas of the industry you intend to penetrate is equally critical
if you are an entrepreneur intent on creating a new business, or a new
nonprofit, because it highlights in one simple picture what you will be up
against in strategic terms. It’s also a potent visual to use in discussions
with potential investors or funders.
Figure 7-1 shows the strategy canvas for the UK charity fund-raising
industry before the launch of Comic Relief. The horizontal axis specifies
the key factors the industry historically competed on and invested in,
which range from pity pleas, to advocacy counseling and care services,
to year-round fund-raising events and activities. Note that this axis
captures the “key competing factors,” not the key value factors for


buyers. This is important. Why? Because as you will likely soon
discover, there is often a stark difference between the factors
organizations compete on and assume deliver value and the factors that
buyers actually value. In fact, what companies compete on often not only
fails to add value from the buyer’s perspective, but can actually detract
from it. Think of the year-round fund-raising events and marketing
solicitations that charities compete on, which create donor fatigue, rather
than inspiring people to give. Think of all the buttons on the average TV
remote control, which frustrate and confuse more than they assist. Or
think of the vast array of channels you get when you sign up with a cable
TV provider, when all you really want are the three or four that carry the
shows you love to watch.
Figure 7-1
Strategy Canvas of the UK Charity Fund-Raising Industry (Pre–Comic Relief)
As your team focuses on identifying your industry’s key competing
factors, they will also begin to surface all the areas you and your
competitors currently invest in as you attempt to keep up with or surge
past one another. These factors increase your cost structure, absorb your
organization’s time, and can complicate operations. But because they
seem to be de rigueur, they are rarely questioned. So as the team
expressly identifies these factors, they will also be creating a roster of


candidates to consider later, when you’re looking for things to eliminate
or reduce in order to drop your cost structure while simultaneously
offering buyers a leap in value.
The vertical axis of the strategy canvas captures the offering level
buyers receive or experience for each of an industry’s key competing
factors. In the case of the UK charity fund-raising industry or, for that
matter, any nonprofit, donors are effectively the buyers of the nonprofit’s
mission and credibility, which they “pay” for with a donation. A high
score on the vertical axis means that an organization offers buyers—here,
donors—more, while a relatively low score means that an organization
offers less. You now connect the dots to create your strategic profile—a
graphic depiction of your organization’s relative performance across its
industry’s factors of competition—and your competitors’. A strategy
canvas, as exemplified in figure 7-1, is what we call the as-is strategy
canvas because it captures the industry’s current as-is state of play. It
helps to create a common understanding on industry reality among the
team.
What the Strategy Canvas Reveals
Looking at the canvas in figure 7-1, we can literally see why the industry
had become a red ocean of competition. The industry has essentially
commoditized itself. Despite the fact that there are thousands of charities
in the UK, from the donors’ point of view there is enormous
convergence in their strategic profiles. From a donor’s perspective, large
traditional fund-raising charities all effectively compete in a similar way.
The same can be said for small fund-raising charities. What’s more, the
strategic profiles of both large and small charities essentially follow the
same basic shape, only at different offering levels. As both large and
small charities try to improve the value of their offerings by providing a
little more for a little less, and benchmark industry best practices, the
basic shape of their strategic profiles converges. The result, as seen in the
figure, is that industry players’ strategic profiles become nearly mirror
images of one another without challenging the basic shape of their
curves. This is not rare. It is commonplace.
Think about major retail banks in São Paulo, New York, Paris, Lagos,
or Tokyo. Are there any stark differences in their relative locations,
façades, atmosphere, or even tellers? Or, from the buyers’ point of view,


are almost all of them pretty much the same, except for the language
spoken? What about gas stations the world over? Any major differences
in what you would expect? Again, the same. Or law firms and
management consultancies? Here, too, they’re fairly similar, other than
potentially being distinguished by a famous high-profile lawyer or a
thought-leader consultant. And these are just a few examples. Take a
moment and we are sure you will come up with your own long list of
organizations whose strategies are driven by one-upping the competition.
The strategy canvas helps you change that. It pushes you to take a
step back from the detail you are typically enmeshed in, and clearly see
your industry’s defining contours—to differentiate the forest from the
trees. It allows you to capture and depict a macro picture of the current
state of play in your industry, without getting lost in the technical details
of small operational differences. Focusing on the basic shape of the
industry’s strategic profile is essential, because it’s impossible to make a
blue ocean shift without challenging and altering the industry’s basic
strategic norms. Depicting the small operational deviations that
individual players are making in their offerings will only clutter the big
picture that buyers see and be irrelevant for your intended strategic shift.
The Importance of Focus, Divergence, and a Compelling Tagline
To make a blue ocean shift, the basic shape of your strategic profile
cannot look like everyone else’s. It must distinctively diverge, so that
when buyers think about your offering, they do not lump it together with
the offerings of other industry players. Specifically, to make a blue ocean
shift and stand out to buyers, your strategic profile needs to meet three
criteria: First, it should be clear that its basic shape on the strategy
canvas diverges from the industry’s average profile. It shouldn’t simply
be a little more, or a little less, than what the competition does. Second,
your strategic profile has to be focused. It shouldn’t just over-deliver or
under-deliver on the same set of factors the rest of the industry competes
on. Rather, it should concentrate on the key factors that can offer buyers
a leap in value, while eliminating and reducing others. This is what
allows your strategy to achieve lower costs at the precise moment you
are also offering greater value.
Finally, your strategic profile should have a compelling tagline that
speaks to the market and honestly reflects what your offering provides. It


must have integrity, not be a wishful marketing slogan. Buyers see
through empty slogans fast. A compelling tagline is an important initial
litmus test to ensure that the divergence and focus behind your strategic
profile are actually linked to a leap in buyer value, and not merely
differentiation for differentiation’s sake. Consider the strategic profile of
Comic Relief, known as Red Nose Day in the United States, which we
discussed in depth in chapter 3. Figure 7-2 shows how its strategic
profile meets all three criteria, opening up a blue ocean of new market
space in the UK charity fund-raising industry. Later on, in step four of
the process, we will show how this new, or “to-be,” strategic profile can
be derived.
Figure 7-2
Strategy Canvas of Comic Relief “Doing Something Funny for Money”
What does the as-is strategy canvas of your industry or target industry
look like? Would it look like that of the UK fund-raising charity industry
pre–Comic Relief, where all the major players’ strategic profiles
followed the same basic shape, and essentially converged, from the
buyers’ point of view? What does it reveal about your strategic profile?
Does it march in lockstep with everyone else’s, or does it stand apart, as
Comic Relief’s does? These are not questions for you to answer yourself.


These are the questions you should ask the team to answer through the
process of drawing the as-is strategy canvas of your industry.
How to Draw Your Strategy Canvas
The as-is strategy canvas is a self-assessment, not a customer survey.
The aim is to understand the team’s perspective, what the team members
see and register about the current strategic landscape: What do they
believe the business or product/service offering you’ve identified
competes on? How much or how little of each key factor does your
organization and the competition offer? What is the offering’s price point
relative to the competition’s? What is its relative cost structure? You will
likely be amazed by the plethora of insights drawing your as-is strategy
canvas can reveal.
Here is how this step unfolds.
Name the industry you are in
Start with a blank as-is strategy canvas, which, along with a supporting
explanation, are provided for your free download and use at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates. Ask the team to name the
industry that the business, product, or service you’ve selected for this
initiative competes in or, if you are an aspiring entrepreneur, the industry
you desire to enter. The aim is to ensure that everyone on the team has
the same reference point and that this reference point is decided by the
team, not imposed on them, so that they will fully own the as-is strategy
canvas they are about to create. This is typically a straightforward,
rapidly accomplished task. However, on rare occasions a team member
will start to hypothesize about what industry “we should be in.” If this
happens, simply remind him or her that at this stage you’re focused on
defining the industry “as it is,” not “as it should be.” That will come later
in the process.
Identify the key factors your industry competes on
Before the team settles down to address this task, it’s important to
establish a few parameters:


• Identify no fewer than 5 and no more than 12 key competing
factors on the as-is strategy canvas. A minimum of 5 pushes teams
who say they only compete on price to challenge their assumptions
and to uncover factors that may have become so familiar they no
longer register. Basic B2B industries like chemicals and plastics,
for example, often fall into this camp, because they take it for
granted that the product they sell is a commodity and argue that
price is the only distinctive point on which they compete, when, in
fact, the competitive factors usually include assessment and
technical support services, delivery lead times, inventory
availability, and more. Conversely, a maximum of 12 factors
pushes teams who come up with overly long lists to focus only on
“key” competing factors and not every factor they can name. The
aim is to keep the team focused on the big picture and neither
oversimplify nor get lost in minutiae. In the case of for-profit
companies, price should always be included in the key competing
factors.
• Key factors can be related to an offering’s product, service, or
delivery platforms. So think about all three platforms in coming up
with your list. For example, for a turbine engine manufacturer, key
competing factors might include customer financing (a service
factor), engine power (a product factor), and speed to fulfill orders
(a delivery factor).
• Avoid supply-side technical jargon and use words that describe the
factor from the buyers’ point of view. For example, speed instead
of megahertz.
Before taking up this task as a team, each of the members should
develop their own list independently. Beginning this way is key for three
reasons. One, it avoids groupthink, which tends to stifle people and to
lead to lists that do not fully reflect the range of views within the group.
Such self-censorship can engender an unspoken “what if” mindset that
may never go away and can discredit the initiative’s conclusions. “If I
had mentioned this, would the result have changed? Why didn’t I speak
up?” is not the kind of thinking you want when implementation is the
ultimate aim. Two, it challenges everyone on the team to name the


factors they believe the industry competes on. You will likely find this is
a question that few people have ever given much thought to, even though
they often come into the process assuming they have. As they usually
soon discover in sitting down to answer this question, it’s not easy.
Three, it allows the team to appreciate the differences in how each of
them interprets what their organization and industry do, and how often
people may identify the same factor and yet mean different things (we’ll
get to that in a minute). People’s jobs tend to induce tunnel vision, which
this process helps to break down.
Once all the team members have created their lists, the team should
reconvene as a group. At this juncture, have everyone read their list of
identified factors and, as they do, record them on a whiteboard so
everyone “sees” what others are thinking. When a factor is mentioned
more than once, make a check mark next to it, so that the team can also
see which factors most members identified and agreed on.
At this point we typically find that roughly 50–60 percent of the
factors identified will be the same. We also often hear members
comment casually to one another about the time it took for them to come
up with their lists, even if they have just completed their organization’s
annual strategic planning process. “If it’s hard for us to identify and
agree on the range of factors we compete on, how can we have a clear
strategy that is executed with integrity?” is an all-too-common insight.
Or, as one executive aptly put it, “Now I know why we never get there.
We don’t know where we’re going.” In and of itself, this reckoning
opens team members’ minds to the realization that they need to think
more deeply about their strategy.
Now initiate and lead a discussion focused on the factors where there
was no consensus. Asking each member to explain the reasoning behind
the factors he or she identified ensures that everyone will appreciate the
variety of ways in which their colleagues perceive the industry and
enable them to register factors that were always there but were somehow
overlooked. At this stage, the team usually finds that another 20–30
percent of the identified factors are actually getting at a similar point,
even though members have labeled them differently. They also learn
about factors that only one or two members may have identified, but that
are quickly recognizable as “key” factors once the proponents have
articulated why.
As the team identifies the key competing factors that will appear on


the horizontal axis, they may need to be reminded to describe them from
the buyers’ point of view, not the organization’s. Good people or state-
of-the-art IT are examples of organizational factors people often confuse
with key competing factors. While these may indeed be strengths of the
organization, they need to be translated into factors that speak to buyers,
if they do. The factors buyers don’t see or experience should be
scratched. Good people, for example, might be customer responsiveness,
if that’s what the good people produce for buyers. And state-of-the-art IT
might translate into ease of use, if that is what it leads to. The point is to
continually bring the team around to describing the offering and key
competing factors from buyers’ point of view, not the supplier’s.
Similarly, team members often identify brand as a key competing
factor. In almost all cases, however, an organization’s brand is a direct
function of its strategic profile; that is, of what it offers buyers/users.
Apple’s brand is strong because its offering is strong: leading edge,
reliable, easy to use, and stylish. Google’s brand is strong because its
product works amazingly well, it’s quick, it’s easy to use, and it delivers
reliable results. A brand, in short, is the result of what you do. It’s not an
isolated, independent factor. To get beyond brand, ask what customers
derive from the brand that makes it compelling. For example, what
explains Federal Express’s brand? That it’s reliable, fast, gives peace of
mind, and so on. To get to the root of the value the team believes a brand
conveys, encourage members to think of the top three reasons buyers
would purchase the offerings of the organization to which it belongs.
Decide which key player(s) to compare yourself with
Once the team has whittled down the list of key competing factors, they
have to decide on the best player(s) to plot their offering against. We
recommend selecting the industry leader, whose strategic profile is
usually the benchmark others have focused on keeping up with or
beating. If you are the industry leader, select your strongest competitor.
You may think, “Hey, how can the as-is strategy canvas capture the
industry if only the best player is plotted besides ourselves?” To which
we reply, take a moment and think about Pepsi versus Coke or Sotheby’s
versus Christie’s. Or imagine what the strategic profile of every major
investment bank, every major haute couture house, every major
accounting firm, and every major state university looks like.
Players in these industries may well argue that there are differences


across them, and no doubt there are. But, in the big picture, seen from the
buyers’ (or donors’) perspective, they all are pretty much the same. The
market leader’s strategic profile typically captures the profile others have
been converging toward or, in many cases, have already come close to
mimicking. Besides, the strategic profile of the best in class is also the
gold standard that defines the industry.
If team members feel that an additional player should be plotted for
the strategy canvas to be valid, then let them do so. However, we
strongly discourage plotting more than three strategic profiles, lest the
strategy canvas become cluttered and start to exaggerate inconsequential
differences for buyers. For example, a car that accelerates up to 100
miles per hour in 3 seconds versus 15 seconds may matter to car
manufacturers and a small segment of auto enthusiasts. But as ordinary
car drivers ourselves, our response to such a difference is—sorry,
engineers—“no big deal.” Remember you are looking to capture the big
picture from buyers’ perspective, not technical differences from the
supplier’s perspective that may speak to a relatively small niche.
That said, there are contexts where it does make real sense to plot
more than one best player. This typically happens when an organization
operates in a market space served by two distinct strategic groups or
alternative industries. For example, in the case of the blue ocean
initiative team that was headed by Christian Grob at Groupe SEB, at the
start of the blue ocean shift journey, the team plotted the strategic profile
of its electric home French fry maker not only against its best-in-class
traditional competitor’s, a global consumer appliance company, but also
against a new class of competitors, the best-in-class retailer brand’s.
With large retailer brands gaining power in the market, Christian’s team
saw them as important to include on the as-is strategy canvas.
When we worked with a company in the budget hotel industry, the
organization plotted its strategic profile against the market leaders in two
strategic groups that were relevant from the buyers’ point of view: one-
star and two-star hotels. In another organization, team members agreed
that, although the strategic profile of the market leader was generally
representative of what other industry players were doing, there was also
a newcomer that appeared to be defying industry logic, growing at a fast
clip, and garnering lots of attention. This was not just a new player. This
was a new, fast-rising entrant that hadn’t started to dominate the industry,
but looked like it was on course to do just that. In this case, the team


argued that the strategic profile of both the industry leader and this
newcomer should be plotted along with its own. These are the types of
reasons that make strong strategic sense and that you should look out for.
Rate your offering and the best-in-class player’s or players’ along the key competing factors
Having chosen the best-in-class player(s) you’ll compare yourself with,
the team is now ready to rate the offering level for each factor of your
business or product or service against theirs. If the team decided that two
strategic profiles or groups should be plotted along with your own, rate
the offering levels for both of them. For simplicity, however, we’ll
reference only one strategic profile here in addition to your own.
Using a 5-point Likert-type scale (or some variant thereof), with 1
equal to very low, 3 equal to average, and 5 equal to very high, ask the
team to rate your offering level for a given factor and then your reference
player’s for that same factor, before moving on to the next factor. We
have found this approach the most effective way to proceed, because it
offers a quick reality check if the ratings tend to be too high or too low.
As people challenge one another on just where they and the best-in-class
player stand on each factor, and why they feel as they do, a lively
discussion usually ensues. What team members often begin to viscerally
understand during these discussions is that, in the past, they and their
colleagues often had different mental baselines for calibrating their
offering, and had essentially talked past one another. As a result, while
annual strategic plans were produced, they were more often about tactics
to hit performance goals than about the big picture. This is another aha
moment that seldom gets lost on team members, further opening people’s
minds.
In plotting price, the team should use the absolute price—the price
tag buyers see. So, a high price should be ranked high on the vertical axis
and a low price ranked low. While this may sound self-evident, teams
often get this wrong and plot a low price high on the vertical axis and a
high price low. Why? Because they are incorrectly interpreting price to
mean value. But price is not value. Price is price. Just as a low price tag
with a dismal product or service offering does not translate into high
value, a higher price tag with a compelling offering does not mean low
value.
Team members also often ask whether each competing factor should
be weighted as part of this step. To this, our answer is no, because it


drives you to focus on the wrong thing. The objective of the as-is
strategy canvas is to record the factors the industry currently competes
on and invests in, and the offering level buyers receive for each factor as
objectively as possible. The aim of this step is not to provide a
subjective, value-laden assessment of each offering level, but an
objective one: Do we absolutely charge a little or a lot, or offer or focus a
little or a lot on each factor, and hence invest accordingly? Later in the
process, when team members meet the market, we will drill down into
value judgments and shift from what is to what should be.
Draw your as-is strategy canvas
With ratings for the key competitive factors in hand, the team is ready to
plot their as-is strategic profile and that of the best-in-class player. The
team should begin by putting price as the first competing factor on the
horizontal axis, so that it’s clear what value is: Value is what is
exchanged when the buyer pays. Everything to the right of price on the
horizontal axis is what the buyer is gaining. When the strategy canvas is
viewed in this way, it is easy to see what buyers get for the price they
pay.
Next, the team needs to plot the other key competing factors along
the horizontal axis. In plotting, you want to keep your completed as-is
strategy canvas from looking like a bowl of spaghetti—a zigzag, where
the offering can be described as “low-high-low-high-low-high.” With
such a drawing, it will be very hard to make sense of and communicate
the industry’s current state of play. To avoid this, the team needs to plot
key competing factors with similar ratings next to each other.
Once this is done, plot the offering level scores the team arrived at for
each key factor and then connect the dots to create your as-is strategic
profile. The team can then overlay this with the strategic profile of the
best-in-class player to arrive at the as-is strategy canvas. Finally, team
members are asked to reflect on their as-is strategic profile and see if
they can give a compelling tagline that reflects their offering. When they
do this exercise, you should make sure the team doesn’t develop an
advertising slogan, which doesn’t really relate to the strategy in any
meaningful way. The tagline should authentically reflect the strategic
profile they are trying to headline. They will likely struggle to come up
with a compelling tagline—one that resonates with integrity—for their
as-is strategic profile if its basic shape converges with that of the best-in-


class player(s).
What to Expect as You Draw Your Canvas
To appreciate the kind of dynamics that unfold and the insights that
emerge as a team draws their strategy canvas, consider this vignette from
the experience of a US commercial food-service company we’ll call
School Foods. The company’s profitable growth had stalled for some
time, and two major players dominated the industry. In this instance, the
CEO who took on the project chose to be the team’s leader as well.
After discussing their factors of competition, the team began to plot
their strategic profile against the two dominant rivals. Given the strength
of both, the team argued it couldn’t afford to focus on only one. This
concern, however, was quickly found to be groundless. The team fast
discovered that not only did the strategic profiles of the two rivals
converge, but their own strategic profile also followed in lockstep. The
strategic profiles of all three converged along the same dimensions of
competition: financial accountability, quality of management services,
transparency of bidding processes, and the like. The only difference was
that the two industry leaders had higher name recognition, whereas
School Foods had a high sense of mission, which the team wanted to
include on the canvas as a distinguishing key competitive factor. The
team was probed: “Do any of your customers know that you value your
sense of mission?” “No, not really… I guess not,” a team member
reluctantly replied. Upon reflection and discussion, the team then agreed:
They might be proud of their mission, but customers were clueless about
it.
“Do you know what your competitors have to offer in terms of food,
quality of service, or ambience?” a blue ocean expert asked. The entire
team went quiet. There were blank faces all around. Eventually, a team
member responded, “No, we don’t really know what they offer, nor do
we really know how our food offering is valued versus theirs by our
customers.” The probing then went deeper: “Why isn’t the quality of
food or variety in the offering noted as one of your factors of
competition? You are a food-service company after all, aren’t you?” The
group was amused, but ashamed. “I guess we are so focused on winning
the bid to provide the service by offering the best financial package
desired by the management of the school,” one team member confessed.


“Elsewhere at work you always talk a lot about the importance of
building relationships in your business. Why isn’t that on your strategy
canvas?” The team members looked at one another. The head of
operations said, “We’ve always spent a lot of energy on developing and
maintaining relationships, but you know it really doesn’t add value to
customers.”
“The industry principally competes on offering an adequate service at
the lowest price,” one team member chimed in, “but that’s only half the
picture, isn’t it?” “When we really think about it,” another team member
added, “the factors our industry competes on are contract-related—price,
transparency of our costs in bidding, inclusive pricing. It’s about giving
the customer the best financial deal, not necessarily the best food deal for
the end user.”
In the span of a 45-minute discussion, the School Foods team realized
they were a “me-too” business: Customers didn’t see how their offering
differed from their competitors’. With their lower name recognition, they
now have a good understanding as to why their company’s growth has
stalled for some time. They did not have a clear sense of how their
offering compared to that of their competitors in the core of their product
—food. And they competed on factors of little or no value to their real
customers—the students who eat the food. This was good news. The
entire industry was competing on four cylinders. All members of the
group could collectively see the wide-open opportunity space to create a
blue ocean and now share their willingness and urge to turn on all eight
cylinders. They were excited to get started.
Building a Shared Understanding of the Strategic Implications
Now it’s time to draw out the strategic implications of your completed
canvas. To start, ask all your team members to write down the key
insights they gained from drawing the canvas. Tell them that to kick off
the group discussion, each one of them will be called on to share their
insights. Inviting people to reflect, collect their thoughts, and crystallize
the takeaways that jump out at them is a crucial part of building the trust,
confidence, and ownership that are at the heart of making a successful
blue ocean shift. Setting clear expectations in advance about what will
happen during the group session reinforces that this is a fair process,
while turning up the heat to encourage everyone to think deeply.


After each of the team members has shared their insights, you’ll want
to reflect on everyone’s observations, using open-ended questions to let
people appreciate their collective strategic insights. There are several
areas to probe: Does the basic shape of our offering’s strategic profile
converge with or diverge from that of the best-in-class player(s)? Does
our strategic profile merit a compelling tagline that has integrity? Or
does our strategic profile confirm that a more honest tagline might be
something like “We try hard, but we’re hardly different from our rivals?”
If potential customers saw the completed as-is strategy canvas, would it
give them reason to be our fans and purchase our offering, or would they
be largely indifferent to it? And if investors saw it, would this give them
cause to upgrade their estimate of our future profitable growth prospects
and sign off on further funding? The strategy canvas is a powerful tool to
use in seeking funding, and in objectively demonstrating to buyers why
—when your organization has a compelling strategy—they should, in
short, fall in love with you.
To ensure that important insights revealed in the process of drawing
the strategy canvas don’t get lost, the team leader should also delve into
how much agreement, or disagreement, arose throughout the process. If
team members diverged in their lists of key competing factors, relative
offering levels, or choice of best-in-class competitor(s), probe for the
implications with questions like “How can we consistently sell to the
market, when there is no clear strategic vision we all embrace?” “How
can we convince customers to buy our product or service when we, as an
organization, can hardly agree on what we’re offering?” And “How can
we make consistent investment decisions when we hold different views
about what our strategy is?”
If you are in an established company with a well-known brand that
historically has dominated its industry, but have seen your profit and
growth prospects dwindle, along with your ability to pull in the best
talent, watch out for two things: In such situations, we have often seen
confusion and a high level of denial as to how serious this trend is and
how long it might continue. In this instance, your as-is strategic profile
may quickly reveal the exact opposite of what it takes to sail into the
blue ocean; namely, that in an attempt to monetize your well-known
brand, you are charging more for your offering than your rivals are,
while ironically offering less along the industry’s key competing factors.
(This is usually due to some combination of coasting on your reputation,


arrogance, and the rise of rivals who now play your game better than you
do.) What your as-is strategy canvas may also reveal—and we’ve seen
this happen numerous times as well—is that your strategic profile has
essentially become a “me-too” with a high cost structure, because you
invest at high levels across the full range of competing factors.
Meanwhile, a newcomer that seems to be whizzing by you has a strategic
profile that is divergent, focused, and has a compelling tagline. Should
either of these scenarios be the case, challenge team members by
commenting that “Incremental improvements might buy us time,” and
adding, “but would they enable us to create strong profitable growth?
Would they really enable our offering to break away from the
competition and stand apart while having lower costs?” Then go silent.
Let the questions sink in and wait for the team members to respond.
When the as-is strategy canvas tool reveals that your organization’s
strategic profile is a “me-too” or inferior to your competition, it is a
powerful mobilization tool to underscore the need to make a blue ocean
shift. But don’t stop here. There is a maxim that a cup that is full cannot
hold any more water. Likewise, when people feel they know it all, they
lack thirst. As a result, their room to learn is limited. The challenge is to
help team members not only see the need to make a blue ocean shift, but
also make room in their mental cups so that they have the space and
thirst to look at the world anew, which is at the heart of opening people’s
minds to new ideas and making a shift.
To encourage a learner’s mindset, highlight the unknowns that
surfaced during this step by recapping the comments team members
themselves made along the way. The kind of comments we often hear
and that serve this purpose well include:
• “It was more difficult than I thought to identify our key competing
factors. Few of us have a good grasp of the big picture and see the
industry through the lens of buyers—although, before we drew the
canvas, most of us assumed we did.”
• “We and everyone else in the industry tend to reflexively accept
the same key competing factors and assume that, because we
compete on them, they deliver buyer value. But is this true? Maybe
they’re sacred cows or unquestioned orthodoxies that we’ve
simply failed to question.”


• “Our strategy tends to be reactive and driven by the competition.”
• “If we had drawn the strategic profiles of all the other players in
our industry, they would hardly look different than ours or our
chief competitor’s, plus or minus minor differences in customers’
eyes.”
• “I see contradictions in our offering, where we offer a high level on
one competing factor, while ignoring others that support it—
investing heavily in making our online store beautiful, for instance,
while not investing in the speed of loading pages.”
• “There are strategic inconsistencies between the level of our
offering and the price. Basically, we’re offering less for more.”
Moving Forward
With the as-is strategy canvas drawn, the team now has a one-page
picture that captures the current state of play, the assumptions the
industry acts on, and the degree of competitive convergence across the
existing players. Instead of being told that change is in order, team
members have discovered for themselves the need for change. And
because they confirm the need for change, they own it. The completed
strategy canvas provides not only a compelling, objective case for why a
blue ocean shift is in order—or not in order—but also a good baseline
against which to evaluate new ideas.
Occasionally (as we saw in the School Foods example), the team will
include an executive member who may also serve as the leader of the
blue ocean initiative. Obviously, this has major benefits; but it is not
always possible. For this reason, be sure to keep the executive team
apprised of the main insights being revealed throughout the process. By
keeping executive management informed, you set clear expectations and
manage their expectations.
Similarly, after this first step, it is key to have team members return to
their areas to share the findings and what they’ve learned from the as-is
strategy canvas. Whether with executives or colleagues in their area, they
need to walk everyone through the story of what happened in the process
of drawing the as-is strategy canvas. This includes explaining how their
understanding about the current state of play changed and why, what the
as-is strategy canvas reveals, and what the team’s plenary discussion


brought to light. This builds buy-in and “no surprises” into the process,
which are key to implementation and form a powerful way to boost
everyone’s learning and create a common vocabulary and shared
“picture” of the as-is strategic reality the organization faces. As most
employees are seldom engaged in the strategic conversation of the
organization, this process cultivates a culture of inclusion where people
feel they matter.
This brings us to the next step in the process where you begin to
imagine what could be. In the next chapter you’ll learn to discover all the
ways the current industry or your target industry is creating hidden pain
points that limit demand for your offering and exclude potential buyers.
In the blue ocean shift process, pain points and boundaries are not
constraints. They are clear opportunities to change the strategic playing
field. So let’s start exploring them.


Step Three: 
Imagine Where You Could Be
