# 8.   Uncovering the Hidden Pain Points That Limit the Size of Your Industry

consumers who don’t own a corkscrew? Or to embarrass yourself in
front of guests by choosing the wrong wine or chilling it improperly.
To help teams get a snapshot of the practices in their industry that are
blocking utility for buyers and narrowing the basis of the industry’s
appeal, we developed the buyer utility map. This tool gives team
members a platform for developing a deep understanding of the ways in
which an industry, even an intensely competitive one, limits its demand
by creating pain points for current and potential buyers. As team
members work with the map, they begin to objectively register that blue
ocean opportunities exist, and that they just might have what it takes to
create them.
Ensuring that the team really begins to internalize this perspective is
critical, because at this juncture the members are typically experiencing
two powerful streams of emotion. Having drawn the as-is strategy
canvas, they have likely come to understand that maintaining or
tweaking the status quo will not put their organization on a strong,
profitable, growth trajectory. To get out of head-to-head competition and
into the blue ocean, something different will have to be done. Along with
this sentiment comes another underlying, but almost always unvoiced,
question, namely: If blue ocean opportunities exist, why has everyone in
our industry missed them? Which is to say, the team’s new awareness
goes hand-in-hand with that nagging self-doubt we’ve spoken about
before as to whether they—this team—can actually create a blue ocean.
What the team leader should not do is ignore these reservations.
Pretending they do not exist simply allows them to fester below the
surface. Then even a slight bump in the journey—and there will be
bumps—can easily shake the team’s confidence further. That said,
acknowledging these doubts and asking people to suspend them doesn’t
work either. They always resurface. What you have to do instead is nip
these doubts in the bud and continue building the team’s collective
confidence by allowing the members to keep on discovering their own
capabilities and creativity.
How? The team has already begun to experience the process of
firsthand discovery through the work of drawing their industry’s as-is
strategy canvas. Now they will have the opportunity to deepen it, as they
systematically uncover opportunities the industry has left on the table or,
more aptly, created via the self-imposed boundaries and assumptions its
players act under. This may seem counterintuitive. But by gaining a deep


understanding of the accepted “truths” that define their industry, the team
begins to see who its pain points are forcing out, and who the
noncustomers they never thought were even in the picture might be. The
buyer utility map is the tool we’ve developed to help teams generate
these insights.
The Buyer Utility Map
The buyer utility map helps team members see that almost every industry
—including theirs—has significant problems worth solving. The map
outlines the full range of experiences buyers have in using your
industry’s offering. In so doing, it reveals the problems the industry has
failed to address, creating pain points worth solving and, conversely, the
levers that could be pulled to address them and unlock exceptional
utility. This lets the team identify not only the full range of ways an
industry delivers utility to buyers, but also, importantly, where it blocks
utility, producing hidden opportunities to break away from the
competition and expand the size of the market. Let’s see how this works,
by looking at the map’s dimensions in detail.
The Six Stages of the Buyer Experience Cycle. The map begins by
outlining the full breadth of buyers’ experience, which is almost always
wider than the view most industries hold. As the horizontal axis in figure
8-1 shows, a customer’s experience can be broken down into a cycle
with six distinct stages, running more or less sequentially from purchase
to delivery, use, supplements (that is, other products or services needed
to make yours work), maintenance, and disposal. Each stage
encompasses a variety of specific experiences. For a retail store, for
example, purchasing may include getting to the store, finding what you
want when you get there, and checking out when you’re ready to pay.
While these six stages provide a generic template that forces
organizations to think through the complete buyer experience cycle, they
can be and often are customized to better fit an industry’s particulars. To
illustrate, imagine once again that you’re a customer of the wine
industry. Your buyer experience cycle would be something along the
lines of: Search (variety, food pairing, region, etc.)  Purchase  Chill 
Opening/Sharing  Drinking  Disposal of bottle.
Figure 8-1


The Buyer Utility Map
Interestingly, many industries focus on one or two stages of the
experience cycle and overlook all the opportunities the remaining stages
afford. This bounded rationality often creates pain points that escape
industry players because they simply aren’t considering them. By
identifying the full range of stages in the buyer experience cycle, the
buyer utility map begins to generate insight into the unquestioned
assumptions an industry is based on—assumptions that detract from
buyer value and can be reversed.
The Six Buyer Utility Levers. The map also displays the major
levers organizations can pull (or not) to provide greater utility for buyers.
While the six stages of the buyer experience cycle run across the
horizontal axis of the map, the six utility levers run down the vertical
axis, producing 36 potential “utility spaces.” In the case of simplicity,
fun and image, and environmental friendliness, the utility these levers
offer is clear. The idea that a business, product, or service could reduce a
customer’s financial, physical, or reputational risk is also fairly
straightforward. And a product or service offers convenience simply by
being easy to obtain or use. The most commonly used lever is customer
productivity, which captures how efficiently an offering can fulfill
buyers’ needs in each stage of the buyer experience cycle by saving them
time, effort, and/or money. Interestingly, just as industries tend to focus
on a small subset of stages, they also tend to focus on a small subset of


the six potential utility levers, overlooking the expansive opportunities
the full set affords.
Where does your industry or target industry concentrate its efforts
among these 36 possible spaces? Executives in commoditized red ocean
industries typically focus on only a few, leaving the rest virtually wide-
open for blue ocean possibilities where today only inadvertent pain
points reside. As you will see below, that’s precisely what Christian
Grob’s team at Groupe SEB found when they filled in the buyer utility
map for the European electric French fry appliance industry discussed in
chapter 1. This is not an anomaly, either: Few industries or organizations
realize the breadth of utility spaces they could explore or, on the flip
side, the narrowness of their current focus. And simply asking people to
imagine, without any help, that new utility can be created seldom helps
them expand their field of vision.
When people can see how few spaces their industry focuses on,
however, and see and name the range of utility spaces there are to
explore, they literally see where trapped value may be hidden. That’s
certainly what also happened to Kimberly-Clark Brazil when the
company’s initiative team applied the map to toilet paper. “What could
we do with simple toilet paper?” was the initial question everybody had
in mind, since they all knew the industry was highly commoditized,
swimming in a bloody red ocean. They couldn’t imagine what could be
done beyond producing toilet paper more cost-effectively than the
competition. But as you will discover in a subsequent chapter, the map
helped them see ample untapped utility spaces they could exploit to
create a blue ocean in the industry.
To drill down and get clear on exactly what these pain points are and
where on the map they are hiding, the buyer utility map provides a
straightforward, structured method for systematically thinking through
all the possibilities. As shown in exhibit 8-1, team members are guided
to consider the biggest blocks to each utility lever and the factors that
give rise to them at each stage of the buyer experience cycle. As pain
points become visible that no one had ever noticed before, or that the
industry knowingly ignored—as players focused on beating one another
in the current game—more ahas emerge.
Exhibit 8-1
Uncovering the Blocks to Buyer Utility


Purchase  Delivery  Use  Supplements  Maintenance  Disposal
Customer Productivity: What is the biggest block to customer
productivity in each stage? What are the key reasons for this block?
Simplicity: What is the biggest block to simplicity in each stage? What
are the key reasons for this block?
Convenience: What is the biggest block to convenience in each stage?
What are the key reasons for this block?
Risk Reduction: What is the biggest block to risk reduction in each
stage? What are the key reasons for this block?
Fun and Image: What is the biggest block to fun and image in each
stage? What are the key reasons for this block?
Environmental 
Friendliness: 
What 
is 
the 
biggest 
block 
to
environmental friendliness in each stage? What are the key reasons
for this block?
Plotting Your Buyer Utility Map
How do you plot a buyer utility map for your offering? Here are the
steps.
Start with the buyer experience cycle
Walk the team through the generic buyer experience cycle shown in
figure 8-1, making sure everyone is clear on what it captures. To help
you effectively perform the tasks discussed in this chapter, relevant
materials and templates are provided for your free download and use at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates. Then, using this as a
baseline, ask them to put themselves in the shoes of buyers, and imagine
their total experience from purchase through disposal. While the buyer
experience cycle for many industries generally follows the generic
pattern shown in the figure, the team can also customize theirs for their
business, product, or service offering, renaming some of the stages, for
example, or adding or deleting stages to fit the specifics of their industry.
In the case of personal computers, for example, a typical buyer’s
experience would include setup as a stage after delivery and before use.
Next, challenge the team to identify the specific activities that fall
within each stage of the cycle. This will help everyone begin to get a
rich, full understanding of what buyers actually experience over the life


of the offering. Going back to the PC industry, for example, setup would
include getting the PC out of its big, tightly packed box; reading and
making sense of the setup instructions; connecting the PC’s wires to all
your other devices; climbing under furniture (which is when many of us
hit our heads) to plug the PC in; and throwing away the box and all the
protective casing inside it.
Explore the six buyer utility levers
Once the full buyer experience cycle is laid out, the team can turn to the
six utility levers. To ensure that everyone understands what each buyer
utility lever means, the team leader should post the summary definitions
presented in exhibit 8-2. Then move methodically from stage to stage,
posing the same two questions about each, as shown in exhibit 8-1,
namely: “What is the biggest block to [insert utility lever here, e.g.,
customer productivity] in this stage?” and “What are the key reasons for
this block?” While both questions aim to uncover the same problems,
we’ve found that the richest answers come from exploring both
perspectives.
Exhibit 8-2
What Each Utility Lever Means
To ensure that everyone is clear on what each buyer utility lever
means, below is a summary for your easy reference:
Productivity: Anything to do with efficiency—less time, effort,
and/or money—in fulfilling buyers’ needs.
Simplicity: Anything that eliminates or minimizes complexity
or mental hassle.
Convenience: When and where I want something—like 24/7,
365.
Risk Reduction: This may be financial, physical, and
emotional, including reputation.
Fun and Image: This is the tangible and intangible aesthetic
look, feel, attitude, and style an offering conveys.
Environmental Friendliness: This utility lever is about


“green” matters. Is your offering environmentally friendly? Or
do buyers prefer your offering because of your organization’s
strong reputation for environmental friendliness?
To illustrate how dramatic the insights can be, consider the
experience of a company in the Mexican retail furniture industry. The
industry historically thought about delivery in terms of delivering new
furniture to the buyer’s apartment complex, which in Mexico City meant
depositing it in the building lobby. In fleshing out what delivery means
from the buyer’s perspective, however, the team quickly realized how
narrow this definition was and the pain points the industry unknowingly
imposed. Delivery for buyers was not only about getting the furniture to
the apartment building. It also encompassed getting the furniture from
the lobby up to the customer’s apartment. Many on the team recounted
horror stories about people struggling with family and friends to get their
new furniture up to their apartments after a tiring day at work. Yet,
somehow, even executives in the industry had simply assumed that
hassle goes with getting a beautiful new room of furniture.
Such assumptions are not uncommon. Don’t most of us assume that
dealing with an insurance company will entail getting the runaround, that
getting gas for our car is a drag, that bottled water will be hard to carry
and store, or that buying an iron also requires that we have a large,
clumsy, hard-to-store ironing board? As you flesh out the blocks to
utility that fall in each stage of the buyer experience cycle, even
executives who consider themselves market savvy are typically surprised
by all they’ve never thoroughly thought through.
Fill in the buyer utility map
As the blocks to utility surface, you should put an “X” in each space
where a pain point was revealed. Figure 8-2 shows a completed buyer
utility map, in this case for electric home French fry makers that Groupe
SEB found when the team applied the map. As shown on the map, make
sure to capture the reasons for each “X,” whether in speech bubbles, as
we’ve done here, or on a separate sheet of paper. Cataloguing the reasons
behind each pain point is important, because the team doesn’t want to
lose any of the work or insight gained here.


Figure 8-2
The Buyer Utility Map of Electric Home French Fry Makers: Pre–Groupe SEB’s ActiFry
Finally, use an “O” to mark the utility spaces the industry currently
focuses on. To do this effectively and avoid putting “Os” all over the
map just because the industry minimally touches on a space, you should
get the team to distill the industry’s core utility. Once again, the aim is
the big picture. Go back to the as-is strategy canvas to provide the
baseline: What is the industry fundamentally offering from the buyers’
perspective? Boil down the central utility buyers experience by using
your product or service. Christian Grob’s team at Groupe SEB found, for
example, that despite the intensity of competition, the industry
essentially focused on only 1 of the 36 potential utility spaces—
productivity in use, that is, creating a reasonably priced electric French
fry maker that worked reliably. That is the “O” shown in figure 8-2.
As the team works to complete their map, you should remind them
that today’s negatives could become positives in tomorrow’s strategy,
and that the pain points they’ve identified reflect buyers’ perspective.
When the negatives of their industry are unearthed, people in established
organizations can feel uncomfortable or get defensive. Your role is to
remind them about the potential opportunities that lie behind these pain
points. Let them know that what your organization and the industry have


focused on, as revealed by the map, may have been enough to succeed in
the past. The point here is not to look back and it’s certainly not to cast
blame. It’s to build a compelling future together and pain points provide
strong clues on how to do just that.
One last observation about this stage of the plotting process: In some
cases, after completing the map, one or more members of the team may
question the results. And, indeed, as the team goes through the rest of the
blue ocean shift process and meets with and interviews both customers
and noncustomers, these insights may well be refined and altered.
Hassles the team did not perceive in this initial step may make
themselves known and be found to be significant. Others the team
identified may be found to be less important than they had originally
thought. At this point, though, you should immediately follow up by
asking the team member or members who’ve expressed concern what
percentage of conceivable inaccuracy they’re worried about: 100
percent? Or 20–25 percent?
In our experience, the far lower range is almost always the answer.
That’s your opportunity to stress the strength of the results: Even
assuming 20–25 percent of the utility blocks the team identified are
inaccurate or incomplete, it doesn’t invalidate the other 75 percent
uncovered through this one step. In short, blocks to utility still exist, and
the flip side represents opportunities to redefine the strategic playing
field. Then go on to assure the team that as the initiative continues, they
will have ample opportunity to systematically meet customers and
noncustomers, validate or disprove their insights, and learn how to look
at the market in new ways. This type of honest, direct discussion eases
people’s anxieties and strengthens collective confidence. In the case of
Groupe SEB, for example, not only did the team confirm the pain points
noted in figure 8-2, but the next steps of the process led the team to
discover other important pain points that had long slipped under the
radar, such as how the high calories in French fries discouraged
noncustomers from patronizing the industry.
As an aside: We have seen the above concern come up often in
organizations that have a culture of analysis paralysis, where data tends
to be used not to help people take action, but rather to postpone and even
invalidate actions that move away from the status quo. Should this
happen, it’s an important signal to take note of as you move forward with
the process, because it means that additional handholding will likely be


required as the team learns to step back and see the big picture, atomized
step by atomized step.
Is What You See What Buyers See and Experience?
With the completed buyer utility map in hand, the team can bring the
insight it contains to life. To initiate the discussion, ask the team
members to juxtapose the insights gleaned from the as-is strategy canvas
with those revealed through the buyer utility map. Have them first recap
what they learned and the conclusions they reached from the as-is
strategy canvas. Provide prompts as necessary: That competition is
intense? That the strategic profiles of the industry’s players have largely
converged? That the room for future profitable growth is viewed as
limited? That it is hard to find opportunities to break away from the
competition? Jotting down the key takeaways to these questions creates
an additional opportunity for team members to internalize the lessons
from drawing the as-is strategy canvas.
With that done, shift to the completed buyer utility map, asking:
“What, by contrast, does the map we collectively created reveal?” “Is the
industry, knowingly or unknowingly, imposing pain points on buyers
across their total experience?” “Could these pain points be limiting
current customers’ use of our industry’s product or service?” “Would
existing customers jump ship and champion an organization that
eliminated these blocks to utility, and even use more of its offering?”
“Could these blocks to utility also be discouraging or intimidating other
people—noncustomers—from patronizing our industry?” “How many of
the 36 utility spaces does our industry genuinely focus on?” As one
executive put it, while answering this last question, “We are here
[pointing to two utility spaces on the map], when there’s all that out there
[dragging his finger across all the “Xs” on the rest of the map].” That’s
when the team first begins to appreciate and see the real possibility of
creating blue oceans.
As the discussion above suggests, creating the buyer utility map for
their offering enables the team to see that red oceans need not be
inevitable, and that insights into new opportunity spaces begin to be
revealed just by applying this one analytic tool. Completing the map can
be tough, however, in industries where, over the years, management has
seemingly become disconnected from market reality and buyers’


experience. We have been called into industries fraught with hassles and
inconveniences where, at the same time, management stares almost
blankly at the buyer utility map. Understanding the obstacles that buyers
experience in using their industry’s products or services, or even their
own product or service, is hard for them to get their heads around.
In some cases, organizations are so close to their industry that they
fail to see what hassles still exist. In others, the players have historically
held unique positions, which gave them little or no incentive to focus on
buyers’ experience and the blocks to utility they themselves created. In
still other situations, the organization itself has unwittingly put rose-
tinted glasses on management’s eyes, creating a gulf between the way
they see and experience their industry and the way ordinary people do.
One of the top three US automakers, for example, was known to have
employees systematically take care of management’s cars while the
executives were at work—making all the necessary tune-ups and repairs,
filling their tanks, and washing their cars. And when dealerships heard
that management would be dropping by, they rolled out the red carpet.
When you don’t have to experience any of the hassles of buying,
owning, and maintaining a car, or suffering breakdowns and waiting and
paying for repairs, and when dealerships couldn’t be more
accommodating and sparkling, it’s no wonder you’d lose touch with the
pain points imposed by your company and industry.
When any of the above is the case, our response is “Stop. Go no
further.” Likewise, if the answers coming back are thin, or lack
conviction, or are loosey-goosey in any way, or if there isn’t a deep level
of agreement among the team members, you need to take a different
tack. Have all of them get up, go out, and see with their own eyes what it
means to experience your industry’s offering across the entire buyer
experience cycle in the same way that ordinary people do. You’d be
surprised how many organizations lack a wide-angle understanding of
their buyers’ total experience and all the pain points they encounter
along the way. This is why we stress, time and time again, that seeing is
believing and that you should never, ever outsource your eyes or ears. In
fact, even organizations that don’t struggle with the map are often keen
to do this for added learning.
To see how this process works, and how, in executing it, the scales
fall from people’s eyes with a speed no market research report we have
ever seen was able to achieve, let’s look at the experience of a team that


went into the field to learn.
Learning to Look Through Buyers’ Eyes
On a cold, snowy, late-winter morning, the senior executive team of one
of America’s largest pharmacy chains gathered in a hotel conference
room to work on their buyer utility map. The company was growing like
gangbusters; yet this growth was largely through acquisitions. Their
main rival in the US$250 billion US pharmacy market was following
suit.
8:00 a.m.
“OK. I need a volunteer.” The nine C-level executives look at the
team leader with mild anxiety. “I need a volunteer.” Heads turn, faces
contort, and at last the vice president for IT says, “OK, I’ll do it.”
“You’re all sick,” the team leader says. “Not a life-threatening illness,
but a serious one: an earache, a sore throat, a bad cold, the flu. What
would you do?”
“Go to work!” the executives unanimously respond.
“OK. Let’s say you have a sore throat that won’t go away. Maybe it’s
a strep infection. How’s your productivity?”
“Rotten,” they once again unanimously respond.
“How do your coworkers feel about you?”
“Not happy. You’re sick and infecting them,” they say.
“Great. So our productivity is low, we may be infecting our
colleagues, and none of us uses the pharmacies in our own stores for the
most common illnesses. Thank goodness others do.”
“Let’s start the day over,” the team leader then says. “I’d like you
[pointing to the VP of IT] to go home. Get back in bed. Don’t push
through the pain of your sore throat. We’ll go home with you. Let’s go!”
Back at the executive’s home, about 20 miles outside a midwestern
city, the team gathers around his bed. They have a video camera with
them to capture the buyer experience.
9:30 a.m.
“Now instead of going to work, call a doctor. You may have strep
throat. You don’t want to get anyone else infected, do you?”
The VP calls his doctor. It’s 9:30 a.m. The earliest he can be seen is
11:30 a.m. The team waits. Video is rolling. The executive is told to stay
in bed. He can only communicate on the phone or by email (preferable,


as his fake strep barely allows him to speak).
10:30 a.m.
With his doctor’s office more than 30 minutes away when the roads
are clear, the team sets out. Between the snow and the stop-and-go
traffic, it takes 45 minutes to get there. All ten members sit or stand in
the crowded waiting room, which looks more like an emergency room:
children with hacking cough, adults sniffling in their sleeves, a few
infants spitting up. After 30 minutes of waiting—appointments are
running behind schedule—the team is let in to see the doctor.
11:45 a.m.
A nurse takes the “patient’s” weight and height. He sits down and is
told to strip down to his underwear. Hysterics aside, everyone on the
executive team feels bad for the VP as he goes to the bathroom and
emerges in his tighty-whities, or shorts.
12:15 p.m.
After, what seems like forever (particularly for the VP sitting up on
the examination table in his skivvies), the doctor arrives. He takes the
patient’s blood pressure, tests his reflexes, asks about his dietary habits,
probes why he’s overweight, asks how much he drinks, and if he’s
thinking about having children. Very intrusive.
After a throat swab, a few more minutes of waiting, and getting the
results from the nurse, the team is done. At this point, the team is several
hours into the buyer experience cycle. While the VP actually had a clean
bill of health (it was a fake strep throat, after all), the team improvises
that he has received a prescription for antibiotics and analgesic
medications. So they get back in their cars and drive to the pharmacy. As
most people do, the IT executive chooses the location nearest to his
house.
Another 45 minutes of driving and they’re at the store. As at many
American suburban pharmacies, the team finds ample parking. But as the
doors open, it is like walking into a grocery store. Aisles of merchandise:
chewing gum, toys, magazines, soft drinks, diapers, and finally, some 50
yards later, the pharmacist. The team goes over to the prescription
counter and realizes that after handing in their prescriptions, customers
are told to wait. Fifteen minutes is the average wait time recorded—a
small eternity for people who don’t feel well, many with children
climbing on their laps.
That is the buyer experience cycle of the person who does the right


thing and doesn’t expose colleagues to contagion.
3:30 p.m.
The team reconvenes at the hotel meeting room. They now map the
buyer experience cycle with relative ease. As they start to assess the
utility blocks they experienced that day, the executives are flabbergasted.
One executive blurts out, “Who wants to spend their day doing that? It’s
so much easier being sick. There are just too many pain points.” Another
executive chimes in, “Think of all the people suffering needlessly just to
avoid all the hassles we experienced. Didn’t we even joke this morning
about going to work sick, even if our productivity is down, and others
don’t like it? We don’t even patronize our own industry when it comes to
a common, serious, but non–life-threatening illness!” Silence. Then
energy builds as possibilities to eliminate this pain point, break away
from the competition, and unlock new demand start to come into view.
“What if we put a doctor in the pharmacy?” suggests one team
member. “Too expensive,” replies another. “What about a nurse-
practitioner? They’re one-third the cost, and they can write prescriptions
for most of the common ailments we’re looking to treat.” “You walk in,
you see a ‘doctor,’ and you’re out within minutes! Hours and hours of
boredom and pain are gone.” “Sales grow.” “And people feel better.”
Quiet grins. Team members sit noticeably taller. Electricity runs through
the room as the red ocean parts and blue ocean possibilities begin to
open before them.
The First Rule of Fieldwork: Experience What Buyers Experience
As the example above reveals, when insights are lacking at this step,
there is no substitute for going into the field to discover them firsthand.
Asking the marketing department to come in and walk a team through
the buyer experience cycle, or provide research reports to fill in the
blanks, will not work. There are no shortcuts. We cannot emphasize
enough the danger of allowing a team to outsource their eyes and ears,
even to their subordinates. It will ensure that the members learn almost
nothing, and that what they do learn will be nonvisceral—data points that
seldom register and are rarely engraved on people’s hearts and minds.
In going out in the field, we strongly recommend that, wherever
possible, the team assume the role of ordinary buyers, or observe
existing buyers in their professional environments or homes, being


careful to document the difficulties these individuals encounter across
the full buyer experience cycle. Do not confuse this with holding a focus
group. Focus groups are artificial forums. While they are fine for
gathering input on how to incrementally improve a product or service,
they will provide neither the rich insights nor the conviction you and
your team need and will only get by going into the field.
Teams who observed buyers at the point of sale alone have gained
insights into pain points that had eluded their industry for years. Similar
wake-up calls have occurred for teams who watched how their offerings
were explained, stored, set up, used, and disposed of. To document the
difficulties buyers experience, you may want to ask the team to take
pictures or to video what they see and experience to support their
findings.
Note that we have rarely met a team that wasn’t initially somewhat
reluctant to go out in the field, with some members even questioning
what they could possibly learn. However, we have also never observed a
team that didn’t come back glad they had done it and with a visceral,
grounded understanding of what buyers experience and the blocks to
utility they face. Such knowledge is immensely worthwhile.
In the end, one of the biggest obstacles to implementing a blue ocean
shift can be the executive team, even if they sanctioned the project.
Many executives become blind to the hassles and grievances that buyers
and users of their industry’s offerings face day-to-day. They may realize
they are stuck in a red ocean, and they may aspire to sail into the blue
ocean, but to build both their understanding of what this will mean in
practical strategic terms and their confidence in the team’s work, you
need to follow the principle of “No surprises—EVER.” This means
thoroughly debriefing senior executives about what the team has found
after this and every step, and having them hear it directly from the team
members themselves. Even if they say this isn’t necessary, it is
necessary. In fact, it’s more than necessary. It’s indispensable, because it
means that any doubts executives may have can be caught early and
addressed up front.
If the executive team seems to be discounting what the blue ocean
team has found, make sure to invite the doubters to see the pain points
ordinary buyers experience for themselves. When this has happened, we
have never witnessed executives be other than profoundly influenced.
The experience not only shifted their thinking, but renewed their


confidence in the initiative. Their status and involvement also did
wonders to garner support for the project across the organization,
providing yet another illustration of how mobilization is built into every
step of the blue ocean shift process.
With the buyer utility map assessed, collective confidence created,
and the executive team apprised of the results, the team is now ready to
move on to the next task—understanding the three tiers of noncustomers
they can unlock to create all new demand and expand the size of the
economic pie.


CHAPTER 9
Discovering an Ocean of Noncustomers
FOR THE PAST 25 years, the business mantra has been “customer
first.” The blue ocean strategist’s mantra is “noncustomers first.” The
aim of making a blue ocean shift, remember, is not to compete for
existing customers but to create new demand and grow your industry.
That’s done by unlocking new utility for your noncustomers. Yet, few
organizations have a sound grasp of who their noncustomers are or why
they continue to remain just that—noncustomers.
This brings us to the next task: understanding precisely who your
noncustomers are and why they don’t patronize your industry. The buyer
utility map gave the team initial insight into the pain points and blocks to
utility the industry imposes on its existing customers that may potentially
also turn noncustomers away. Now you will begin to widen the lens so
the team can see the total demand landscape. Doing this offers insight
into two of the questions executives raise most often: “Is the concept of
noncustomers relevant to our industry?” And “With a compelling blue
ocean offering, how much new demand could we unlock?” After
working through this step, no executive ever looks at demand in the
same way.
Think of Square versus Visa, MasterCard, and American Express. All
three rank among the world’s top 100 brands. Yet despite their global
reach, strong brand recognition, and deep pockets, all three compete
head-to-head, essentially striving to win a greater share of the wallets of
the same group of customers: established merchants and their customers.
This is particularly true in America, which accounts for the greatest share
of all three companies’ card circulation, and where nearly 75 percent of
all adult Americans already have more than one credit card.
