# 9.   Discovering an Ocean of Noncustomers

The way the industry saw it, the US credit card market was saturated,
with scant room for profitable growth, especially given the tighter
regulations on interest rates and fees that followed the 2008 global
financial crisis. But was it? That wasn’t the way Square saw it. To the
contrary, Square, founded in 2009 by Jack Dorsey, who also cofounded
Twitter, and Jim McKelvey, saw an ocean of noncustomers.
Yes, most Americans have a credit card, and almost all medium-sized
and large merchants accept them. But could Americans use their credit
cards to pay the pizza delivery person, the gardener, the electrician who
visits their home, the piano teacher, or the ice cream truck at the beach?
Could they use credit cards or debit cards to pay the babysitter or the
housekeeper, or to pay back the friend they borrowed $50 from? No.
Every person who wanted to make a person-to-person payment was a
noncustomer of the credit and debit card industry, and so were many new
businesses and microbusinesses, like farmers’ market vendors, food
trucks, and pop-up shops.
Of America’s 27 million small businesses, roughly 55 percent don’t
accept credit cards. Yet research shows that more than 55 percent of
customers wish they did. Moreover, other studies show that when people
are given payment options in addition to cash, they are likely to spend
more per purchase, which helps small businesses grow. In other words,
there were lots of entrepreneurs, small business owners, and newly
started businesses that didn’t offer customers the option of credit or debit
card payment, but would benefit handsomely if they did. And there were
lots of person-to-person transactions, typically handled by cash or check,
that people would be thrilled to use credit or debit cards for. This is the
ocean of noncustomers Square saw in 2009 and has been rapidly
capturing with its mobile payment system, which allows individuals,
small businesses, and even large organizations to accept credit or debit
card payments on their iPhones, Androids, or iPads, simply by attaching
a free Square reader, a small plastic device that’s literally a snap to use.
Today many other followers have joined in and, like Square, are
unlocking this ocean of noncustomers, which continues to grow, while
the industry itself is constantly evolving.
As Square, Comic Relief, Salesforce.com, and many others
understood, the universe of noncustomers not only exists, but provides
expanding growth opportunities. Yet most organizations are so focused
on their industries’ existing customers that they cannot see beyond this


narrow frame. To be fair, it is always easier to talk with existing
customers, the ones who have already crossed your threshold. And, of
course, their opinions matter. But, to grow, you have to bring new people
into the industry.
The Three Tiers of Noncustomers
To help organizations broaden their vision, we developed a framework
that defines and identifies three tiers of noncustomers, as the graphic in
figure 9-1 shows. The three tiers provide successively wider lenses with
which teams can view the ocean of noncustomers they could tap into to
unlock new demand. We have found that without such an organizing
framework, the notion of noncustomers, though seductive, becomes too
broad a catchall to use to systematically analyze and understand—and
hence capture—potential demand. In this context, we present two
formulas that are key to making a blue ocean shift and, we would argue,
are increasingly tied to your organization’s ability to grow.
Figure 9-1
The Three Tiers of Noncustomers
First, contrary to common practice,


Total demand potential ≠ function (existing industry customers)
Rather,
Total demand potential = function (existing industry customers +
first-tier noncustomers + second-tier noncustomers + third-tier
noncustomers)
Let’s consider the definitions of the three tiers, how they differ, and
why they are often closer to an industry than most organizations imagine.
First-tier noncustomers are all the soon-to-be noncustomers of your
industry. These buyers patronize your industry not because they want to,
but because they have to. They use current market offerings minimally,
to get by, as they search for or simply wait for something better. Upon
discovering a superior alternative, they will eagerly jump ship. In this
sense, they sit on the edge of your market. Go back to the US credit card
industry. Of the small and midsize merchants who accept credit card
payments and debit transactions, many do so reluctantly. They have
tolerated the cost of installing point-of-sale technology, the fees for
processing transactions, and the often hidden costs they may be charged
(especially those that don’t have the bargaining power to negotiate fees),
because they knew customers expected to be able to pay with their cards.
But these noncustomers would willingly make a switch if an easier, less
cumbersome, and less expensive alternative to the current system
existed.
Just think for a moment about how many industries you patronize
only because you have to, not because you want to, are proud to, or
enjoy the experience. And think about how you might love to jump ship
if a compelling alternative came along. If you are like most people, you
will quickly realize how many industries and organizations you are a
first-tier noncustomer of. First-tier noncustomers are not only highly
vulnerable to being poached, but if an alternative could eliminate their
pain points, it’s likely the rate and frequency of their use would multiply.
Do you know who your industry’s first-tier noncustomers are?
Second-tier noncustomers are refusing noncustomers—people or
organizations that have consciously thought about using your industry’s
offering, but then rejected it, either because another industry’s offering
better meets their needs or because yours is beyond their means, in
which case their needs are either dealt with by another industry or
ignored. For the credit and debit card industry, second-tier noncustomers
are all the new businesses, microbusinesses, and self-employed


individuals who thought about offering credit and debit card payment but
in the end chose against it. Even though they knew customers would
probably appreciate it, their small annual sales, the fragility of their new
enterprise, or the perceived complication of setting up and paying for the
point-of-sale system made them reject the industry. Cash and checks tend
to be the standard payment options for this broad swath of organizations.
Think about how often you or your organization has been a second-
tier noncustomer. For example, did you recently choose to paint your
living room after contemplating the pros and cons of using wallpaper
instead? If yes, you were a second-tier noncustomer of the wallpaper
industry. Or did your management decide to use stone flooring in the
new head office after contemplating wood as an alternative? If yes, your
organization was a second-tier noncustomer of the wood-flooring
industry. You see, being a second-tier noncustomer is as easy as that, and
happens far more frequently than most people or organizations ever
assume, imagine, or give much systematic thought to. And yet, think of
how close second-tier noncustomers actually are to patronizing the
industry they chose against. The simple fact that they contemplated and
weighed the pros and cons tells you that the industry they rejected is still
far closer to capturing their wallets than most of its players ever realize.
Do you know who the second-tier noncustomers of your industry are?
And why, after considering your offering, they dismissed it?
Third-tier noncustomers are the furthest away from an industry’s
existing customers. Commonly, these unexplored noncustomers have
never been thought of as potential customers, nor targeted by any of the
industry’s players, because their needs and the business opportunities
associated with them have always been assumed to belong to other
industries. Go back to credit cards. Before Square, the industry always
assumed that a merchant was half of the transaction equation. All the
transactions that occur between individuals were left off the table and
unexplored, because they were assumed to belong to another industry—
cash and checks. After all, who would install a point-of-sale credit/debit
card system at home? Yet, we would wager that most of us have opened
our wallets to pay someone, only to discover that we’ve run out of cash
and wished we could use a credit card instead. But since we can’t, what
do we do? We reluctantly but hastily go to the nearest ATM. Those are
the third-tier noncustomers that Square set out to unlock through its
simple, easy-to-use, easy-to-carry, pay-only-when-you-use-it Square


reader.
Do you, like Square, know who the third-tier noncustomers of your
industry are? Have you or your organization ever given much thought to
this tier? You should, because this can be the largest catchment of
noncustomers an organization can unlock. Quick caution, though: Do not
be tricked into thinking third-tier noncustomers are “everyone else.”
They are not. They are people or organizations that would ideally like to
use, or who could benefit from, what your industry fundamentally offers,
but who have never seriously considered doing so because your industry
has made this somehow unfeasible, unattractive, or unimaginable.
Identifying the Three Tiers of Noncustomers in Your Industry
When teams are introduced to the three-tiers framework, a natural first
reaction from some members is to question whether the concept of
noncustomers applies to their industry. The concept is typically easy for
executives to grasp when their organization operates in or intends to
enter a nascent industry. In those circumstances, most teams get the
applicability right away, even if they struggle initially to identify who the
dominant noncustomer categories in each tier are. Take, for example, the
MP3 player. As Apple was designing the first iPod, the number of
noncustomers of MP3 players was huge and far overshadowed existing
industry customers.
Noncustomers abound in every industry, however, not just new ones.
Think for a moment about orchestras or museums. Significant
noncustomers? Absolutely. How about credit cards? Square highlighted
just how many noncustomers there were. CRM software? Think of
Salesforce.com. Flying? Think about US aviation pre–Southwest
Airlines. Coffee drinking? You bet—Starbucks grew that industry. And
the list goes on and on.
The purpose of this exercise—and what you should aim for—is to
move the discussion of the three tiers from a theoretical concept to a
pragmatic reality. Identifying the three tiers of noncustomers in your own
industry allows you to make this happen.
Begin with the basic concept
Start by laying out the definitions of the three tiers of noncustomers


using the descriptions and graphic from the previous section. To deepen
the team’s understanding, and to show how the tiers apply in various
industries, walk the team through several examples from outside their
own field. Table 9-1 shows the three tiers of several red ocean industries:
the credit/debit card industry discussed above, the UK charity fund-
raising industry examined before, the language translation industry, and
the orchestra industry. Ask the team questions like these: “If these red
ocean industries all had oceans of noncustomers could the same be true
in our industry?” And “If we were to zoom out, and apply a wider-angle
lens, would we see our own noncustomers?” You should pose these
questions to the team explicitly to ensure they are seeing the connection
between the noncustomer insights of these industries and your own
industry setting. As your team discusses these examples and answers
these questions, the meaning and relevance of the three tiers will begin to
sink in. This is typically a sit-up-in-your-chair moment for team
members, when their emotions start to shift from denial—“Nah, this
doesn’t really apply to our industry”—to wonder—“Could it be in our
industry, too? It might just be.”
Table 9-1 Noncustomers in Various Industries
The Credit Card/Debit Card Industry
First Tier of Noncustomers: Small and midsize merchants that
reluctantly accept credit and debit cards for payment
Second Tier of Noncustomers: New business, microbusinesses, and
self-employed individuals who do not accept credit or debit cards
Third Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals needing to make payments to
other individuals
The UK Charity Fund-raising Industry
First Tier of Noncustomers: Older wealthy individuals who feel
frustrated with year-round solicitations for funds
Second Tier of Noncustomers: Young professionals who choose not to
donate, due to the lack of transparency in percentage of funds that go
to the cause
Third Tier of Noncustomers: Children and low-income individuals
who never thought of donating
The Language Translation Industry


First Tier of Noncustomers: Large corporations frustrated by the time,
expense, and fractured nature of securing language translation of
business materials, including website copy, brochures, product
documentation, etc.
Second Tier of Noncustomers: Midsize organizations that don’t use
translation services for the vast majority of languages, even though,
with the Internet, people from virtually every country can be their
potential customers
Third Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals with blogs and small
organizations, who never thought of using language translation, even
though it could open a far wider global audience and customer base
for them
The Orchestra Industry
First Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals who attend concerts once a
season or every few years, as it’s seen more as something they should
do than something they want to do
Second Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals who can afford to attend but
choose not to, as they find the experience boring, outdated, or too
pretentious
Third Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals who never considered going
to the orchestra, as they have no real knowledge of classical music
and feel the orchestra experience is essentially for the educated elite,
not ordinary people
Shift to your industry and offering
Realizing that noncustomers probably abound in their industry doesn’t
always make it immediately obvious who those noncustomers are. So
rather than ask your team to identify them now, start by discussing who
typically buys and uses the industry’s current offering. Everyone
working on the team (and in the organization) should have a good feel
for this information already. It’s also information that’s generally
available in considerable detail, so it provides a good reference point for
the team as they start thinking about the total demand landscape. The
objective, however, is not to engage in a deep analysis of fine-grained
demographic differences within the existing market, as marketers often
do. Rather, it is to see whether a major variable, such as age, sex,
income, family structure, or, for a B2B business, organization size is a


reasonable predictor of who the industry’s existing customers are. For
video games pre–Nintendo’s Wii, for example, the dominant customer
demographic was young males between the ages of 14 and 26. Likewise,
higher-income, older, educated individuals were the predominant donor
group for the UK charity fund-raising industry pre–Comic Relief. As for
CRM software, before Salesforce.com entered the scene, the dominant
customer group was Fortune 500 and 1,000 firms.
Throughout this discussion, it’s important for you to keep the team
focused on the big picture, and not to let people get bogged down or lost
in minute details, like what proportion of young male video game users
are black, white, and Hispanic. Such a discussion and analysis may be
the path to refining an offering, but it will prevent the team from seeing
the major defining contours of the industry’s current customers. In our
experience, too many organizations that have analyzed their customers in
granular detail fail to see the big picture and the commonalities that unite
the largest group of them.
If team members identify several groups of existing customers,
challenge them to see whether they can identify a broader category that
would encompass most, if not all, of them. The point here is not to
duplicate what marketing departments are generally good at doing,
which is developing a refined understanding of the differences across
existing customer segments. Rather, the purpose is to seek a higher-level
understanding of the macro contours and commonalities that cut across
and unite existing customers so you’ll be able to see the forest for the
trees.
Identify the three tiers of noncustomers in your industry
Now we turn from current customers to noncustomers. Using the three-
tiers graphic, shown in figure 9-1, as a guide, ask each of the team
members to think through and write down their thoughts about who
might be in each tier. To help you perform this task effectively, relevant
materials and templates are provided for your free download and use at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates. Here are the questions you
want to ask:
1. Who sits on the edge of our industry and uses its offering
reluctantly and/or minimally?


2. Who considers our industry and then consciously rejects it,
satisfying their needs through another industry’s offering or not at
all?
3. Who could strongly benefit from the utility our industry offers,
but doesn’t even consider it, because the way it is currently being
delivered makes the industry seem irrelevant or out of their
financial reach?
For many people, this will be the first time they’ve ever been asked to
systematically think through the issue of noncustomers. As we have
witnessed, if an organization has given thought to noncustomers, it’s
usually in terms of their competitors’ customers, not the noncustomers of
their overall industry. They ask, “Who are our competitors’ customers,
and how can we win a greater share of those who patronize other
players?” But this is not the meaning of noncustomers in blue ocean
terms. What is key at this stage is getting team members thinking deeply
about noncustomers and, critically, letting them discover for themselves
how little they may know or have thought about the wider opportunity
landscape that exists beyond the current industry’s horizon.
Organizations often become comfortable commissioning and
outsourcing large, formal market studies. Hence, it is not surprising that,
at this juncture, we’ve often been asked, “Don’t we need to be supported
by formal market research so we will know, concretely, who the three
tiers of noncustomers are?” In response, remind them that the blue ocean
shift process is built on firsthand discovery that will be done when the
team goes out in the field. The purpose here is to maximize the team’s
firsthand learning and confidence in what they see for themselves in the
field. With firsthand discovery, the resulting strategy is likely to be
executed strongly, as the confidence that emanates from the team
reverberates throughout the larger organization.
Much to their surprise, team members generally find that, by
struggling through this exercise independently, they flesh out a rich list
of noncustomer groups and are really pushed to broaden their thinking.
Equally important, they see how tightly focused on existing customers
their strategic lens has been. When people are spoon-fed answers by
having reports commissioned up front, they seldom realize what they
don’t know, and too often easily conclude that they “got it, knew it, no


big deal,” when, in fact, they didn’t have or know it, and it is a big deal.
People seldom realize what they don’t know or appreciate the value of
what they’ve learned if they haven’t struggled to obtain it themselves.
Making people discover firsthand that what they know—and don’t know
—is key to getting them to internalize and value what they learn.
After each of the team members has compiled their list of
noncustomers, ask them to share their thoughts about whom they put
where and why. The objective now is for the team to identify and select
the people or organizations they collectively see as the dominant
noncustomer group or groups in each tier. Note that team members may
continue to feel a bit uneasy, because they’re being asked not only to
move away from what they know, but also to share their thoughts in front
of their colleagues. Some unease is good, however, because it means that
team members are being pushed to broaden their current understanding.
As each of the team members contributes their thoughts on each of the
three tiers, you should record and post them in front of the group. This
allows everyone to see the whole team’s thoughts, which in itself is eye-
opening, as they get to appreciate the differences and similarities in how
each of them views the same market reality.
As people share and debate their selections and the thought processes
behind them, team members’ understanding of who potentially belongs
in each tier starts to deepen. So does their confidence that opportunity
exists in the untapped demand that lies beyond the boundaries of their
industry as it’s currently defined. Typically, as members discuss the
validity of one another’s reasoning, a number of customer groups are
crossed off, and different sets of customers get grouped together,
producing fairly solid agreement among team members as to whom they
see as the main noncustomer groups in each tier. With this, a good
understanding of the industry’s total demand landscape starts to come
into focus.
Determine the rough size of the new demand landscape
In this age of Google, where search is simple and easy, and a significant
amount of industry information is available online, the team can now
proceed to get a good sense of the new demand that a reconstructed
offering could potentially unlock. Break the team into subteams, and ask
them to Google basic statistics on the rough size of each of the
noncustomer groups. What are the relative proportions of the groups?


Just how big is their respective potential demand, based on their per-
capita or, for B2B players, per-organization spending? Have each team
do this for all three tiers.
The objective here is not to nail down specific numbers for each tier,
but to get a rough sense of how potentially important each tier could be
to the organization, if it were unlocked. For example, if a noncustomer
group is currently small and only growing in single digits, it’s likely this
tier will remain small for the foreseeable future. On the other hand, if a
noncustomer group is growing at a fairly consistent clip of, say, 30
percent a year, the team can reasonably surmise that even if the group is
relatively small today, this tier has the potential to become a significant
source of noncustomers within a meaningful time frame.
By the end of this step, teams have usually surprised themselves by
how much they agree on who the key groups of noncustomers in each
tier are and the relative demand potential for each. In the next stage of
the process, these answers may be revised: The relative proportions of
potential demand across the three tiers may shift, for example, or a new
group of noncustomers may be identified. Nonetheless, these insights
allow the team to see both that there is clear scope for creating new
demand and how limited their understanding of the unlocked demand
beyond their industry’s conventional boundaries has been. The power of
this step lies not only in the insights and confidence gained, but also in
the speed with which team members achieved and internalized these
insights. This can usually be accomplished in a half- or full-day off-site
meeting.
To see how the three-tier exercise can transform a team’s
understanding of the potential demand for their offering, let’s listen to a
group of educators discover their noncustomers.
Discovering an Ocean of Potential Undergraduates
A private, four-year, US university that we’ll call CU faced a mounting
challenge. With a student body composed primarily of first-generation,
college-bound youth from families in the bottom 25 percent of the
country’s income distribution, CU had a vital mission. But the school’s
retention rates were falling and operational costs were rising. The
president of CU not only wanted to turn this situation around, he wanted
to grow CU and make it a model urban university for youth.


The CU blue ocean initiative team, comprising faculty and
administrators, had just completed the buyer utility map exercise. As the
team leader summed it up, “There are a lot of pain points in our industry,
based on outdated, misguided, or wrong assumptions.” “Exactly!” said a
team member. “We believe we provide a quality education because our
hearts are in it, we work long hours, and we charge a premium. But none
of that really matters. Quality is what students get out of school and what
they can afford. And the competition is getting tougher.”
“The question is,” the team leader continued, “Will surveying our
current students give us the answers we need to create a blue ocean and
break away from the pack?” Team members quickly agreed that existing
students were likely to request the same things their peers at other
schools did: better dormitories, a more lively campus, better teachers,
greater course selection, better school food. “What we’re saying,” the
team leader concluded, “is that if we start looking for solutions by asking
our students what they want, at best, we’ll achieve incremental gains at
an even higher cost. And we won’t grow. To do that we’ll have to look
outside our market, at our noncustomers. We know who our customers
are, but who are our noncustomers? Maybe we can discover some
answers by focusing first on what our ultimate purpose really is.”
After some spirited discussion, the team reached a unanimous
conclusion about what constituted their purpose: providing a step change
in the lives of young people in terms of their economic prospects, self-
confidence, and ability to thrive in the world. “If that is really the case,”
said the team leader, “and we all heartily believe it is, then let’s use that
to be more specific about who the dominant noncustomer groups in our
three tiers are.”
“First tier are bright students who enrolled in CU but now are
insufficiently challenged by their classes and classmates,” one professor
observed. “They are increasingly tempted to transfer to other schools for
a greater intellectual challenge.”
“An even bigger group are students who attend with the help of
financial aid, parent PLUS loans, and Pell grants,” added another. “But
as soon as those supplemental funds run out, typically in the third year or
so, they depart. And neither we nor our peers have strong work-study
programs to help them close that gap, nor have we challenged ourselves
on how we could dramatically bring costs down to make our education
more affordable. Essentially, we try to offer and match everything your


standard four-year private college offers with a small fraction of the
resources. So, our costs are high while quality is compromised. It’s not
even clear that what these students need from CU to make a step change
in their lives is what your standard college offers.” Silence.
Once the discussion on the first tier wound down, and everyone felt
heard, the team leader shifted to the second tier. “Who are the refusing
noncustomers of private four-year universites?”
“This tier is huge,” noted one team member. “It’s all the students who
choose to go to state universities, over private colleges like ours.” Heads
nodded. The noncustomer demand landscape was growing.
The conversation did not stop here, however. “What about all the
students who choose to go to junior colleges?” a faculty member asked.
“That’s another large group of second-tier noncustomers. Those are
students who may want a four-year school but ultimately choose a junior
college—maybe because it’s more practical, given their professional
aspirations and personal lives, or because they have more confidence that
they can succeed in that environment, or maybe they just don’t have the
funds. Whatever the reason, it’s still a big catchment of second-tier
noncustomers.” Without any analysis or debate, everyone in the room
agreed that second-tier noncustomers represented a larger tier of
potential demand than the existing market.
The team leader then shifted the discussion to the third tier, the
noncustomers who could benefit from higher education’s ultimate
purpose, but who never thought about the industry’s offerings as an
option. “What are your ideas on who this would be?” asked the team
leader. After a little while, a sober answer came back: These
noncustomers are the peers of our students who chose another route
entirely. Many of CU’s undergraduates come from poor public school
districts where K-12 education itself is weak. Students in economically
impoverished districts typically are discouraged from considering higher
education, and those who do seldom receive the kind of counseling they
need and that is routinely provided for their peers in better-off districts.
And yet for these young people, higher education could be the most
powerful path out of poverty.
Where could these noncustomers be found? The team members were
full of ideas: “The military.” “Blue-collar work.” “Missionaries.” “Store
personnel.” “Maybe entrepreneurs?” This tier, the team agreed, was the
largest of all. “Look at our competition locally,” said the team leader.


“Are they trying to understand these three tiers of noncustomers?” “No!
Not at all,” responded team members. “That’s why all colleges look the
same.” The eagerness in the room to look beyond their usual customer
base was palpable, as was the team members’ impatience to get started.
Understanding the Strategic Implications of Your Three Tiers
Before beginning to discuss the overall implications of this exercise,
have team members again collect their thoughts individually and write
down the takeaways that jump out at them. Then, as with all the steps in
the blue ocean shift process, ask each of the team members to share the
insights they recorded to ensure that all points are put on the table and to
create collective ownership of the discussion. This precludes the most
articulate from drowning out the opinions of members who may be more
reserved but no less perceptive. More than that, the simple act of having
each member record and voice their key takeaways ensures a deeper
level of internalized learning, even before you start to calibrate the points
the team has made.
In our work with teams, we find they tend to get the most out of this
discussion when you structure the group discussion via a set of
systematic questions:
• What did we learn? Who are the first-tier, second-tier, and third-
tier noncustomers of our industry or target industry?
• What is the approximate magnitude of each tier of noncustomers,
relative to the industry’s existing customer base?
• Is each of the three tiers small, suggesting scant room to create a
blue ocean? Or are one, two, or all three of the tiers noteworthy in
terms of the magnitude of their potential demand?
• Which tier, if any, has the largest group of noncustomers that could
potentially be unlocked with a reconstructed offering?
• Do we see a link between the blocks to utility revealed in the buyer
utility map and any of the three tiers?
• Might these blocks to utility be causing the noncustomer groups to
patronize another industry to fulfill their ultimate purpose?
• If yes, do we imagine that this tier of noncustomers might be


unlocked by systematically exploring what it would take to convert
them into customers?
As team members review what they have discovered, they may
become eager to probe deeper into the hurdles or attitudes that are
keeping the industry’s noncustomers noncustomers: “What’s missing
from the industry’s offerings, which, if we included it, would start to
unlock new demand?” they may ask. This is a sign that they’re
intellectually engaged and eager to take their learning to the next step.
You should let them know that in the next step of the process they will
do precisely that. That said, if the energy generated by this topic is high,
allow the team to hypothesize about what could be different, while at the
same time reminding them that, right now, the points being made are just
that: hypotheses. This allows people to feel heard, while also signaling
that developing blue ocean offerings demands grounded live field
research and a structured method, not simply brainstorming in a
conference room. Team members usually respect this reminder
tremendously.
As they discuss the broad context of the industry and the available
demand opportunity, the team’s understanding of the relative proportions
of the market for existing buyers and users and the three types of
noncustomers will start to crystallize. As it does, their perception of
potential demand will shift from existing industry customers to the far
larger total demand landscape.
End Strong
At the end of this step, to ensure that everyone is on the same page, and
to create another opportunity for team members to internalize key
lessons, you should recap the steps the team has taken to date.
Specifically, you want to remind the team that, as they applied the as-is
strategy canvas tool, they became clear on the current state of play in the
industry, the factors the industry competes on, and the degree of
convergence between their organization’s current strategic profile and
that of its competitors—convergence that has likely thrown the
organization into the red ocean. The subsequent step, where they applied
the buyer utility map, revealed both the subset of utility spaces in which


the industry currently competes and, at the same time, the pain points
and points of intimidation imposed by the industry that potentially limit
usage by existing customers and turn noncustomers away. By doing so,
the team has already been able to benefit by identifying low-hanging
fruit that the organization could act on and fix, even if it decided not to
go any further. Last, by applying the three-tiers framework, the team
gained a good grasp of the potential new demand that could be unlocked
with a reconstructed offering. Noncustomers who were once invisible to
the team and to the industry have now been made visible.
At this juncture, the team’s confidence and competence are usually
another notch higher. Team members start to think, “Yes, there is a way
out of the red ocean, and just maybe there are real opportunities that we
could unlock to create a blue ocean.” The team dynamic will also have
started to shift quite noticeably, as team members now begin to push to
get on to the next step, rather than wait for the team leader or top
management to push them to move forward. This is the emotional state
you want to achieve, and it brings us to the next step where the process
shifts from broadening perspectives and imagining what could be, to
generating practical, real-world, blue ocean options. Here the team will
meet the market and explore the six systematic ways to reconstruct
market boundaries to unlock new demand and create new market space.
Let’s get started.


Step Four: 
Find How You Get There
