# 10. Reconstructing Market Boundaries—Systematically

dive head-on into the market, get their hands dirty, and do the kind of
grounded, field-based research that can generate actionable insights for
changing the strategic playing field. Simply getting out into the field,
however, is not enough. If you want different answers, you need to ask
different questions and listen to different people. People are as insightful
(or not) as the questions you ask them. Ask standard questions and you’ll
get standard responses that keep you anchored in the red ocean. Ask
questions that force people to think in fresh and innovative ways, and
you’ll gain insights into new market creation. As you will see, each of
the six paths guides you to look at the market universe in a new way by
shifting the questions you ask and the people you listen to.
Imagine a one-way street you’ve gone down a thousand times in your
car and you think you know by heart. Then one day you walk up that
very same street but in the reverse direction. Suddenly you’re jolted. You
notice a house that you never observed before, or a tall tree in someone’s
yard you’d never taken notice of, or a stunning view of a distant lake that
was hidden from your sight when you traveled in the old one-way
direction. That’s what the six paths do. They show you how to travel
down roads in new ways so you see new things that were always there
but had been blocked from your view. And just as it’s awe-inspiring in
life when we see new things we hadn’t seen before that had been in front
of us all along, people feel enlightened in the process when they, with the
help of the six paths, learn to see the same reality differently and
discover blue ocean opportunities.
How was this analytic tool developed? When we analyzed strategic
moves that created commercially compelling blue oceans by
reconstructing market boundaries, we found the six systematic patterns
depicted in this framework repeated across multiple industries. Does this
mean there aren’t other ways to create new market space? Of course not.
However, in our role as advisors, working side by side with
organizations across diverse industry sectors, we have seen firsthand
how effective this framework can be.
The Six Paths Framework: How It Works to Open Up a New Value-
Cost Frontier
Most organizations follow a similar pattern in developing their
strategies: They start by analyzing their industry: Have new competitors


entered? Is demand flat, rising, or declining? Have raw materials prices
gone up? Next, they focus on the players in their particular strategic
group: the companies or organizations in the industry that pursue a
similar strategy or approach to the market. Luxury hotels will tend to
assess what other luxury hotels are up to, for example, while budget
hotels will do the same versus their strategic competitors. But since they
operate in different strategic groups, neither one tends to pay much
attention to the other. Then, the strategic lens narrows once again, to
focus on current customers—their own and those of their competitors—
and how the distinctive needs of those customers can best be served. Not
surprisingly, therefore, budget hotels don’t pay much heed to the
wealthy, nor do luxury hotels focus on lower-and middle-income
individuals. Both sets of hotels will concentrate on making the best hotel
they can, however. In other words, they will define the scope of their
offering as the industry has long defined it. With this will go a focus on
features that align with their strategic group’s customary orientation. For
budget hotels, this will mean providing functional, low-priced rooms,
while luxury hotels will prioritize sophistication and refinement to
enhance their image and prestige. Finally, they will consider the impact
of external forces, such as environmental or safety concerns, which are
affecting the industry and to which they have to adapt.
In sum, executives tend to define their strategic playing field—and
limit their opportunity horizon—on the basis of six conventional
boundaries: industry, strategic group, buyer group, scope of the product
or service offering, nature of the offering’s appeal, and time. Nonprofit
leaders, government decision makers, entrepreneurs, and even one-off
Main Street storeowners and professional firms typically do the same.
Yet boundaries do not define what must be or should be. They merely
define what is. None of them is a law of nature. All of them are the
product of people’s minds, and, as such, they are open to change. But
over time this fact tends to be forgotten, and people come to take them as
eternal truths. They become a conceptual cage that organizations lock
themselves into, even though every one of these boundaries was created
by an individual organization. And just as people and individual
organizations created them, so they can change them if they are prepared
to think in a different way. The six paths framework, shown in figure 10-
1, provides six systematic ways to shift the lens you use in looking at the
market universe and open up a new value-cost frontier. Path by path, the


framework explains how to uncover plausible blue ocean opportunities
by looking across an industry’s self-imposed boundaries, instead of
remaining stuck within them. It also incorporates seasoned advice on
what to look and listen for as you pursue each path. Let’s explore the six
paths in turn.
Figure 10-1
The Six Paths to Open Up a New Value-Cost Frontier
Path One: Look Across Alternative Industries
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on rivals in your industry
Look across alternative
industries
Organizations compete within their own industry and with industries
that offer alternative products or services. In making their decisions,
buyers often weigh alternative industries and make trade-offs, explicitly
or implicitly: Want to put your best foot forward with neat, wrinkle-free


shirts—do you iron them at home, send them to the dry cleaner, or only
buy shirts made with wrinkle-free material? Going from New York to
Washington, D.C., do you take a plane, a train, drive your car, or take a
bus? This thought process is intuitive for consumers. Yet, the tight
strategic lens that most organizations use drives them to focus on beating
rivals within their existing industry, keeping them trapped in the red
ocean. To open up a new value-cost frontier, you have to look across
alternative industries and understand why buyers choose one over the
other.
The objective in this path is to identify the problems or needs your
offering currently solves, and then to generate a list of other solutions or
industries noncustomers use to address the same problems or satisfy the
same needs. Remember that the focus is not on alternatives within your
industry—why people choose to fly on one airline over another, for
example—but on alternative industries that serve the same function or
solve the same problem, but that have a different form. What are the
decisive sources of value and the detractors of value that make people
gravitate to and choose one alternative over another?
Although there may be several alternative industries to the industry
you’re in or targeting, you should focus on the one(s) that has (have) the
largest catchment(s) of demand. These noncustomers hold the key to the
greatest number of potential new buyers, and they are the ones you want
to interview.
Having identified the relevant alternatives, you need to ask people
why they choose one over the other. This question shifts the discussion
from all the factors an industry competes on—factors that buyers have
been trained to expect and organizations love to marginally improve on,
typically for little overall gain—to the factors that decisively create or
detract from value. By probing in this way, buyers reveal not the
branches of an industry but the fundamental trunk or basic utility that
justifies the industry’s very existence and size.
What most teams quickly discover is that, despite the wide set of
factors alternative industries compete on, one or two usually determine
whether people patronize them. For example, why do people hire
electricians instead of going to a hardware store to do it themselves, or
vice versa? More than anything else, two factors drive people to hire an
electrician—expertise and having no time to do it themselves. And only
one factor drives most people to patronize a hardware store—cost. The


aim here is to drill down to the factors that cause buyers to choose other
industry offerings than yours, find a way to combine these decisive
factors, and then reduce or eliminate everything else, thereby unlocking
new market space that will be commercially viable because it focuses on
precisely what potential buyers value.
Remember, asking people why they trade across industries is not the
same as asking what makes an alternative industry different, which can
reveal a whole host of factors that may indeed be “clever” or different,
but that also may have very little value. To avoid getting distracted by
“clever ideas,” stay focused on why people choose for and against your
industry or the alternative. Their answers will signal the decisive value
factors to create and eliminate in order to develop a blue ocean offering
that is both differentiated and low cost. Exhibit 10-1 outlines the action
steps of path one.
Exhibit 10-1
Path One: Action Steps
1. Identify the major problems or needs that your industry’s
offering or your target industry’s offering solves or addresses
from the buyers’ point of view.
2. Next ask, What alternative industries solve the same problems
or address similar needs for buyers? Here we encourage people
to role-play and ask, “If I were the buyer, what other alternative
industries would I consider before even deciding to patronize
our industry?” That helps people shift from a supply to a
demand perspective.
3. Among these alternative industries, which capture the greatest
catchment of customers? Focus here. Interview buyers from
each relevant alternative industry. These are your noncustomers.
4. Probe why buyers traded across your industry or target industry
and this (these) alternative(s), including what they see as the
chief negatives of the industry they rejected and the chief
positives of the alternative industry they choose.
5. Record all the key insights gained. A recording template for
each path can be downloaded for free at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates.


Path Two: Look Across Strategic Groups Within Your Industry
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on your competitive
position within a strategic group
Look across strategic groups
within your industry or target
industry
Most companies focus on outcompeting their rivals to improve their
position within their strategic group or market segment. In the hotel
industry, for example, five-star hotels tend to focus on outdoing other
five-star hotels, three-star hotels focus on outcompeting other three-star
hotels, and so on. But this only keeps them doggy-paddling in a red
ocean. The key to a blue ocean shift is to understand what factors
determine buyers’ decision to trade up or down from one strategic group
to another. This allows you to distinguish between the range of factors on
which strategic groups compete, and the decisive few that drive buyers’
decisions to choose one over the other. Again, the focus here is not on
why buyers choose one particular organization over another, but on why
they trade up or down across strategic groups. This will allow you to
understand the trade-offs the customers of a strategic group are making
when they choose across strategic groups. Understanding the factors that
are decisive for noncustomers as well as customers lets you emphasize
those factors while eliminating and reducing everything else.
Take the health management industry, a B2B industry that provides
large corporations and insurance companies with health management
services for employees’ health. HealthMedia, a player in the industry,
was on the brink of collapse in this red ocean. After being forced to take
85 employees down to 18 to stabilize the company, in 2006 its new CEO,
Ted Dacko, set the goal to grow it from US$5 million in revenues to
US$100 million in four years by using the blue ocean approach. At the
time the industry had two strategic groups—one offering telephonic
counseling, predominantly for severe medical conditions like disease
management; the other offering generic digitalized content, like
WebMD.
As HealthMedia explored why buyers traded across these strategic


groups, it found that, despite all the factors players competed on, buyers
traded up to telephonic counseling for one overriding reason—high
efficacy—while they traded down to digitalized content for low cost. In
essence, companies competing in telephonic counseling were following a
classic differentiation strategy, offering high efficacy through specialized
counseling mainly for severe health challenges, but at a high cost. By
contrast, those competing in digitalized content followed a classic low-
cost strategy of offering generic health information at a low price but
with low efficacy. These trade-offs limited employees’ use of both
strategic groups’ offerings, creating an ocean of noncustomers.
The focus of telephonic counseling on severe health challenges meant
that most employees’ use for it is limited, since what the majority of
employees primarily need coaching in is their chronic health issues, like
high blood pressure, high cholesterol, stress, depression, insomnia, binge
eating, and the like. Besides, its high cost meant that companies could
not afford to offer it widely. Regarding generic digitalized content, due to
its low efficacy, it did not inspire high employee participation, either.
Instead of competing in either strategic group, HealthMedia set out to
break these trade-offs. The result was opening up a new value-cost
frontier in the industry by creating a new market space called digital
health coaching, which combined the far lower cost of digitalized
content with a leap in efficacy through interactive online questionnaires
that digitally matched people’s self-reported challenges with a health
plan that would work best for them. And the best part was that
HealthMedia offered digital health coaching for the most prevalent
health challenges people face, so the offering was relevant to nearly all
employees. The result was a leap in value for companies who could now
offer digitalized health coaching to a broad swath of employees with
high efficacy at a low price. Within just two years, HealthMedia’s blue
ocean was so compelling that Johnson & Johnson swooped in and
purchased the company for US$185 million, an amount far higher than
its already ambitious four-year revenue goal of US$100 million.
For your analysis of this path, choose the largest two strategic groups
to explore. Typically, we recommend that you zoom in on the one that
captures the largest share of customers, and the one that has the largest
share of profitable growth, if they are different. If there is a small but
very fast-growing strategic group, you should zoom in on that one as
well.


As organizations start exploring this path, one of the most common
and startling realizations is how many strategic groups have emerged in
their industry in recent years, and how much the key players have tended
to focus on the old guard that once monopolized their industry. Whatever
the industry—from TV (reality programs, new producers from Netflix, to
Amazon), to publishing (self-publishing, traditional publishing houses, e-
books), the music industry (traditional labels, YouTube self-made stars,
young kids rerecording), and the auto industry (Tesla, electric cars, self-
driving cars), consumers’ options are exploding. Hence, just laying out
the strategic groups within their industry wakes people up and lifts the
scales from their eyes. Value gained already.
This path tends to be relatively easy for people to get their heads
around and apply. Organizations that are big on segmentation, however,
often have a tougher time distinguishing the forest from the trees. They
tend to list a plethora of groups based on tiny differences in competitive
offerings. They frequently fall into the segmentation trap. Should this
situation arise, you need to push the team to take a step back and look for
strategic commonalities that could enable them to cluster the long list of
groups they’ve identified. In the case of the health management industry,
for example, some telephonic counseling companies focused on
wellness, others on behavioral health, and still many others on disease
management. However, by stepping back HealthMedia saw that, at their
core, all these players shared three overriding strategic commonalities—
a focus on telephonic counseling, addressing severe—not chronic—
health conditions, at a high cost. By understanding the defining contours
that united these players that focused on different market segments,
HealthMedia did not get distracted by segmentation differences. The
point of this path, like all the others, is not to get lost in minutiae, but to
identify the decisive value and cost contours that separate distinct
strategic groups, as HealthMedia did. Exhibit 10-2 outlines the action
steps of path two.
Exhibit 10-2
Path Two: Action Steps
1. Identify the strategic groups in your industry or target industry.
2. Focus on the two largest strategic groups.
3. Interview buyers from each group. Probe why buyers traded up


for one strategic group or traded down for the other. Focus on
identifying the distinguishing factor(s) that led users of each
strategic group to patronize it over the others. Ask the same
people what they saw as the dominant negative or turn-off of
the strategic group they rejected.
4. Record all the key insights gained, noting specifically the
reasons buyers offer to explain their decisions.
Path Three: Look Across the Chain of Buyers
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on better serving the
existing buyer group of the
industry
Look across the chain of buyers
and redefine the industry buyer
group
Most industries converge around a common definition of their target
customer. In reality, however, the purchasing decision usually involves,
directly or indirectly, a chain of buyers: the users of the product or
service; the purchasers who pay for it; and, in some cases, the influencers
whose opinions can make the difference in a decision to purchase—or
not. So for preteen girls’ clothing, the purchaser or payer is typically a
parent, the users are the teens themselves, and the key influence group
might be pop stars.
In thinking about who’s in the chain of buyers, it’s also worth
considering potential influencers, people who could be brought into the
decision-making process but currently aren’t. Retailers are a good
example of an often “untargeted” buyer group for complicated purchase
decisions. Just think about buying computer or stereo equipment, or wine
or major household furniture—decisions that make most of us nervous.
Many, if not most, of the companies that sell products in these categories
spend most of their effort focused on each other and the ultimate user,
the purchaser. But they have largely ignored thinking creatively about
the retailers who sell their products. One of the results is relatively
indifferent retail staff who could easily persuade many, if not most,
people to go in one direction or another, but instead offer ho-hum


knowledge, little passion, and no distinctive services to buyers of one
manufacturer’s product over another. What if, instead, you offered a leap
in innovative value to retailers’ staff that made them advocates for your
products and services? Would your products start flying out the door?
While the three groups of buyers may overlap, they are often distinct,
as are their value preferences. Remember the school lunch provider we
listened in on in chapter 7? The purchaser’s primary objective was
getting the best terms and prices, whereas having the best-tasting lunch
was what the users, the students, valued most. Shifting the focus from
better serving the industry’s traditional buyer group to other groups the
industry has historically ignored can be the key to uncovering hidden
sources of utility and opening up new market space.
Think of the commercial fluorescent lighting you see in major
retailers, supermarket chains, and corporate offices. When Philips
Electronics set out to create a blue ocean, it shifted its focus from the
industry’s red ocean target—corporate purchasers—to a key influence
group, chief financial officers (CFOs). In speaking with CFOs, Philips
learned that the price of fluorescent lighting that corporate purchasers
focused on was a small fraction of the total cost. An even larger
component was the cost of disposal because of the high mercury content
in fluorescent bulbs. Corporate purchasers never saw that cost, but CFOs
did. This gave Philips the insight to create an environmentally friendly
fluorescent bulb that could eliminate 100 percent of corporate disposal
costs, because it could be thrown in the garbage, instead of having to be
carted off to a special dump site. Philips then made the case for buying
the new bulbs, which had a higher price and margin but a lower total cost
overall, to the CFOs who wielded their power to influence the purchase
decision in favor of Philips’s environmentally friendly bulbs.
When interviewing people in the “untargeted” buyer groups, conduct
the interviews in each interviewee’s natural setting. If retailers are an
untargeted buyer group, for example, conduct the interviews on the retail
floor to get a sense of the store, the layout challenges, the retail staff’s
issues, the way customers wander around and talk to sales staff, and the
speed of checkout. This gives you the benefit of seeing what the retailers
themselves may not be able to articulate or even realize. Oftentimes, an
outsider observing with fresh eyes sees the challenges, opportunities, and
potential solutions far better than the players themselves. Exhibit 10-3
outlines the action steps of path three.


Exhibit 10-3
Path Three: Action Steps
1. Identify the chain of buyers—users, purchasers, and influencers
—in your industry or target industry.
2. Identify the main buyer group your industry or target industry
currently focuses on. Then shift your focus to those the industry
has largely ignored.
3. Interview buyers from the “untargeted” buyer groups. Probe for
their different definitions of value. Drill down to the biggest
blocks to utility and costs the industry currently imposes on
them.
4. Record the insights from each “untargeted” buyer group and
group like-minded responses together.
Path Four: Look Across Complementary Product and Service Offerings
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on maximizing the value
of the product or service
offering as defined by your
industry
Look across the total solution
buyers seek to understand the
complementary products and
services that enhance or detract
from your offering’s value
Few products or services are used in a vacuum; in most cases, other
products or services affect their value. But in most industries, rivals
converge within the conventional boundaries of their industry’s product
or service offering and focus their efforts solely on maximizing its value.
The key to value innovation is to define the total solution buyers seek
when they choose a product or service, and then to eliminate the pain
points and points of intimidation across the total solution. A simple way
to do this is to think about what happens before, during, and after your
product and service is used.
By broadening your understanding of the total solution buyers need


or seek, you can often discover new sources of trapped value. Take the
electric kettle industry in the UK. Although the electric kettle is central
to the British public’s love of afternoon tea, the industry had become a
veritable red ocean with low profit margins and little growth. While the
industry had long competed on price and aesthetic design, Philips
Electronics shifted its focus to understanding the total buyer experience.
In the process, Philips discovered that the central challenge British tea
drinkers faced had nothing to do with the kettle itself; it was the lime
scale in municipal water. Before the tea drinkers could enjoy their freshly
brewed tea, they often had to fish out the lime scale floating in it with a
spoon. Kettle companies never thought to address the problem because it
had nothing to do with their industry’s offering. But by looking across
the buyer’s experience and thinking about the whole range of
complementary products and services buyers needed, Philips saw this
block to utility and created a teakettle with a changeable filter that
removed the scale when the tea was poured. The result: Philips’s
teakettle turned a slow-growth industry into a fast-growth one, lifted its
price point, and created a new repeat revenue stream in changeable
filters.
As this example indicates, it is critical to visit users to see firsthand
what happens before, during, and after the use of your product or service.
Why? Because only then can you experience the full context and see the
range of unvoiced steps and challenges. When people were asked what
they did with their electric teakettles, the answer was: Plug it in, turn it
on, boil water, pour, and drink. But when Philips visited people’s homes
and watched how people used their teakettles, the lime scale problem
quickly jumped out. From the users’ point of view, lime scale had
nothing to do with the kettle, so they never thought to voice the problem.
Others had become so accustomed to fishing for lime scale that they
didn’t even consciously register doing it. Lesson: When you ask people
about an offering, they tend to focus on the offering and, as a result, their
answers rarely stray far from what the industry currently does.
In visiting users, the point is not to sit in their homes, offices, or
factories and batter them with questions. It is to observe them actually
using the product or service, so the unvoiced, taken-for-granted
assumptions they make and the steps they take can be revealed. Here you
want to watch for the processes or circumstances that trigger the need or
desire to use the product or service. Are there inconveniences? Are the


triggers too costly or intimidating, curbing demand for your product or
service? What happens before your customers use your product? What
happens during (or around) its use? And what happens afterward?
The buyer utility map, explored in chapter 8, provides a helpful tool
for thinking about these observations, because it provides a structure that
ensures that you, yourself, don’t remain trapped within the narrow
confines of your industry. Learning how to observe insightfully and see
unvoiced, trapped value is a nonobvious skill for many. But by thinking
in terms of the six utility levers and the six stages of the buyers’
experience cycle, you are primed to observe more broadly and
insightfully. The primary objective is to uncover all the blocks to utility,
even if those blocks are not related to your industry as it currently
defines itself—be it lime scale for electric teakettles, securing a
babysitter for parental moviegoers, getting to the airport for airlines, or
opening a ream of paper for your home copier.
You should also probe the largest tier of noncustomers. When major
television manufacturers wished to enter the South African market, for
example, discussions with rural residents revealed that the key block to
purchasing a television for them had nothing to do with the television
itself. It was the fact that only a small fraction of the population had
access to electricity. Selling car batteries with televisions unlocked an
ocean of new demand. This type of insight can only be gained by
interviewing and directly observing the challenges faced by
noncustomers. Exhibit 10-4 outlines the action steps of path four.
Exhibit 10-4
Path Four: Action Steps
1. Look at the real context in which your offering is used by
identifying what happens before, during, and after its use.
2. Observe buyers as they actually use your product or service. In
recording the insights gained, group insights you uncovered so
that patterns in the frequency or criticality of observed blocks to
utility can be discerned.
3. Use the buyer utility map and the noncustomer tool to guide
your observations.
4. Record all insights gained.


Path Five: Rethink the Functional-Emotional Orientation of Your Industry
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on improving
priceperformance within the
functional-emotional orientation
of your industry
Rethink the functionalemotional
orientation of your industry or
target industry
Competition in a given industry or strategic group tends to converge,
not only around an accepted view of the scope of an offering, but also
around the bases of its appeal. Some industries and groups compete
principally on price and functionality: Their appeal is functional. Others
compete on generating positive feelings: Their appeal is emotional. A
new value-cost frontier can often be opened up by shifting the appeal of
a product or service from one basis to another, or by blending the sources
of its appeal.
To uncover these opportunities, you first need to get clear on the
orientation of your industry. Sometimes this is easy. High-end fashion,
for example, has a clear emotional orientation aimed at making people
feel both beautiful and elite. But other times industry players are so
accustomed to its orientation that they no longer “see” it; they simply
take it for granted. To get clarity, ask customers and noncustomers to
describe your industry’s offering in their words, not yours. Doing this
will give you a grounded understanding of whether it is functional or
emotional, and what those adjectives mean in a given industry context.
Take the legal industry. When we query customers, the overriding
response is that the industry has a functional orientation. It does not aim
to generate positive emotions. But what does functional mean in this
context? It gets the job done—no more, no less. For many people,
however, the way the legal industry functionally “gets the job done”
simultaneously triggers negative emotions. The top three responses that
come back repeatedly are: intimidating (Who can read legal documents
anyway?), complex, and overpriced (What industry charges by the
minute and then rounds minutes up to a quarter hour?). Now think about
the possibilities that could open up if the industry’s orientation were
shifted to a positive emotional one. How does a legal product or service


that is welcoming, simple, with price based on value delivered, not
minutes spent, sound? To us, it sounds pretty great.
Or think about supermarkets. Again, the most common orientation is
functional. Three descriptors that spring to mind are nuisance, necessary
evil, and inefficient (think long checkout lines, slow service at the meat
and fish counter, etc.). What could a supermarket be if it set out to shift
this orientation to a positive emotional one instead? Think fun outing,
stylish, and super-fast. That’s the gist of this path: getting you to
reimagine your industry by shifting its orientation, which opens the
floodgates to completely reconceiving your product or service offering.
To probe customers’ and noncustomers’ overall impressions of an
industry, ask what they would say if they had to choose—functional or
emotional. Then drill down to understand what their answer means in
that context by asking for the three to five adjectives or characteristics
that come to mind to describe it. Their responses can then point you
toward the many factors that support and reinforce their impressions of
how the industry presents itself. As you flesh this out, you may find that
the way people actually see and experience how your industry competes
may be very different than the way you see your industry. Then flip the
question and probe interviewees (and your team members) on what the
opposite characteristics would look like in your industry. This will
provide insight into how to shift the appeal of an industry. Overall, this is
a path most teams have a lot of fun applying. Exhibit 10-5 outlines the
action steps of path five.
Exhibit 10-5
Path Five: Action Steps
1. Identify the industry’s current orientation. Is it predominantly
functional or emotional?
2. Listen to customers and noncustomers characterize your
industry or target industry. Probe the top characteristics that
reflect why they see it as functional or emotional.
3. Look for commonalities across their responses and group like-
minded comments.
4. Explore what the offering would look like if you flipped the
orientation.


5. Record all insights gained.
Path Six: Participate in Shaping External Trends Over Time
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on adapting to external
trends as they occur
Participate in shaping external
trends that decisively impact
your industry or target industry
External trends affect every industry over time. Nowadays there is
hardly a business, nonprofit, or government agency whose world is not
being reshaped by external forces. Think of the rise of social media, the
growing obesity crisis, the global environmental movement, or aging
populations in many developed countries.
Many companies try to project external trends themselves, and they
pace their actions to keep up with the trends they’re tracking, adapting to
them as events unfold. Projecting trends seldom provides insight into
opening up new value-cost frontiers, however. Looking at how a trend
will change what customers value, and how it might impact a company’s
business model over time can. As Netflix saw Internet broadband
explode, for example, it realized that fast, real-time streaming of full-
length films would soon be able to take off. That meant the possibility of
instant viewing gratification and complete viewing flexibility. You could
change what you watched on a whim. It also meant convenience and
ease. No need to preorder DVDs, wait for their arrival, and then mail
them back. In other words, no need for Netflix’s original business model.
This insight inspired Netflix to create a leap in value for buyers, via on-
demand viewing, and a new blue ocean for itself. By looking across time
—from the value a market delivers today to the value it might deliver
tomorrow—companies like Netflix can more actively shape their future
and lay claim to opening up a new value-cost frontier.
The aim of this final path is to help organizations go beyond adapting
to external trends to participating in shaping them. Learning which
trends to focus on is crucial, however. So is knowing the right questions
to ask. The first thing you need to get clear on therefore is which trends
decisively impact your industry. The fact that a trend is having a major


impact on other industries or society does not mean it is necessarily
relevant to yours. In one organization, for example, the team identified
the growing power of the millennial generation with its very different
wants and needs. True, the implications of this trend are enormous for
many industries; but not, within a meaningful time frame, for theirs—
real estate for retirees. Understanding and detailing the implications of
each trend specifically on your industry, not the world in general, are
key.
Not every trend, even if it’s relevant, is one on which a blue ocean
can be built in an opportunity-maximizing, risk-minimizing way,
however. This brings us to the other two questions you need to ask: Is the
trend irreversible? And is it evolving down a clear trajectory? Oil prices
decisively impact many industries, for example, and if they have been
dropping significantly for many months that may be a seductive trend.
But if you can reasonably imagine the price going up in another 6 to 12
months, and industry experts agree with that hypothesis, building on the
trend would be unwise. Moving forward with a blue ocean initiative will
be highly risky if, as in the case of oil prices, there is a high level of
uncertainty about how the trend on which it was based is likely to
evolve, or if the trend can be easily reversed.
For trends that satisfy all three criteria, ask, If this trend were taken to
its logical conclusion, how would it impact the value we can deliver to
buyers? And what would the implications be for our industry and
organization? As Groupe SEB applied this path to electric home French
fry makers, for instance, the key trends of rising obesity and healthy
eating jumped out. The team then realized that existing customers of
electric home French fry makers had never voiced this concern in
customer surveys, as they had simply taken for granted that fresh French
fries meant high calories and high fat. With this new understanding, the
team explored the identified trends with noncustomers. This is the time
when the team could clearly see the opportunity of unlocking an ocean of
new demand by making a fryer with no frying.
Insight on how decisive trends will impact an industry can often be
found by looking at other industries that have been, or are being,
impacted by the trend. Disintermediation, deregulation, and the
emergence of two-sided markets are all examples of trends that many
industries have already been swept by. Their experiences can provide
compelling insights into what might become possible for your


organization, and how you might capitalize on this trend by changing the
definition of value in your industry.
The question we hear most often about this path is: “How far into the
future should we be looking?” The relevant question back is: “How long
would it take you to tool up to produce and launch a completely new
offering that will offer buyers a leap in value?” Your answer to this
question will indicate how far forward you should be thinking if you
want to leverage a decisive trend. The period most often used is three to
five years.
The most difficult aspect of this path is getting clear about how a
particular trend will affect the value of an industry’s current offering, or
what a future offering will need to take into account. While the path
itself is easy to grasp conceptually, the solutions are not as obvious as
they are in the other paths, where the work usually yields a robust initial
list of factors that could be changed. To address this problem, the team
should consider each relevant trend in turn and ask, “If this trend
continues as it has begun, what about our current offering will no longer
make sense and might even detract from buyer value, and therefore
should be eliminated or reduced?” And “What in our offering will we
need to create or raise to deliver a leap in value to buyers?” Exhibit 10-6
outlines the action steps of path six.
Exhibit 10-6
Path Six: Action Steps
1. Identify the three to five trends that are seen as having a
decisive impact on your industry or target industry. Give people
the option of doing secondary research online to complete this.
2. Discuss and assess the relevance of these trends to your
industry. Focus on those that are commonly seen to decisively
impact your industry or target industry.
3. Discuss and assess the extent to which each trend is
irreversible.
4. Discuss and assess whether each of the trends is evolving along
a clear trajectory.
5. List the implications of all the trends that are decisive to your
industry, irreversible, and evolving in a clear direction. Detail


how each will change what buyers value and how that would
impact your business model over time.
6. Record all insights gained.
Applying the Six Paths Framework
Athletes often remind themselves that there is no gain without pain. The
same is true when it comes to using the six paths framework. The results
are eye-opening and often revelatory. But be prepared: Generating those
results takes time and effort in the form of multiple one-on-one
interviews and observational fieldwork. While this is the most time-
consuming part of the blue ocean shift journey, this is work that team
members cannot delegate to anyone else—inside the organization or
outside it. There is no outsourcing the team’s ears or eyes. Because the
insights gleaned from the paths come from the team’s own fieldwork,
these insights are empowering and build conviction. So don’t be tempted
to short-circuit the process. If you do, you will undermine the initiative,
and shortcut yourself and the insights gained, as well as the potential for
successful execution, which is the aim of the entire initiative. Here is
how this step unfolds.
Start with the big picture
Begin by explaining that the objective at this stage remains the big
picture: The team is looking for insights that will provide clues as to how
they might reconstruct their industry’s boundaries and open up a new
value-cost frontier. They are not yet looking for final answers. The six
paths will guide them on the type of insights they need to search for.
This reminder is important, because if team members feel the
objective is to straight out search for solutions, many will easily be
discouraged when answers do not jump out at them and become frozen
by the sheer weight of what is being asked. Remember, this process is
very different from what most organizations do to develop strategy. If
people feel frozen or discouraged as they meet the market, they will tend
to go through the process perfunctorily, instead of being inspired and
inquisitive. So you need to make this fun, and let everyone know that


now is the time to be a detective and uncover clues. Reassure them that
feeling a bit uncomfortable is to be expected and they’re not alone in
feeling that way.
Divide the team into two subteams
Exploring each path takes time. Asking the entire team to explore each
of the six paths is typically asking for a time commitment few can make
unless their schedules have been significantly cleared for this initiative.
By having each subteam explore only three paths, this step becomes
much more doable. It creates a healthy sense of competition, as to which
subteam will do the best job, which contributes to fun and the quality of
insights garnered. It also mitigates complaints that the assignment is
unfair and not feasible in light of team members’ regular responsibilities.
Explain this reasoning to the team up front, as the subteams are being set
up. That way they can appreciate that you understand what is being
asked of them; that you expect high-quality work; and that you have also
taken practical measures to make this step feasible and motivating by
creating the subteams. Silence is not golden. Explain the concept behind
the subteams.
Walk the team through the entire framework
Now walk everyone through the full framework and explain what the
subteams will be exploring along each path. It’s key for everyone to have
a good overview so that they can respond intelligently to others in the
organization who ask about what’s happening. Knowing what both
subteams are working on will short-circuit the fear and anxiety that can
easily get sparked if someone answers, “I don’t know. The team leader
hasn’t shared that with us.” Subteam members will also appreciate being
treated as equal partners whose understanding matters. The result: more
commitment, less fear, with subteam members naturally able to keep the
rest of the organization in the loop.
Explain how the process will unfold
Once everyone understands the logic of all six paths, the subteams can
get their assignments. You can make these yourself or, and this is often
preferable, you can let the teams select the paths they’ll work on


randomly, via a draw. This way, they choose their own paths, and the
process feels fair. Subteam members should agree on which path they
will tackle first, and move on to the next path only after that one has
been completed.
Members of each subteam should then develop work plans for their
assigned paths, beginning with the one they will tackle first. Start by
reviewing the logic of each path and the associated action steps, as
outlined in exhibits 10-1 through 10-6. To help you effectively perform
this task, the relevant materials and templates are provided for your free
download and use at www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates. The templates
will provide direction on the right questions to probe, as the subteam
members go into the field to interview noncustomers and customers. The
templates will also help them organize the insights gained in a
meaningful way.
To explore each path, team members should begin working
individually, then come together to synthesize their insights, then work
individually again to gather a broader range of insights that they will
subsequently pull together as a team. This sequence allows for the richest
array of independent insights to emerge, via the individual work, while at
the same time enabling the members to work together to uncover key
patterns and identify interesting anomalies across their insights.
For path one, for example, subteam members will first develop their
own list of key alternative industries and only then get together as a team
to agree on the most relevant one(s) to explore, based on the criteria
given for that path. Then each of them will individually interview
customers and noncustomers, as prescribed in the path’s steps, before
coming together to compile the findings. In this way groupthink is
avoided and collective wisdom is achieved. A variation of this work
pattern applies across the other five paths as well.
As part of the work plan, subteams should get clear on which
noncustomers and customers to observe and interview in the field. You
don’t want subteam members interviewing and observing the same
people. Going back to path one, for example, suppose long-haul carriers
was the alternative industry the subteam had chosen to analyze. Then
you want to ensure that members of the subteam speak to the customers
of different carriers by deciding which members will speak to the
customers of which long-haul carrier. (These people are effectively the
noncustomers of the focal industry.) As part of the fieldwork, take


photos, video what you observe, and visit shops. In other words, get real
in the field. Going back to long-haul carriers, for example, we’d
recommend going to the airport, and speaking directly to people after
they’ve checked in for long-haul flights. We’d also recommend speaking
to airport staff involved in check-in and getting their views on why
people choose to fly long haul over whatever alternative you are
comparing it to. Think of yourselves as detectives. Have fun, and stay
focused on the task at hand.
How many people should each subteam member interview per path?
Typically, the number is 10 to 12, though some subteams do as many as
15 interviews each, because they find the learning so rich and inspiring.
The first interviews for the first path a subteam tackles are usually the
toughest, as most team members will be learning a new skill set. So
remind them not to get discouraged and just to carry on. By the end of
the interview process for a given path, each member should have started
to hear some themes in people’s responses, as well as a few idiosyncratic
responses, which often prove useful as they come together to share their
results. So be sure to record these outliers and not pooh-pooh them. The
six paths interview work can make people feel awkward, or even
squeamish at first, if they’re accustomed to understanding customers via
large-scale surveys. Let them know you appreciate that, but ask them to
persevere. We have never encountered people who were not soon
rejuvenated and awed by what they learned by doing this fieldwork.
To maximize the insights gained, remind team members not to “sell.”
Observe, follow, and ask with due humility. It’s imperative that members
stay open, and not get defensive as noncustomers and customers start to
convey honest responses to their questions. If negative comments come
back, probe deeper to extract the most learning. Stress to the team that
negatives are opportunities in disguise. So they want to get super-clear
on what they are and why they arise. Remind members to record and
capture all the insights and answers for every person met, observed, and
interviewed in real time, not later, when memories can become cloudy.
The objective is to see the world with new eyes. No observation is too
small, as many seemingly small observations can later add up to the big
insight that creates a blue ocean. Think of how the small and repeated
observation of lime scale in the UK’s municipal water led Philips
Electronics to create a blue ocean by creating replaceable filters.
Paths one, two, and three indicate the relevant noncustomer groups to


interview and observe—those in alternative industries, strategic groups,
or buyer groups, respectively. For paths four to six, subteams should
interview people in the largest tier or the largest two tiers of
noncustomers identified in step three of the process (see chapter 9).
Whether one or two tiers are chosen depends on the relative size of the
tiers. When one tier clearly looms far larger than the other two, we
recommend focusing on that tier alone. When that isn’t the case,
focusing on two tiers works well.
What’s Next
After completing their live-action market explorations, the subteams will
be armed with a wealth of new insights on how value can be unlocked in
innovative ways. Inspired by what they’ve learned in the field, most of
the members will also be intellectually energized by the new ways of
thinking they’ve just been exposed to. This brings us to the second part
of step four, where we’ll show you how the team will use the insights
they’ve gathered to craft concrete, alternative blue ocean moves. Here
we will introduce the eliminate-reduce-raise-create grid, which is key in
breaking the value-cost trade-off and opening up a new value-cost
frontier. Let’s keep moving.


CHAPTER 11
Developing Alternative Blue Ocean
Opportunities
AFTER THEIR SIX PATH market explorations, the blue ocean
initiative team members are typically tired but on a high. Factors the
industry has long competed on have been shown to be over-delivered or
no longer relevant. Market segmentations that had long been taken for
granted have now been called into question, as powerful commonalities
that cut across strategic groups are revealed. Complementary products
and services the industry had never paid much heed to are now
recognized as potentially powerful levers for unlocking innovative value.
In sum, the team’s energy and feeling of empowerment are palpable and,
in one way or another, the rest of the organization will feel it too.
What is especially noticeable is the way people engaged in the
initiative speak. Instead of quoting reports and facts when they discuss
what the blue ocean process is revealing, they recount stories. Stories
that have color, names, and places, and draw on specific observations
that cause others in the organization to reflect on and question industry
practices and to feel viscerally connected to the findings.
Now it’s time to distill the team’s insights and observations into well-
formulated blue ocean strategic options. To this end, we introduce the
four actions framework, a tool that will enable you to translate the
findings from the team’s market exploration into concrete, actionable,
strategic options that pursue both differentiation and low cost.
The Four Actions Framework
