# 11. Developing Alternative Blue Ocean Opportunities

As figure 11-1 illustrates, the four actions framework is built on four key
questions. The questions help you to challenge an industry’s strategic
logic and business model to arrive at blue ocean moves that break the
trade-off between differentiation and low cost. Let’s quickly run through
them.
Which factors that the industry takes for granted should be
eliminated? This question forces you to consider eliminating factors that
the industry has long competed on, but which your team found to be
irrelevant through the six paths market exploration in the field. Even
though these factors no longer add value, or may even decrease it, they
are rarely questioned because of long-held industry practice. Other times,
organizations are so focused on benchmarking one another that they do
not act on, or even perceive fundamental changes in what buyers value.
Because these factors buttress an organization’s cost structure for little to
no gain, substantial cost savings can be made by eliminating them.
Figure 11-1
The Four Actions Framework
Which factors should be reduced well below the industry’s
standard? This question pushes you to determine whether products or


services have been overdesigned in the race to match and beat the
competition. Here organizations over-serve customers, increasing their
cost structure for no gain. By reducing these factors, your costs can be
lowered further.
Which factors should be raised well above the industry’s
standard? This question pushes you to uncover and eliminate the
compromises buyers are forced to make. These compromises are usually
caused by an industry’s failure to see that buyers want more of some
factors than the standard offering provides. But because the standard is
the standard, no one thinks to challenge it.
Which factors that the industry has never offered should be
created? This last question drives you to offer entirely new kinds of
value for buyers and to create new demand by converting once
noncustomers into customers.
The first two questions of eliminate and reduce give you insight into
how to drop your cost structure vis-à-vis competitors. By contrast, the
second two questions of raise and create drive you to create a leap in
buyer value. Of particular importance here are the actions of eliminating
and creating because they push the team to go beyond traditional, value-
maximization exercises, which aim to deliver greater value mainly by
reducing and raising levels of the existing factors of competition. If
reducing and raising are all that you focus on, you may produce a higher
degree of buyer value and might even build an advantage over the
competition in your existing industry space. But you won’t make the
existing rules of competition irrelevant, because they don’t change the
key factors on which everyone else is competing. To open up a new
value-cost frontier and leave the competition behind, new kinds of buyer
value need to be offered through the elimination of existing factors and
the creation of new ones.
To ensure that blue ocean teams pursue differentiation and low cost
simultaneously, we created the eliminate-reduce-raise-create (ERRC)
grid, which complements the four actions framework. Together, these
two tools allow you to translate team members’ insights and observations
gleaned from the field into the concrete, strategic actions needed to make
a blue ocean shift. If the team is focused on only a subset of the four
actions—not on all four—the grid visually flags the issue and warns the
team by showing the blank space(s). Let’s walk through this process so
you can see how it works.


How One Company Developed Its Blue Ocean Move
“If there ever were a red ocean,” observed Michael Levie, co-founder of
citizenM Hotels, “the hotel industry would be it. It’s redder than red.”
Four-star hotels offer roughly four-fifths of what five-star hotels offer.
Three-star hotels offer roughly three-quarters of what four-star hotels
provide and so on down to one-star hotels that offer roughly half of what
two-star hotels provide. That is, they all compete on essentially the same
set of factors, just more or less of them. “In this industry,” noted
Michael, “people think they’ve innovated if they change the paint color
on the walls or switch the type of chocolate on the pillow.” Against this
backdrop, Michael and Rattan Chadha, the CEO, cofounder, and lead
investor of citizenM, set out in 2007 to open up a new value-cost frontier
that would capture the growing mass of frequent travelers, mobile
citizens, whether they were traveling for business, on a weekend
shopping excursion, or to explore a new locale. As new entrants to the
hotel industry, these two entrepreneurs wanted to create a blue ocean
with a new kind of hotel chain.
When it came to mobile citizens, Rattan, Michael, and their team
noticed that many were frequenting either three-star or luxury hotels.
Having sensed that a blue ocean opportunity could exist across these two
strategic groups (path two), they wanted to understand why frequent
travelers chose luxury hotels over three-star hotels and vice versa. As
they did, a host of insights began to emerge.
Here’s a glimpse.
“Why do you choose a five-star hotel over a three-star hotel? For the
price?”
“Price? No. Who likes paying more?”
“So, is it because of the bellhops and doormen? They’re usually much
nicer at five-star hotels.”
“That may be true. But that’s not why I choose five-star hotels over
three stars. For me, bellhops tend to take too long to bring your luggage
up, and then I always feel the need to fork over a tip. Bellhops are
certainly helpful if you have a lot of luggage. But as a frequent traveler, I
travel light. For convenience and simplicity, I prefer to carry my own
bag. Same for doormen. They may be nice to have, but I don’t choose a
five-star hotel because of them.”
“So, is the front desk a factor?”


“No. Even in a five-star hotel, you usually have to wait. And then,
when you do check in, you can get the feeling that the person checking
you in is sort of checking you out, judging you. I hate that.”
“What about the concierge? Does that influence your decision?”
“No. With Google maps and restaurant and travel apps, it’s usually
faster and easier for me to figure things out myself than to ask a
concierge. Besides, most concierges use these services too nowadays.”
“Is it because you prefer the restaurants in five-star hotels to those in
three-stars’?”
“No. It’s nice that they have them. But I tend to eat out, since five-
star hotels are in great locations.”
“So location matters?”
“Yes, great locations are important in my decision. Five-star hotels
usually are in prime locations, which is what I’m after.”
“Room service?”
“Room service is usually expensive and slow. I only use it when I
have to.”
“What about Internet and phone?”
“That’s a real pet peeve of mine. When you stay in a luxury hotel,
you’re already paying a lot. And then many of them take you for a ride
by charging you for Internet and phone services at sky-high rates.”
“What matters to me isn’t the size of the room. It’s a great bed, great
sheets, quietness, and a great shower. Water pressure, please!”
“What’s the biggest turnoff of three-star hotels that makes you decide
not to stay there?”
“They’re just not inspiring. They feel so institutional and mediocre.
That feeling of luxury, of beauty, of quality, is central to why I choose
five-star hotels.”
In short, despite all the factors the hotel industry competes and ranks
itself on, it turned out that only three factors stood out as decisive in
determining why frequent travelers traded up to five-star hotels over
those rated three stars: the meta-feeling of luxury and beauty they
experience there, the more luxurious sleeping environment, and the
hotels’ prime location.
Conversely, as the team probed why people choose a three-star hotel
over a five-star, price jumped out as the most common factor, followed
by one other: Five-star hotels often felt too formal and pretentious.
“They feel too uptight. Like you have to dress a certain way and act a


certain way to fit in. They feel too rarified, not relaxed enough, for me.”
To turn these insights into clear actions and a concrete strategy, the
team challenged itself to translate them into specific factors to eliminate,
reduce, raise, and create. As they did, they started to realize several
interesting patterns. For example, the customers of neither five-star nor
three-star hotels saw the front desk, concierge service, bellhops, or
doormen as key to their purchase decision. The team realized that the
front desk does not bring value to customers; it exists for the benefit of
hotels to register and process people and payments. Similarly, for
frequent travelers, who almost always travel light, bellhops were also
seen as unnecessary, and often even as a nuisance. As for the concierge,
frequent travelers were for the most part tech-savvy and preferred
finding directions and locating restaurants and sights themselves.
“We could potentially eliminate these factors,” the team reasoned,
“and there would be no real impact on value for most frequent travelers
—whether they are five-star or three-star hotel goers today, while also
lowering our cost structure.”
Room size could also be reduced without a real impact on value, as
people rarely stayed in their rooms much. It didn’t escape the team that
smaller rooms also meant being able to have more rooms per square foot
of real estate space, creating greater yield. “Luxury is a great sleeping
environment not room size,” the team realized. “Given the high cost of
space, significant cost savings can be realized from building smaller
rooms. Instead, if we raise the quality of the sleeping environment by
furnishing rooms with king-size beds, fine linens, good sound insulation,
big fluffy towels, and amazing showers,” the team reckoned, “we’d
delight guests while keeping our cost per room much lower than the
industry average.”
As team members continued to work through and interpret the market
insights they’d gathered, they also recognized new kinds of value they
could create. “If we eliminate the front desk, couldn’t we adapt and use
self check-in kiosks so guests could check in with no lines? And we
could complement them by replacing scripted front desk staff with
multitasking “ambassadors,” who are ready to explain how the kiosks
work and in what ways they might be of help in a warm and friendly
way.”
“If we don’t have a front desk, concierge, or bellhop, why would we
need a traditional lobby, which is pretty much empty, wasted space?


Couldn’t we create a communal living space instead, where guests can
eat, drink, meet, work, and play freely anytime they want, 24/7, as they
can at home? If the living space is comfortable and relaxed, but also
surprisingly beautiful, luxury customers’ need for beauty and inspiration
would be immediately met on entering the hotel and so would three-star
customers’ need for less formality and pretension.” Figure 11-2 shows
the results of the team’s probing.
Figure 11-2
The Eliminate-Reduce-Raise-Create (ERRC) Grid: The Case of citizenM
In 2008, with the launch of its first hotel in Amsterdam’s Schiphol
Airport, citizenM opened up a new value-cost frontier of affordable
luxury for frequent travelers. Soon after, citizenM began opening hotels
in major cities, like London, Paris, and New York. Consider these facts:
Its hotels earn the highest guest rankings in the hospitality industry,
placing them in the “fabulous” and “superb” categories, right alongside
five-star hotels. Yet, they’re priced to be affordable to three-star
customers. The result is an average occupancy rate of 90 percent across
its hotels—a whopping 80 percent higher than the industry average. As


for costs, its total costs per room are roughly 40 percent lower than the
average four-star hotel’s, while its cost of staff is a staggering 50 percent
lower than the industry’s. CitizenM outperforms all traditional players,
its profitability per square meter being about twice that of comparable
upscale hotels. Today citizenM hotels are further expanding across the
major cities of the world. “Stylish, high-tech, and cheap,” “an overnight
revolution,” and “a form of religion” are among the accolades the media
has showered on citizenM’s blue ocean move.
Generating Your Blue Ocean Strategic Options
The citizenM example illustrates how the insights and observations
generated from one of the six paths, in this case path two (looking across
strategic groups), were translated into a clear and concrete set of actions
that formed the basis of its blue ocean strategic move. As citizenM was a
start-up, only a small group of people, including the two entrepreneurial
cofounders, were involved in developing its blue ocean move. For
organizations that had separate subteams doing the six paths market
exploration, only the members who did the fieldwork for a given path
should develop the corresponding move. Because the translation process
for each of the six paths is the same, we’ll continue using the citizenM
example to show how the process works for a path. As we lay out the
action steps involved in the process, for the sake of simplicity, we won’t
use the phrase the subteam and will just refer to the team. Here is how
the action steps unfold.
Extract the key insights revealed by the path
First, get clear on the key insights revealed by exploring the path. Team
members should carefully read and review the completed recording
templates with all the comments they received and observations they
made during the fieldwork. If the team has not yet grouped like-minded
comments across the completed recording sheets for a given path, now is
the time to do so.
As they work through the comments, the team should pay special
attention to the most common factors cited—both positive and negative.
Those will be their key factors. Then team members need to push
themselves to consider what each factor really means by providing a


short, cogent description of the elements that make it up. In the case of
citizenM, for example, the team could see that, when it came to room
quality, the factor frequent travelers most commonly cited was the
sleeping environment. Then when they pushed themselves to identify
exactly what in the sleeping environment mattered, they were able to
define sleeping environment concretely as “bed size, quality sheets and
towels, quietness (or sound insulation), and water pressure in the
shower.” Reaching agreement on what the salient factors are and exactly
what they encompass not only puts everyone on the same page when
they talk about their results, but also forces the team to ground insights in
specific factors that can later get acted on and are relatively easy to cost.
One of the reasons the first path you work on to create a blue ocean
option is typically the hardest is that translating comments into
practically framed factors calls on people to think in a way few have ever
been asked to do. As a result, anxiety may build, and team members may
start to second-guess their ability “to do it correctly.” Reassure them that
this is natural and that as they work through the path together, and share
their results and learn from one another, they’ll find that they will do just
fine.
Drill down into which factors to eliminate, reduce, raise, and create
Next, you need to decide if the factors you’ve identified should be
eliminated, reduced, raised, or created. Use the four actions framework
and the ERRC grid to help organize your answers. These materials are
provided 
for 
your 
free 
download 
and 
use 
at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates.
To ensure that everyone fully understands how to apply the
framework and complete the grid, let’s go back to the citizenM example.
Because their prime location and more luxurious sleeping environment
were decisive in causing frequent travelers to trade up to five-star hotels,
the citizenM team deemed it essential to raise these two factors to an
unexpected height. At the same time, because people choose three-star
hotels for their lower price, the team saw the need to offer a price point
that was markedly reduced from that of luxury hotels. Since customers
of neither strategic group valued the front desk experience, the team
judged the front desk as eliminate. This, in turn, prompted the team’s
insight about creating self check-in kiosks, so that guests could access
their keys and go straight to their rooms with the same kind of time


savings an ATM provides over a teller’s line at a bank. This is a glimpse
into how the process of drilling down works to arrive at a completed
ERRC grid.
In completing the ERRC grid for a given path, remember to focus on
using concrete factors that you can act on and can get a good sense of
their cost implications. For example, people often list “inconvenience” as
a key factor to eliminate. However, inconvenience is not a concrete
factor and it doesn’t indicate how it will be eliminated. So, it’s important
to push the team to get more specific by asking, “What precise actions
will be taken or things changed to eliminate buyers’ inconvenience?”
Likewise, when people list “convenience” as a key factor to create, the
word says nothing about how that will be done. So here, too, you would
need to probe for a concrete action that will create convenience for
buyers. It is critical to understand the difference between concrete factors
that describe actions and investments as opposed to desired outcomes,
which are the result of your strategic actions. Concrete factors, not
outcomes, are what you need to list in the ERRC grid. As you do, also
start to think about how you might be able to creatively deliver the
factors you raise and create so the cost of delivering them can be
lowered. You want to be thinking about lowering cost as you raise value
all along.
Occasionally, team members may want to go back to the field and
reinterview a select group of people they had previously interviewed to
seek further clarification and to test their ideas about what to eliminate,
reduce, raise, or create. If a team feels this need, you should let them.
But be sure to cap the time for doing so to a month to prevent the team
from falling into analysis paralysis.
Check that you are pursuing both differentiation and low costs
The simultaneous pursuit of differentiation and low costs via value
innovation is key to opening up a new value-cost frontier and hence
making a blue ocean shift. In practice, however, we’ve often found that
groups tasked with coming up with something new tend to focus
predominantly on raising and creating. When they do, they end up
conceiving of potentially costly offerings that reflect red ocean
differentiation, not blue ocean strategic moves. To ensure that this does
not happen, remind people that they need to put as much effort into what
to eliminate and reduce as well as what to raise and create. In practical


terms, that means stressing to team members that for each path they
should aim to show concrete factors in the eliminate and reduce
quadrants of the completed ERRC grid, as well as in the raise and create
ones.
Sometimes a team will argue that there is nothing they can eliminate
or reduce. If they do, push back and ask them to think harder about
factors they may be taking for granted because that’s simply the way
things have always been done, but that no longer add value or
significantly over-deliver on what buyers need. To inspire them, point to
what citizenM eliminated and reduced that had long been sacrosanct in
the hotel industry or to what Comic Relief eliminated and reduced, like
advocacy counseling, grant solicitation, and year-round solicitations. To
spark their thinking, try flipping the question and asking, “What are the
stupidest things our industry does?” Then ask them to zoom in there.
That’s when lightbulbs often start to go off.
People can also fall into the trap of listing factors to “create” that are
new to their organization’s offering but not to the industry. Remind the
team that the only factors that qualify here are those that are largely new
to the industry or market space they are focusing on—factors that are
beyond the industry’s conventional boundaries. A team at one of the
largest European gas service station providers, for example, initially put
having clean bathrooms and the ability to purchase a fun selection of
food in their “create” quadrant. But while these two factors may have
been new to the company, which had a terrible reputation in both areas,
they were hardly new to the industry, which was light-years ahead of the
company in this regard.
Draw your blue ocean alternatives
The team is now ready to draw a “to-be” strategy canvas for the offering,
based on the completed ERRC grid for the path. The to-be strategy
canvas allows you to visualize how the blue ocean alternative for a given
path breaks away from the existing red ocean reality. To accomplish this,
the team should begin by rating the key factors in the completed ERRC
grid, just as they did when they drew the industry’s existing strategy
canvas (see chapter 7). Now, however, all the factors listed as eliminates
should get a score of 0. For the others, the team should use the same 5-
point Likert-type scale (or variant thereof) they used earlier. As before,
when it comes to price, a high price should be rated as “high” and a low


price should be rated as “low.”
Next, plot all the factors along the horizontal axis. So that the
strategic profile of your proposed new move can be easily appreciated
and communicated, list price first, followed by all the factors that were
eliminated, then reduced, then raised, and finally created. That will give
you an easy-to-read strategic profile. Lastly, overlay the strategic profiles
of the competition on that of your proposed new move.
Blue ocean moves seldom involve lots of bells and whistles, nor are
the ideas usually fancy and shiny. In fact, once they’re completed, they
often look remarkably simple and clear and have the ring of common
sense. Be sure to remind the team of this, so that they don’t begin to
doubt the power of their “simple” idea and start adding extraneous or
clever factors that merely complicate it and seriously diminish its blue
ocean potential.
Figure 11-3
Strategy Canvas of citizenM at the Time of Its Launch, 2008
“Affordable Luxury for the People”
Figure 11-3 shows the strategic profile of citizenM’s blue ocean move
in contrast to those of the competition. As you can see, citizenM’s


strategic profile meets the initial litmus test of a blue ocean offering in
that it diverges from the competition; it is focused; and it has a
compelling tagline that is true to the offering, namely, “affordable luxury
for the people.”
Now reflect on the strategic profile of your blue ocean option and
develop a tagline that is both true to its strategic profile and is
compelling from the buyers’ point of view. One without the other is not
sufficient. To develop the tagline, really dig into how the proposed
offering creates a leap in value for customers and how you can best
communicate that. In developing these taglines, it’s important to avoid
falling into the trap of creating catchy but meaningless phrases. Should
that happen, you need to redouble the team’s efforts to communicate the
essence of the offering in a way that will highlight its compelling benefit
and immediately speak to the market.
Outline the offerings’ economic benefits to the organization
Most industries have a fair idea of how costs generally break down
across their value chain. The airline industry, for example, has a good
understanding of the relative costs associated with airport fees, fuel,
staff, maintenance, food and beverages, marketing, loyalty programs,
and so on. Likewise, for luxury and three-star hotels, hotel industry
experts like Michael Levie have a good idea of the relative costs
associated with land, rooms, staff, full-service restaurants, and so on.
Based on these relative costs, the citizenM team developed a rough
idea of how much cost savings would be realized by eliminating and
reducing the existing features of these hotels. For those features that the
citizenM team was looking to create, but luxury and three-star hotels
didn’t offer—like self check-in kiosks or communal living space—the
team looked outside the hotel industry to get an idea of the magnitude of
cost additions. By putting cost savings and additions together, the team
was able to outline how the economics of the offering would work. The
aim here was to create a win not only for mobile citizens through a leap
in value but also for the organization through a tidy profit.
As in the case of citizenM, here teams need to provide preliminary
indicators of the economic benefits of their proposed offerings and make
their business cases, however rough they may be. The blue ocean
offering that ultimately gets selected would then have its economics
further fleshed out with all needed operational expertise available in the


organization to ensure a winning business model.
The outputs of these action steps are: a to-be strategy canvas with a
compelling tagline that powerfully conveys its essence, and a completed
ERRC grid that highlights how costs will be brought down, while
differentiation will be driven up to create a leap in buyer value. With
these inputs, rough indicators of the offering’s economic benefits, like
profit and growth, are developed.
As this process gets completed for each path, what we typically find
is that two or three of the paths will yield stronger and more compelling
insights to create a new value-cost frontier than the others, while the rest
reveal a compelling factor or two to eliminate or create, but fall short of
providing enough insights to unlock a new value-cost frontier. If this
happens, do not be alarmed. It’s normal. That said, you should still go
through the entire exercise. Why? For one, it generates tremendous
learning for everyone. Moreover, some of the insights from the “weaker”
paths can become low-hanging fruit to be acted upon at a later time. So
don’t short-circuit the process and lose the learning.
Move to the Final Step
With viable alternative blue ocean opportunities created, you are now
ready to move to the final step of the blue ocean shift journey. The final
step is where you’ll learn how to select your blue ocean move, rapidly
test it in the market, and tighten and refine it to maximize its market
potential. The final step ends with formalizing a big-picture business
model for the chosen move and launching it. This ensures that the move
you roll out generates not only a leap in value for buyers but,
importantly, a tidy profit for your organization.
The team’s energy is high. Team members are proud of what they
have created, but also understandably nervous, because they are on the
cusp of hearing objective feedback and the market’s judgment on the
proposed blue ocean moves they’ve generated from their hands-on
explorations.


Step Five: 
Make Your Move
