# 13. Finalizing and Launching Your Blue Ocean Move

all the people you’ll have to engage, whether they are part of the
expanded team or not.
Formalizing Your Big-Picture Business Model
By applying the four actions framework in creating your blue ocean
move, the initiative team has already done a large part of the legwork
needed to formalize your big-picture business model. On the one hand,
they have identified the factors the industry currently competes on and
invests in that can be eliminated or reduced, because they add little if any
value to buyers and may even decrease it. While these decisions were
based on buyer value, not on cost, in our experience most of what’s
identified for elimination or reduction typically lowers—often
significantly—an organization’s cost structure and has clear operational
implications. At the same time, they’ve also identified the factors the
industry currently under-delivers or fails to offer that should be raised or
created, because they provide a decisive leap in value from the buyers’
point of view. These factors, too, almost always have cost implications as
well as direct operational implications. Only, here, the factors to be
raised or created typically augment the organization’s cost structure.
As an example, let’s return to citizenM’s affordable luxury hotels
discussed in chapter 11. While its hotels enjoy 90 percent occupancy
rates, and earn guest rankings on par with those of five-star hotels,
citizenM’s blue ocean offering strips out a host of costly factors—such
as the front desk, a traditional lobby, bellhops, the doorman, the
concierge, room service, and even full-service restaurants—which it
didn’t find to be decisive for the mass of frequent travelers. Every one of
these factors citizenM eliminated directly cuts the number of hotel staff
required (its hotels operate with less than half the staff of comparable,
200–400-room hotels) and, with it, overall staffing costs. By eliminating
a traditional lobby and restaurant, and reducing room size by 50 percent,
the costly factor of real estate is also significantly reduced. The impact
goes well beyond the space that customers can see, because it means
citizenM can also eliminate the space for a professional kitchen as well
as all the associated costs that come with building out and maintaining a
kitchen. Moreover, by reducing the guest-room variety to one standard
format, citizenM is able to not only streamline building the rooms, which
results in efficiency gains, but also, as we’ll see below, make use of


other, innovative, high-value and low-cost construction approaches.
At the same time, the citizenM team also identified three factors to
raise: the sleeping environment of its rooms (with extra-large beds, fine
linens, plush towels, quiet—or sound insulation—and strong showers); a
prime city location; and connectivity for guests (with free high-speed
WiFi and movies on demand as well as Skype phone rates, which are
much desired by guests but actually cheap to deliver). And it identified
three factors to create: simple self check-in kiosks; a unique and
compelling communal living space, with a 24/7 bar and pantry; and
multitasking ambassadors. Lastly, the team committed to deliver this
experience at a price accessible to three-star customers. The result: an
offering with the potential to attract the mass of “mobile citizens,”
regardless of whether they currently frequented three-star or luxury
hotels.
The next step in formalizing your big-picture business model is to
determine the target profit margin you want to earn to ensure a healthy
win for your organization. What works best, we’ve found, is to start with
a more aggressive profit margin than you think would be reasonable,
given existing industry practices. Then your target costs—what your
costs will ultimately need to be—can be derived by deducting this target
margin from the strategic price the team has identified.
The more aggressive the target profit margin you set, the more
aggressive your target costing will be. Challenging people to meet
aggressive profit and cost targets stretches them to think beyond their
usual practices and to search for innovations across their entire
operation. Just as industries often compete on factors that buyers no
longer value, standard industry operating practices often leave
tremendous room for fresh thinking and innovations that can lower costs.
So even though people may initially push back on aggressive profit and
cost targets, we encourage you to hold firm. With some encouragement,
they will strive to perform and deliver on their assignments in
innovative, high-value, and low-cost ways, often with surprising results.
Unlike the more familiar practice of cost-plus pricing, in which prices
are set by adding a desired profit margin to the organization’s costs,
target costing is based on price-minus costing. In our experience,
organizations that fail to apply target costing to their blue ocean moves
typically build out their business models only to find that their costs are
too high to earn a profit at the strategic price set. So, they either raise the


price of the offering or cut back on the value they intend to deliver—in
both cases compromising the move and sending the organization drifting
back into the red ocean. The lesson we’ve learned: Your to-be strategy
canvas has to be nonnegotiable. What is negotiable is how your business
model delivers it.
How to Hit a Challenging Cost Target
Beyond what organizations have eliminated and reduced in their blue
ocean move to lower costs, there are several other ways organizations
can pursue to hit their challenging target cost without compromising on
their blue ocean offering to buyers. While there is no magic formula,
there are several questions teams should explore, as they formalize their
business model, to ensure the organization achieves the low costs
required to actualize their blue ocean move: “Who can we partner with?”
“How can we streamline and innovate operations?” And “How can we
multiply people’s positive energy and contributions?” Let’s probe each
of these in turn.
Who can we partner with? In bringing a new idea to market, many
organizations mistakenly try to carry out every aspect of the operation
themselves. Sometimes this is because they see the product or service as
a platform for developing new capabilities. More often, however, it’s
simply because that’s the way things have always been done, and no one
thinks to question this approach. While doing everything yourself may
give you more control, it usually takes more time and can be a lot more
costly than partnering with an organization that’s already more proficient
and efficient in an area of your business model where you’re a novice.
By leveraging other companies’ expertise and economies of scale,
partnering (including making small acquisitions when doing so is faster
and cheaper than other options) can pare costs and time, and close
capability gaps quickly.
The citizenM team, for example, identified two important areas—
food and housekeeping—where it could significantly lower its cost
structure by outsourcing them in creative ways and enhance buyer value
by benefiting from the proven expertise of others. While citizenM
decided to eliminate restaurants and room service, it still aimed to
provide healthy, fresh light bites in its communal living space. But food
is a tough business: You need fresh ingredients, which requires volume;


there is spoilage and waste; you need a kitchen, a good chef, and more.
And yet, as Michael Levie observed, “Despite all that effort and cost,
few hotels make food worthy of praise.”
CitizenM got around this dilemma by partnering with local boutique
catering companies within blocks of each of its hotels. In this way,
citizenM leverages the caterers’ proven expertise and purchasing power
to ensure that only the best fresh food will be delivered and restocked in
its pantries throughout the day—think fresh sushi, salads, and tasty
healthy sandwiches—resulting in lower costs and a higher-quality
offering. CitizenM also partners with an outside company for
housekeeping and linens. But it doesn’t stop there: Its partners also order
all the guest amenities and cleaning supplies and store them on the
partners’ premises. Combined with the fact that citizenM’s blue ocean
move eliminates restaurants and room service, this affords citizenM the
unique advantage of eliminating purchasing, receiving, and storerooms
in its hotels, which simultaneously provides more space for additional
guest rooms and significantly lowers operational costs.
The US-based retail chain Wawa, which serves over 600 million
customers a year in more than 700 stores in six states, and has annual
sales approaching US$10 billion, has been similarly savvy about
partnering. Customers are so gaga about Wawa that some (like Jeremy
Plauche) have even tattooed its logo on their arms. While Wawa’s
management team considered it a blue ocean company, in 2009 Howard
Stoeckel, then its CEO, saw it drifting into the red ocean. The economy
was tough after the global financial collapse, and competitors were
catching up to Wawa. Determined to steer clear of the impending red
ocean, Howard and his top team applied the blue ocean approach to open
a new value-cost frontier. Up until then, Wawa’s blue ocean had been
created by the way it had perfected the intersection of its three businesses
—convenience store, fuel retailer, and food service—under one roof,
while delivering outstanding customer service. The perfection was
apparent in the numbers: While not a convenience store per se, Wawa’s
in-store sales are more than three times those of the average 7-Eleven
convenience store.
As Howard and the team worked with the blue ocean tools, and
created what became known as their “blue ocean strategic plan,” they
identified food service as the weakest link in the company’s overall
offering and the one with the greatest profitable growth potential. As


Howard reflected, “If you sell gas, people have traditionally assumed
you can’t be a high-quality food restaurant.” As the team set out to make
a blue ocean shift, it set its sights on completely changing this
perception. It aimed to create a leap in value in the quality, freshness, and
healthfulness of the food Wawa sold at the best possible price that would
recast Wawa from a convenience store and gas station that also sells
food, to a leading quick-service restaurant that also sells gas and
convenience items. The result was a total rethinking of what food to
offer, how fresh and healthy it had to be, how to display it for it to be
inviting and appetizing, and how to make the selection process easy and
food fulfillment fast—all at the best possible price for buyers. Now
Wawa offers freshly baked breads; fresh salads like kale and quinoa;
healthy wraps and soups; made-to-order hoagies with fresher and more
innovative ingredients; hot lunch, dinner, and breakfast sandwiches; and
what is described by some as coffee nirvana. With this rethinking, food
sales skyrocketed, as did the quality of the overall Wawa experience. The
power of its blue ocean shift is reflected in the numbers: Today, Wawa’s
per-store food sales are ahead of McDonald’s per-store sales. What’s
amazing, however, is the way the team built a business model for the
new food and beverage offering, which simultaneously enabled Wawa to
earn an aggressive profit margin and hit its aggressive cost target.
Wawa eliminates a number of things that other quick-service
restaurants offer, such as in-store tables and drive-throughs. But what’s
key to its low costs and efficiency are the dramatic differences in its
behind-the-scenes operations. It not only partners with grocery logistics
leader McLane Company but also set up a daily fresh channel that allows
Wawa to outsource its entire supply chain in food. It partners with
bakeries for all its freshly baked offerings and with Taylor Farms and the
Safeway Group for all the preprepared fresh food. To get fresh food
delivered to every store, every day, Wawa partners with Penske
Corporation, which manages a cross-dock distribution facility, where the
perishable food made by Wawa’s food partners is delivered daily. And
Wawa operates none of these activities: Its involvement is limited to a
small group of employees who work with its partners on
communications and quality control to ensure reliable, high-quality
deliveries.
As Howard observed, “By applying the blue ocean approach, we
were able to identify what it would take to create a leap in the quality,


value, convenience, and presentation of food for customers that would
simultaneously raise the convenience and quality experience for Wawa
overall. But we had no food preparation facilities and expertise in the
league we were aiming to deliver on—which was world-class—to be
able to make that happen. Rather than compromise our blue ocean
offering, or make a costly attempt at developing this expertise in-house,
we have partnered with the best to realize our vision fast and at low
cost.” According to Chris Gheysens, Wawa’s current CEO, “Fresh food
and beverage now account for more than 40 percent of Wawa’s
merchandise sales. We’ve grown from what had been a traditional
convenience store to a restaurant to go with fuel. It’s hard even to
categorize us.”
How can we streamline and innovate operations? Contained
within this question are multiple possibilities for lowering costs without
sacrificing buyer value. Subsequent questions teams can ask to uncover
these possibilities include: “Can we replace raw materials with
unconventional, less expensive ones?” “Can we eliminate high-cost, low-
value-added activities and facilities or replace them with low-cost,
effective ones?” “Can we shift the location of our offering to lower-cost
real estate?” “Can we truncate the number of parts or steps in the
production process?” “Can we factory-manufacture things that industry
competitors construct manually?” “Are there off-the-shelf technologies
we can use or activities we can digitize to reduce our costs?” The
National Youth Orchestra of Iraq asked this question, for example, and
answered it brilliantly by holding auditions via YouTube and using
Skype for project management. These creative innovations not only
eliminated the cost and logistical nightmare of attempting to do either
task in person in Iraq, but also allowed NYOI to build a social media
presence in the process.
Likewise, by delving into questions such as those listed above, the
citizenM team discovered an innovative way to lower its building costs
dramatically while simultaneously raising the quality of its rooms. In the
hotel industry, construction is one of the largest cost factors. Because
citizenM’s blue ocean move envisioned only one type of guest room, the
team was prompted to reflect on how other industries made standardized
products. After all, that’s what its guest rooms would be—standardized.
Framed this way, the obvious answer jumped out at them: Standardized
products are rarely made by hand; they’re factory-manufactured. This led


the team to question whether they could also manufacture citizenM’s
rooms, instead of using traditional construction methods. The answer
was a resounding yes. Modular manufacturing would allow the rooms to
be built at far lower cost and with greater speed, higher quality assurance
and consistency, and, very importantly, optimized sound insulation and
wiring using value engineering. So, although citizenM builds the lower
floors of its hotels using traditional construction methods, its guestrooms
are factory-manufactured. And because its blue ocean move reduces the
size of the guestrooms significantly, they can arrive preassembled, so
they can be easily stacked and snapped together. This innovation helped
citizenM cut its room-construction costs by as much as 35 percent,
compared to the average four-star hotel, and its overall construction time
by around 35–50 percent, compared to other three-star and luxury hotels.
CitizenM also realized it could further lower costs by eliminating call
centers and phone reservations and replacing them with a simple, fast,
online reservation system. For one thing, the growing mass of mobile
citizens is tech-savvy and accustomed to doing things online. For
another, most hotels’ call centers and phone reservations are pretty
annoying—a long message detailing which button to press for what, then
pushing the right reservation button, then waiting for the next available
receptionist while ads or uninspiring music play endlessly. Who likes
that?
How can we multiply people’s positive energy and contributions?
The people who are the face of your brand, and ultimately determine a
large part of your blue ocean offering’s integrity, are the people who
interact directly with your customers if you’re a business, your donors if
you’re a nonprofit, or your citizens if you are a government entity. These
customer-facing people need to walk the talk every day to create that
tingly experience that gives their customers pause, makes them smile,
and motivates them to come back again and again. Yet these very people
are often viewed and treated as if they were the lowest level on the
hierarchical totem pole. If you’re serious about creating an offering with
integrity and lowering your business model’s costs, however, they
shouldn’t be. When the energies of the people on your front lines are
engaged and multiplied, their productivity goes up, turnover rates drop,
and their commitment to go the extra distance rises. This can be achieved
by following a process that embraces humanness in the way you treat
them. As discussed in chapter 4, such a humanistic process makes your


front-line people feel recognized and appreciated for who they are as
people, not because they are brilliant and perfect, but because they have
something to contribute and want to make a difference. This humanistic
approach is a powerful lever to explore as you finalize your blue ocean
move. Let’s see how it is put into action with customer-facing
employees.
CitizenM, Wawa, and NYOI, for example, all practiced this approach
in formalizing their business models. One common denominator, which
costs nothing, is the titles they give their people, which convey a sense of
dignity. At citizenM you’re not a front-desk clerk, or a bellhop, or a
doorman, you’re an “ambassador.” At Wawa, you’re not a convenience
store cashier, or a deli worker, or a stock boy or stock girl. Every single
one of its nearly 22,000 storefront employees is an “associate.” As for
the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq, its players were not only musicians
but also “cultural diplomats” and “peace makers.” All of these titles
convey a larger sense of responsibility, grace, and purpose than merely
getting a job done. Think of the impact any one of them could have on a
person’s sense of mission and pride.
The respectful message these titles send is reinforced by the ways the
leadership sets the business model up to elevate customer-facing people
in the corporate hierarchy. At citizenM, for example, the “reverse
pyramid” is a central part of the culture, with hotel staff at the top of the
organizational pyramid and top management at the bottom. At Wawa,
every executive is expected to spend a minimum of one full day every
month typically visiting 12 to 15 stores to talk with associates and store
managers. At Christmas, it’s a long-standing tradition for executives to
spend the day visiting stores (with the majority dressed in Santa hats!),
thanking associates for outstandingly serving customers 365 days a year.
On every visit, management is there to listen, thank, learn about
associates’ concerns, and ask associates and store managers to share
ideas for improving operations and stories of customers’ delight. At
NYOI, Paul MacAlindin assembled all the orchestra members and, using
a facilitator from the Iraqi Peace Foundation who spoke both Kurdish
and Arabic, invited them to define what they wanted their orchestra to
stand for. The values, chosen by the players, were love, commitment, and
respect. We can imagine no greater way for Paul to have demonstrated
that this orchestra was about them, and that they had a mission to be a
light of hope for their country as well as musicians.


Empowering customer-facing service staff and trusting them to use
their best judgment when speaking with customers, instead of giving
them scripts as though they were robots, is another powerful way to
activate commitment and energy. Consider the way citizenM and Wawa
hire, train, and reward their staff to make this possible. Both companies,
for example, hire for attitude and values and train for competence.
Among the sentiments echoed at both are “Skills we can teach. Attitude
and values are tough to alter.” And indeed, skills are taught intensively.
But far more important is imbuing staff with a deep sense of what the
brand stands for, and what its blue ocean move’s promise to the customer
is, and what their role is in making that promise a reality.
As Howard Stoeckel notes, “I tell all our associates, ‘You may brew
coffee, work the register, or make a sandwich. But your real job at Wawa
is to help people have a better day.’ There’s no higher calling than that.”
Once hired, customer-facing staff get to interpret for themselves how to
deliver on that brand promise, which is how and why they make
authentic, inspired human connections with customers. Whether that
means saying, “Hi, honey,” or helping someone with the door, or asking
a person who looks sad, “What’s wrong?” they are on the case. This
personal accountability for delivering on the brand’s promise is
reinforced and comes full circle with the bonus policies these companies
follow. At citizenM, for example, ambassadors—not executives—can
earn (or lose) a 30 percent bonus each month, based 100 percent on
customer satisfaction. CitizenM budgets for the full 30 percent. Why?
Just look to its consistently high five-star guest satisfaction ratings,
delivered by its multitasking ambassadors.
As for Wawa, it has one of the 10 largest employee stock ownership
programs in the United States, based on the number of participants.
Close to 40 percent of its private stock is owned by employees, with the
greatest share of that held not by senior management, but by associates
and store managers. With stories of dozens of associates who retired as
millionaires to motivate them, associates take their stock ownership
seriously. Meaningful performance incentives; hiring based on attitude;
training customer-facing staff both for skills and, crucially, to internalize
the brand’s promise; and then empowering them to bring that brand to
life through exceptional service—taken together, these practices multiply
people’s energy, engender a culture of strong accountability, create
genuine and memorable experiences for customers, and lower the cost of


staff turnover. It’s a win all around. These organizations don’t have
customers; they have fans they delight, day in and day out.
Drawing the Big Picture
A big-picture business model shows how the value and cost sides of an
organization’s blue ocean move come together to generate strong
profitable growth at the set strategic price. Figure 13-1 depicts a big-
picture business model, in this case for citizenM, and shows how its
components interact. While the left side of the figure presents how the
cost dynamics of the organization work to achieve its target cost, the
right side shows what buyers receive to ensure they will have a
compelling reason to purchase the new offering and an ability to pay for
it. Directional arrows show how the elements on both sides of the model
interact to create a profitable business model for the company and a win
for its customers.
In the case of citizenM, through the big-picture business model
presented in the figure, one can easily understand and see how it
achieves strong profitable growth. In fact, citizenM’s profitability
outperforms all the traditional players with its profitability per square
meter being about twice that of comparable upscale hotels. This big-
picture business model allows people to grasp the economic logic of the
blue ocean move in one graphic and to appreciate how their individual
operational tasks will fit together to produce the bottom line. It provides
a road map for the organization to lay out the operational details and
actions, including key milestones of what is to happen when and the
objectives and deliverables for each function.
Figure 13-1
How citizenM’s Business Model Works


Together with the to-be strategy canvas, the big-picture business
model focuses everyone on the same endpoint and prevents people from
getting distracted or sidetracked as they translate the blue ocean move
into a tangible offering. In essence, they act as an important “decision
sieve,” aligning the efforts of people across the organization, as they
work out operational details.
Launching and Rolling Out Your Blue Ocean Move
The wisest rollout strategy is to start small, then go fast and wide. We
can’t emphasize this strongly enough. Apple, for example, didn’t build
300 stores at once. They first built 2 and concentrated their efforts on
ironing out the snags that inevitably get fully revealed only when a new
offering goes live, in color. Soon thereafter, they built 25, and the rest is
history. Today Apple has more than 490 stores around the world.
Similarly, citizenM built its first hotel in 2008 in its own backyard, at
Amsterdam’s Schiphol Airport. This allowed the citizenM team to
carefully observe and analyze how the hotel was running, and to make


any adjustments they found necessary to get their business model right.
Were the self check-in kiosks optimally situated when guests entered the
hotel, or should they be moved a little to the left or the right? Were the
kiosk screens as intuitive as they needed to be to ensure one-to-three-
minute check-ins, or were guests repeatedly getting confused by
something? Was having one multitasking ambassador on hand when
guests checked in sufficient to provide the warm welcome and genuine
connection their blue ocean move demanded, or were more required?
How about the factory-manufactured rooms: Did the wiring “snap
together,” as the value engineering in the factory prototypes showed, or
did adjustments need to be made? Did the sound insulation specs
actually achieve the desired level of quiet? And so on.
In this way, citizenM could quickly work out any kinks, from the way
value was delivered to guests to its behind-the-scenes operations and
business model, all the while conserving capital because the changes
needed to be done in only one hotel. With the adjustments made, and its
success clear, citizenM then launched a second hotel in the center of
Amsterdam, building on the lessons learned, and providing another
opportunity to validate its business model. With the Amsterdam citizenM
hotel a tremendous success virtually from the get-go, citizenM
management had confidence in the leap in value its hotels delivered and
proof of the strong profit engine underlying it. With that, citizenM
started to turn up the dial and roll out hotels in major cities around the
world.
Wawa uses the same smart rollout strategy when it launches a new
offering. It starts with a limited set of stores, works out the bugs, puts the
offering into a few more stores to validate its strength and the
effectiveness of its business model, and then hits the gas and rolls out
fast across all its stores. This rollout strategy has distinct advantages on
several grounds. For one, it acknowledges that there will almost always
be points of refinement and correction needed in your blue ocean
offering and business model. This helps keep people emotionally on
track in the face of issues that arise when launching. It says, “Yes, we are
aiming for the gold; but we shouldn’t get discouraged or thrown when
there are initial glitches. Rather, we should expect this, keep an open
mind, refuse to get discouraged or look for someone to blame, see this as
a valuable learning opportunity, and set about working through the bugs
as fast as possible.” This approach also minimizes financial risk,


credibility risk in the market, and what we think of as demotivation risk
with your people.
We’ve also seen what happens when organizations take the opposite
approach, rolling out their moves far and fast, and then discovering the
bugs. Only then, it’s far more costly to fix the bugs and make
adjustments, which leads to frustration and, typically, finger-pointing.
And because the rollout is far and wide, the press is often fast to pick up
on it. So when something goes other than planned, they are also fast to
publish an overly negative review, which discourages people in the
organization even further. Sadly, after that, many organizations throw up
their hands, call the initiative a failure, and retreat, leaving egos bruised,
money wasted, people demotivated, and an organization fearful of trying
anything new again, when the glitches they encountered were no bigger
or worse than those that accompany any new offering. It’s just that they
were magnified exponentially by the scale of the launch.
We suggest that you think about the launch and the rollout of your
blue ocean move as though you were producing the next smash hit on
Broadway. You’ve gone through the blue ocean shift process and come
out with a compelling, original story line that everyone loves. People tell
you they can’t wait to see the play. And the people who’ve worked with
you to create it can’t wait to perform it at last. Moreover, by working
through the big-picture business model, you’ve also worked out
everything that needs to happen behind the curtain, from the stage sets,
to the lights, costumes, and sound. But does that mean you don’t need to
practice and iron out the details, so the play will sing and the story line
come alive? Of course not. To put on a smashing play, you need to first
expect glitches, and then make minor modifications to get it right. When
people say, after the first preview performance, “It still needs work,” you
need to listen carefully, take notes, eschew blame, and strive to unlock
the magic of the script. You and your people need to fully understand
that adjustments are the natural course of action for building excellence.
Now, you are ready to make your blue ocean shift. You have the tools
and the process and the mindset to make this happen from start to finish.
The world needs more blue oceans. We invite you to create yours.


EPILOGUE
A National Blue Ocean Shift in Action
WITH NATIONS AROUND THE world facing tight budgets and
growing demands from their citizens, blue ocean shifts are as applicable
for governments as they are for corporations, nonprofits, or start-ups. In
this epilogue, we’ll draw on the experience of Malaysia to illustrate a
national blue ocean shift in action, discuss the issues it is addressing,
how the process works, and the far-reaching results it has produced.
In the beginning of the new millennium, Malaysia was at a
crossroads, stuck in the so-called middle-income trap. During the 1970s,
Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan had all been at a similar
level of development, but that was no longer the case. In the intervening
years, the other three countries had all become high-income nations, but
Malaysia had not managed to make the jump. The country was facing
differentiation challenges from developed nations and regions like the
United States, Europe, and Japan, which offered higher quality, and low-
cost challenges from emerging countries like China, India, Vietnam, and
Indonesia.
Malaysia’s leaders wanted to move the country out of this red ocean
trap and thought that blue ocean strategy might provide the platform for
achieving greater public well-being and higher national income. To test
and validate their reasoning, the prime minister and the deputy prime
minister invited us to engage in several rounds of discussions with
different interest groups, ranging from informal small group sessions, to
a three-day retreat with national leaders from the public and private
sectors, to an official cabinet meeting chaired by the prime minister.
After two years of exploration and probing, the government decided to
apply the theory and tools of blue ocean strategy to create blue ocean
