# Epilogue: A National Blue Ocean Shift in Action

shifts in the nation’s economic and social sectors.
To this end, the government set up a nonprofit research organization,
called the Malaysia Blue Ocean Strategy Institute (MBOSI), in 2008.
The following year, it launched the National Blue Ocean Strategy
Summit, an ongoing monthly gathering of Malaysia’s top national
leaders, its highest-ranking civil servants, including those from the
nation’s security forces, and selected leaders from the private sector.
When the agenda doesn’t require the direct attention of the prime
minister or the deputy prime minister, the chief secretary to the
government chairs the Summit gatherings. To ensure that the principles
and process of blue ocean shift are properly applied, MBOSI has
supported the Summit from the start.
By January of 2013, the National Blue Ocean Strategy Summit
(hereafter referred to as the NBOS Summit) had launched more than 50
economic and social blue ocean shift initiatives. For these initiatives,
differentiation was conceptualized in terms of delivering a leap in value,
or high impact, to the country’s economy and society, while low cost was
defined in terms of the savings generated by reductions in the cost of
providing government services. Since the public sector is notoriously
slow, the speed of execution was added as the third measure of a
successful shift, making the guiding principles of every NBOS initiative
high impact, low cost, and rapid execution.
Following the successful outcomes of these initiatives and the rapid
expansion of their scale and scope, the government established the
National Strategy Unit under the Ministry of Finance to further support,
accelerate, and monitor the initiatives in close cooperation with MBOSI.
By 2017, the number of blue ocean initiatives launched at the national
level totaled over 100.
How National Blue Ocean Initiatives Are Formulated and Executed
National transformation programs often fail because government
organizations are unable to overcome deeply entrenched silos. With
government ministries, departments, and agencies typically working in
isolation, resources and information are seldom shared, and turf wars and
lack of ownership are all too common. The NBOS Summit recognized
that blue oceans could not be created unless these silos were broken
down and the boundaries separating federal, state, and local government


officials were dissolved. By encouraging people in these different silos
and levels to work together and share their knowledge and resources,
based on the tools and process driving a blue ocean shift, the Summit
aims to expand national leaders’ horizons on how to create and capture
new economic and social opportunities for the public.
To this end, the NBOS Summit created two platforms to support the
transformation—the Pre-Summit and the Offsite. The process begins
with the NBOS Summit, which sets the strategic priorities for pressing
national issues that need to be resolved, and specifies in what sequence
they will be addressed. The matters the members discuss range from
safety and security issues, like rising crime and global terrorism; to
economic issues, like urban and rural development, and the need for
more innovation and entrepreneurship, stronger infrastructure, and youth
employment; to social problems and issues of public well-being, such as
women’s empowerment, inefficient government services, health care,
low-cost housing, and environmental degradation, including wild animal
poaching. Each Summit lasts three hours and ends with the
announcement of new initiatives to pursue in addition to those already
underway. The two supporting platforms then develop these initiatives in
progressively greater detail.
With macro guidance from the NBOS Summit, the Pre-Summit,
chaired by the chief secretary to the government, sets the scope, team
members, and strategic direction for the new initiatives before handing
them over to Offsite teams whom they’ve fully briefed. The Pre-Summit
is composed of leaders chosen from government ministries, departments,
and agencies who also prepare the Summit agendas and monitor the
progress of ongoing initiatives to ensure their execution and resolve any
cross-ministerial 
or 
cross-agency 
conflicts 
that 
occur 
during
implementation.
Offsite platforms are made up of working-level teams tasked with
executing the blue ocean initiatives. The leaders of these teams are also
members of the Pre-Summit, thereby ensuring that their actions will be
aligned. The teams develop detailed execution road maps, which lay out
actionable tasks with clear time lines that each member can easily carry
out and be held responsible for. Team members share their firsthand
discoveries about on-the-ground realities in meetings, and they are
empowered to adjust their execution road map accordingly, if necessary.
The chief secretary to the government and his team play a critical role


across all three NBOS platforms by coordinating and orchestrating their
efforts toward the country’s goals. From the beginning, this work of
national transformation has consistently benefited from the leadership of
competent, 
determined, 
and 
devoted 
chief 
secretaries 
whose
contributions to shifting the nation from red to blue oceans cannot be
overstated.
So that everyone could follow the strategy discussions and develop a
shared understanding of the road ahead and what would need to be done,
a common language across the three NBOS platforms was essential.
Visual tools like the strategy canvas, the four actions framework, and the
eliminate-reduce-raise-create (ERRC) grid served this purpose well. For
example, by looking at a strategy canvas with a compelling tagline and
the four actions drawn on a single page, as shown in figure E-1, people at
every level of government and in all the relevant ministries and agencies
could easily see and tell if a proposed move was indeed a shift and likely
to open up a new value-cost frontier. Figure E-1 depicts the strategy
canvas of the Community Rehabilitation Program (CRP), discussed in
chapter 1, along with its tagline and four actions as presented at the
Summit. As a quick reminder, the CRP was designed to rehabilitate petty
criminals, who constitute the largest proportion of the country’s
prisoners. Since the shift, the recidivism rate has plummeted, families are
thrilled, and society is safer. As for cost, a CRP center is 85 percent
cheaper to build than a conventional prison and 58 percent cheaper to
run. Based on current numbers, CRP is projected to deliver over US$1
billion in reduced costs and social benefits in its first decade. Perhaps its
greatest gift, however, is the way CRP enables former inmates to
transform their lives by giving them hope, dignity, and the skills to
become productive members of society.
Figure E-1
Strategy Canvas of Malaysia’s Community Rehabilitation Program
“Give a Second Chance Through Rehabilitation, Not Incarceration”


In formulating and executing initiatives, all NBOS platforms follow
three overarching rules. One, to be considered, any idea or proposal must
involve two or more ministries and be designed to meet the three blue
ocean criteria of high impact, low cost, and rapid execution. Two, the
principles of fair process—engagement, explanation, and clear
expectations—need to be observed in all discussions and decision
making. Three, market-creating tools like the strategy canvas, the four
actions framework, and the ERRC grid are used, as applicable, and
reflected in all discussions and reports. The Malaysia Blue Ocean
Strategy Institute and the National Strategy Unit play important
supporting roles throughout this process. The Summit takes the lead in
driving the adoption of both the humanistic approach that earns people’s
voluntary cooperation and the blue ocean tools that build their creative
competence.
How the Journey Began
Malaysia’s blue ocean journey began humbly, in 2009, with a single
initiative. Street crime was soaring. Snatch-theft was rampant, with
thieves on motorcycles using rob-and-run tactics on pedestrians, mostly
women. People wanted more police presence in the streets. While the
police were doing their best to meet this demand, they lacked enough
trained officers to staff more patrols. The police proposed building more


training facilities to accelerate the number of recruits they could bring
on. But with the world economy struggling to crawl out of the 2008
global financial crisis, and a rising government budget deficit, that option
was off the table. The police were trapped in a red ocean of rising crime.
Citizens were frustrated. And the competition—the criminal element—
was winning out. The government recognized that conventional practices
would not turn the situation around. A blue ocean shift was imperative.
As the Summit discussed the issue, it became clear that the Royal
Malaysia Police couldn’t solve the problem alone. The Ministry of Home
Affairs and the Department of Public Administration had to join in. The
Summit empowered a cross-ministry team and asked them to present
their strategic action plans at the next Summit. To this end, the team ran
an initial round of Pre-Summit and Offsite meetings to deepen their
understanding of the realities on the ground and create viable blue ocean
alternative solutions.
The team found that a great many trained police officers across the
nation were doing administrative tasks, such as writing up reports,
managing inventory, and filing documents. Officers traditionally
performed these tasks, so no one had ever questioned the practice. But
why, the team wondered, couldn’t these activities be equally well
performed by nonpolice personnel, freeing up the trained police officers
for the patrols the citizens were crying out for? At the same time, by
having members of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Department of
Public Administration on the team, the NBOS team found that the civil
service had excess administrative staff on the payroll who had light
workloads. A blue ocean opportunity existed to quickly move
underleveraged, competent administrators locked in the “cold spots” of
civil service departments to the “hot spots” at police stations. The team
reckoned that such a move would allow the government to make an
initial blue ocean shift, achieving high impact at low cost with rapid
execution.
By then, the team was ready to chart specific strategies to execute the
shift. But while the fair process practiced in all the platform meetings
had aligned all the top-level people at the relevant governmental bodies,
moving people across ministries and departments wasn’t simple. It
would stir up deep turf wars, involve issues related to relocation and
incentives, and require widespread changes in people’s mindsets and
behaviors. Moreover, the Attorney General’s Chamber would need to


check whether moving personnel across the legal boundary between the
police and the civil service would violate any existing rules and
regulations. And if it did, the chamber needed to figure out how to
address the problem within the bounds of national law.
Having listened to all these findings and execution challenges, the
Summit added the Attorney General’s Chamber to the team, approved
the proposed approach, and asked the newly expanded team to map out
and present an action plan with concrete milestones. At this point, the
Pre-Summit and the NBOS Offsite platforms needed to be further
mobilized to complete the task. The expanded team was also expected to
show results within six months. A challenging time line like this would
be used in all the subsequent NBOS projects, unless otherwise agreed to,
as a way of creating a sense of urgency and inspiring innovative
approaches to speed execution. Clear expectations and a sound
explanation were provided up front to all NBOS members.
The team reported their progress to the Summit monthly for
feedback. In a period of six months, over 7,400 trained police officers
who had been doing desk work were released to do street patrols, while
4,000 civil servants were placed at the police stations to take over the
officers’ administrative duties. Efficiency gains identified in the course
of the shift process accounted for the reduction in personnel and further
lowered costs. Compared with a convential red ocean approach, where
new police officer candidates were recruited, trained, and sent out on
patrols, this cross-agency and cross-departmental move saved the
government hundreds of millions of US dollars and had a rapid impact
on street security. From 2009 to the end of 2010, reported street crimes
dropped by 35 percent, and they have continued to go down since then.
Even more rewarding were the changes in people’s attitudes and
behaviors. New conversations, such as the following, began to take
place: “I became a police officer the day I turned 22,” one officer said,
turning to the civil servant who’d taken over his administrative work. “I
spent 15 years on a beat and had finally gotten a nice job sitting in a
comfortable air-conditioned office [remember, the weather in Malaysia is
hot throughout the year]. But when you came, I had to go back out on
street patrols in the hot sun, and I wasn’t happy about it.” The civil
servant looked at the officer and replied, “Oh, that’s why you were so
cold and confrontational when I started. But you’re different now.
You’ve become cooperative and supportive. Why?” The officer smiled


and answered, “I saw you excel at administrative tasks, which isn’t
surprising, since it’s your thing. And I felt good about your work. More
importantly, though, once I got back in a police car, I realized I’d missed
the patrols and the fun of reconnecting with the people I protect and
serve, and monitoring the comings and goings in neighborhoods. NBOS
brought us together and made us work on things we like and are good
at.” This exchange is not unique. While room for improvement still
exists, and breaking down deeply divided silos will always take time and
patience, it is not difficult to find positive exchanges like this across the
country, as police officers and civil servants work together for the good
of their country.
Similarly, some generals had initial reservations about the military’s
involvement in the CRP initiative. They were concerned that it could
distract them from their core duty of protecting the country from external
threats or invasion. After several rounds of discussions, however, they all
agreed to give the CRP initiative a try. As we’ve seen, it has been a great
success. At a recent Summit, the chief of defense forces, the highest-
ranking general in the military, reflected on their journey, “We have
come a long way, and we now wholeheartedly embrace the change that
NBOS represents. Our duty is to serve our country, and we have found
new ways of doing so while maintaining our core focus on keeping the
country safe.” Today, under NBOS, six CRP centers have been
established and some 10,000 inmates rehabilitated.
Before NBOS the military and police almost never crossed the
boundaries that separated their two institutions. That has changed.
Multiple signs provide evidence that they now see protecting people and
nation building as a common mission. For example, they have initiated
joint patrols in crime hot spots, and the military has begun sharing their
extra training facilities with the police. This has not only allowed the
police to put trained officers on the streets more rapidly, but also resulted
in significant cost savings by negating the need to build new police
training facilities. “The police and military march at a different pace and
salute in different ways,” the inspector general of police observed at one
of the Summits. But, he suggested, together with the chief of defense
forces, “to signify the change in the way we work together for the nation,
why don’t we organize a joint graduation ceremony, so that the first
batch of police recruits trained at military facilities will graduate side-by-
side with military graduates? Such a ceremony would be a first in our


history.” Over 20,000 people came to witness this historic event, and the
spirit of change was high and palpable.
The Evolution of the Journey
Since 2009, the Malaysian government has initiated more than 100 blue
ocean moves, involving over 90 ministries and agencies from finance, to
education, to rural and regional development, to agriculture, to urban
well-being, to defence, to housing and local government, to women,
family, and community development. The issues they’ve addressed range
from safety and security, to economic and social development, to the
environment and public well-being. You can learn about these blue ocean
moves at www.nbos.gov.my and www.blueoceanshift.com/malaysia-
nbos. To date, the NBOS initiatives that have generated the widest
demand among the citizenry are those focused on urban and rural well-
being, entrepreneurship, and youth volunteerism. Let’s look briefly at an
example of each.
In June 2012, NBOS established the first Urban Transformation
Center (UTC) in Melaka City, one of the country’s state capitals. Since
then, more than 20 others of varying size have been opened in main
cities across the country. The UTCs are one-stop shops, where all
government services are available under a single roof. Open seven days a
week, from 8:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., they offer everything from passport
renewals, licenses, legal permits, and registration forms to skill training
programs, health clinics, social welfare programs, and official
certificates of various kinds. The UTCs are soaringly popular—in a
country with a population of slightly over 30 million, UTCs have
counted nearly 50 million visits for government services in the first few
years alone. In addition, people can also buy groceries, enjoy
recreational facilities like fitness centers, and conduct their banking
activities at the centers. Because UTCs are located in previously idling or
underutilized government buildings, execution followed rapidly as soon
as the Summit approved the idea. The first UTC building in Melaka was
ready in just six weeks, and two weeks after that, the counters were open
for business. Because ministries and agencies no longer need their own
city offices, the UTCs will save the government billons of dollars in the
years to come, while the gains in efficiency and convenience for the
public, who no longer have to visit multiple offices, fighting city traffic


all the while, are substantial. A similar model is at work in rural areas,
where the NBOS Summit has established over 200 large and small Rural
Transformation Centers (RTCs) to provide new economic, social, and
educational opportunities that result in higher incomes for rural citizens.
The Malaysian Global Innovation and Creativity Center (MaGIC) is
also a brainchild of the NBOS Summit. It brings together
businesspeople, finance providers, domain experts, universities, and
government officials to provide end-to-end support to both domestic and
international entrepreneurs. Since its launch in April 2014, by then–US
President Barack Obama and Malaysia’s Prime Minister Najib Razak,
over 15,000 start-ups have been established with its support. MaGIC not
only orchestrates the entrepreneurial ecosystem of the country but also
builds its creative competence by teaching blue ocean tools and methods
to people from all segments of the society. The MaGIC Accelerator
program, which is building a community of ASEAN (Association of
Southeast Asian Nations)-focused start-ups, has become the largest in
Southeast Asia.
The Summit’s decision to create 1Malaysia for Youth (iM4U) has had
a similarly transformative effect on youth volunteerism. Launched in
2012, the initative was designed to open up a new frontier of
volunteerism by building young people’s confidence and unlocking their
energy and talent for the good of the nation. With about 3 million
members, iM4U has become the largest youth volunteering organization
in Southeast Asia and one of the biggest in the world. Its volunteers have
carried out over 4,500 national and international projects to aid natural
disaster relief efforts, provide supplementary schoolteachers, engage in
charity work on behalf of the needy and elderly, perform local and
regional community work, and more. This new and unprecedented level
of youth volunteerism has impressed both the country’s citizens and the
regional public. As for the youth, they have seen firsthand the positive
impact they can have on the well-being of others, which increases their
confidence, their pride in their accomplishments, and their skills—all at
low cost to the government.
These initiatives are game changers, not only in the way people work
together to create new value-cost frontiers but also in how they think
about and carry out their roles and responsibilities. During one of the
Summit meetings, the secretary general of treasury said with a big smile
on his face, “I am a finance guy. Having been assigned to lead and


execute initiatives like UTC and MaGIC, I learned a lot about how to
think and act in a blue ocean way. My fellow NBOS team members and I
have realized that we need to both ‘blue-ocean’ these initiatives, and
shift our mindsets. For me, this means being more than a numbers-driven
finance guy. To deliver our national budget with high impact at low cost
with rapid execution, I need to be a blue ocean strategist.”
Since 2009, when the prime minister kicked off the National
Transformation Journey where NBOS has played a pivotal role, the
country’s gross national income has grown by nearly 50 percent, and
over 2 million jobs have been created. The global community, especially
the governments of emerging and developing nations, has taken notice,
and asked the Malaysian government to share its experiences with them.
Malaysia and its leadership responded positively, and the result was an
international conference on NBOS, held on August 16–18, 2016.
The three-day conference took place in Putrajaya, the country’s
federal administrative center outside downtown Kuala Lumpur, and
attracted 5,500 attendees representing 45 countries. Among the
participants were heads of state, ministers, civil service leaders, and
representatives from the United Nations, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and member
countries of the Commonwealth Association of Public Administration
and Management.
The chief secretary to the government kicked off the conference by
providing an overview of the NBOS initiatives. The prime minister then
gave an inspiring keynote, explaining that “If we had continued with the
old policies, we would have found the government and country
swimming in an ocean of red. We knew that we had, instead, to make a
paradigm shift, and create a new economic model; one driven by
knowledge, creativity, and innovation—a ‘blue ocean’ of new
opportunities.” In the panel of heads of state that followed, the prime
minister of Thailand built on this idea, noting that “Especially in times of
economic uncertainty, countries tend to return to competition-based red
ocean strategy,” and urging the delegates to focus instead on “striving to
innovate to create blue oceans.”
After these opening events, the conference broke into sessions where
participants discussed not only how the initiatives had transformed the
formulation and execution of national policies but also how such changes
affected the mindsets and behaviors of the people involved, their ways of


working together, and the economic and social landscape of the nation.
The Malaysian defence minister, who when he was home affairs
minister, led the very first NBOS initiative, shared his view that “NBOS
continuously reminds us that things have got to be shaken up from time
to time, and that we should always keep an open mind and cooperate
with each other.” Given that the beginning of any change initiative is the
most challenging period, his remarks, like his contributions, were
especially resonant.
The conference also featured NBOS exhibitions, where participants
could visit booths showcasing various initiatives and discuss what they’d
heard. During the final day, they were also given the opportunity to visit
one of the sites to experience firsthand how the initiative worked and
how it affected people’s lives. The CRP Center at Gemas was one of the
options; visitors were able to see the new, income-producing skills the
inmates were learning, and to listen as they described their work and
achievements with genuine pride.
“Transformation requires people to work together in new ways, to
think differently, and to take on new roles and responsibilities. These are
not easy things to do, but they are rewarding. Throughout our NBOS
journey, we have been creating new ways to serve people better and
deliver on the things that really matter to them. NBOS has been
transforming the entire nation. Blue oceans ahead!” said Malaysia’s
deputy prime minister in his concluding keynote address.
Today, at the Summit meetings, one can regularly hear participants
talk about “blue-oceaning” initiatives and “NBOSing” their work.
Presenting his vision for the nation at a recent Summit, the prime
minister underscored the importance of this work, saying, “We aspire to
be a top-20 nation in the world by 2050. For that, we need to persist on
our blue ocean journey.” With recharged energy, the chief secretary to
the government is vigorously orchestrating all NBOS activities,
motivating the participants and monitoring and communicating the
results. In a recent address to the civil service, he reflected, “No doubt,
change is not easy. But miracles can happen, given a positive mindset, as
we have seen through NBOS. NBOS is a pivotal pillar in our nation’s
transformation journey.” So, with renewed confidence, the blue ocean
shift continues.


Acknowledgments
We have had significant help in actualizing this book. INSEAD, our
academic home, has continued to provide a unique and inspiring
environment in which to conduct our research. We have benefited greatly
from the truly global composition of our faculty, student body, and
executive education participants, as well as the crossover between theory
and practice that exists at INSEAD. Dean Ilian Mihov and Deputy Dean
Peter Zemsky of INSEAD have provided enduring encouragement and
institutional support. We would also like to acknowledge our former
Dean Frank Brown for his vision to establish the INSEAD Blue Ocean
Strategy Institute.
With our deans’ support—including that of former INSEAD
Executive Education Dean Sumitra Dutta who is now dean of Cornell SC
Johnson College of Business, we have been able to create many blue
ocean programs for INSEAD executives and MBAs that are carried out
across the globe. Special thanks to all the INSEAD MBAs who have
taken part in the Blue Ocean Study Group, the Blue Ocean Simulation
Course, and the Blue Ocean Theory Course, and to all the executives
from around the world who participated in the Blue Ocean Strategy
Open Enrolment Program or Blue Ocean Strategy corporate-specific
programs. Their challenging questions and thoughtful feedback clarified
and strengthened our ideas. Special thanks also to the Boston Consulting
Group (BCG), which has extended financial support for our research and
has proven to be a great long-term partner dating back now for more than
20 years.
We are grateful for INSEAD’s faculty who have taught blue ocean
courses in the MBA, EMBA, and executive education programs at the
school. Among the faculty are Professors Andrew Shipilov, Fares
Boulos, Peter Zemsky, Guoli Chen, Jens Meyer, Javier Gimeno, Neil
Jones, Mi Ji, James Costantini, Ben Bensaou, Michael Shiel, Narayan
Pant, Loïc Sadoulet, Matthew Lee, Lauren Mathys, and George Eapen.
