# Acknowledgments

Not only have they provided valuable feedback and rich discussions that
have stimulated our thinking, many have importantly also become our
dear friends. Thank you to all.
Along the trajectory of our research journey, many people have
supported us at different points and we are thankful for all. However,
there are two individuals who deserve special mention: Gavin Fraser and
Marc Beauvois-Coladon. Over long years, both Gavin and Marc have
provided feedback and put our ideas in practice often before they were
even published. We are delighted and proud that two of the blue ocean
shifts discussed in this book are the direct result of their powerful
application of the ideas in practice. Gavin and Marc, thank you for your
support and insight, the intellectual integrity you bring to your work, and
importantly your friendship. Special thanks are also due to Jae Won Park,
CEO of the Malaysia Blue Ocean Strategy Institute (MBOSI); John
Riker, who skillfully led the Blue Ocean Strategy Initiative Center; and
blue ocean senior experts Jason Hunter and Ralph Trombetta, whose
experiences in applying our ideas in practice have directly contributed to
our book. The dedicated work of all the directors and fellows of MBOSI
including Jang Rae Cho, Gowrishankar Sundararajan, Lisa Carse, Tim
Polkowski, Pamela Leong, Craig Wilkie, Julie Lee, Pallav Jha, and the
rest of the MBOSI team serves as the backbone for the national blue
ocean shift we lay out in the book’s epilogue.
Thanks especially to our Blue Ocean Officer Kasia Duda and her
team at MBOSI for their enthusiastic support and dedication. Kasia,
thank you for being an unsinkable ship and great captain of the team. We
appreciate all that you do.
Special thanks are also due to CEO of the Blue Ocean Global
Network, Robert Bong, who also serves as chief advisor to MBOSI, and
his team: Chin Chin Lim, Serena George, and Gan Kah Liang. Thanks
also to the members of the Blue Ocean Global Network, a global
community of practice on the blue ocean family of concepts—especially
to those we were unable to mention here.
Warm thanks are also due to our outstanding team of executive
fellows and researchers, current and recent past, at the INSEAD Blue
Ocean Strategy Institute (IBOSI). In particular, Mi Ji, Oh Young Koo,
Michael Olenick, Mélanie Pipino, Katrina Ling, and Jee-Eun Lee.
Through the thought-provoking cases and firsthand original theory-based
videos, today blue ocean concepts are used in over 100 countries around


the world. Thanks also to our IBOSI coordinator Kim Wilkinson.
Researchers beyond those already cited who deserve special mention are
Zunaira Munir, Allison Light, and Amara Buyse.
Over the decade since our first book Blue Ocean Strategy was
published, corporate executives, public officers, entrepreneurs, small-and
medium-size business owners, and even high school students and
religious organizations have set out to put our ideas and market-creating
tools and frameworks into practice to make a blue ocean shift. To all
these individuals—some of whom are contained in this book—we offer
our sincere thanks. You have inspired us, sharpened our thinking, and
greatly shaped the ideas in this book.
The Malaysian government has been applying the concept and tools
of blue ocean shift to national development through its National Blue
Ocean Strategy (NBOS) initiative. We are enormously grateful to Prime
Minister Najib Razak and former Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi for
their vision and inspiring leadership to create blue oceans for the nation.
Also, special thanks are due to Deputy Prime Minister Zahid Hamidi,
Defence and Special Function Minister Hishammuddin Hussein, and all
cabinet 
ministers 
who 
have 
spearheaded 
the 
cross-ministerial
collaboration under NBOS.
The chief secretary to the government of Malaysia, Ali Hamsa, and
the chairman of Petronas and former chief secretary to the government,
Sidek Hassan, deserve our special appreciation for their excellent work
in institutionalizing and nurturing the growth of National Blue Ocean
Strategy within the Malaysian government. Other important contributors
to NBOS include the secretary general of Treasury, Irwan Serigar;
chairman of Permodalan Nasional Berhad (PNB) and former minister in
the prime minister’s department, Wahid Omar; governor of the Central
Bank of Malaysia, Muhammad Ibrahim; director general of the Public
Service Department, Zainal Rahim; chairman of Agrobank and former
director general of the Public Service Department, Zabidi Zainal;
inspector general of the police, Khalid Abu Bakar; chief of the Defense
Forces, Raja Mohamed Affandi; former chief of the Defense Forces,
Zulkifeli Zin; CEO of Petronas, Zulkiflee Ariffin; commissioner general
of prisons, Zulkifli Omar; and director of the National Strategy Unit,
Aminuddin Hassim, along with all the secretaries general and directors
general of the Malaysian Civil Service and the leaders of the Malaysian
security forces.


It would be remiss of us not to acknowledge the millions and millions
of Malaysians who have contributed, either directly or indirectly, to
creating blue oceans in Malaysia through various NBOS initiatives. We
are very grateful to the numerous civil servants, teachers, students,
generals and soldiers, police officers, professionals, businesspeople,
entrepreneurs, youth, retirees, housewives, even inmates and many more
besides, who have given their time, energy, and hearts as participants and
volunteers. While there are far too many to mention their names here, it
has been truly inspiring to witness the efforts made by citizens from all
walks of life who have supported and played a crucial role in Malaysia’s
national development through NBOS.
We’d also like to thank President Obama’s Board of Advisors on the
White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
This work provided new impetus for us to apply and expand our blue
ocean theory into the nonprofit sector.
In writing this book we have benefited from the comments of many
people. In particular, we are grateful for the thoughtful comments and
suggestions made by Nan Stone. Not only is Nan a dear friend we have
known for over 20 years, she also served as the editor-in-chief of
Harvard Business Review overseeing our initial HBR articles that are the
seeds of our research. Thanks are also due to the valuable comments and
feedback made by Andrea Ovans.
Finally, we would like to thank our publisher, Hachette Books. From
the very start the entire team, in particular Mauro DiPreta, Michelle
Aielli, and Betsy Hulsebosch, have believed in the ideas and been strong
enthusiastic supporters, providing encouragement and inspiring ideas,
and importantly, also being graciously patient as we struggled to get the
manuscript done. We appreciate the dedicated efforts of Joanna Pinsker
and David Lamb as well. Thanks also to Michael Pietsch, Hachette’s
CEO, for his full support and commitment to our book. We are grateful
to all.


About the Authors
W. CHAN KIM and RENÉE MAUBORGNE are professors of
strategy at INSEAD, which is consistently ranked in the world’s top
business schools, and co-directors of the INSEAD Blue Ocean Strategy
Institute in Fontainebleau, France. They are fellows of the World
Economic Forum and were named among the world’s top five best
business school professors by MBA Rankings. Kim is an advisory
member for the European Union and serves as an advisor to several
countries. Mauborgne served on President Barack Obama’s Board of
Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) for
the president’s two terms. They advise, consult, and speak to
governments and companies worldwide, and have published numerous
bestselling articles in Harvard Business Review and Academy of
Management Journal, Management Science, Organization Science,
Strategic Management Journal, Administrative Science Quarterly,
Journal of International Business Studies, MIT Sloan Management
Review, the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times, and the Financial
Times, among others.
They are the authors of Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create
Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition Irrelevant
(Harvard Business Review Press). Blue Ocean Strategy has sold over 3.6
million copies and is recognized as one of the most iconic and impactful
strategy books ever written. It is being published in a record-breaking 44
languages and is a bestseller across five continents. Blue Ocean Strategy
has won numerous awards including “The Best Business Book of 2005”
Prize at the Frankfurt Book Fair, was selected as a “Top Ten Business
Book of 2005” by Amazon.com, and was chosen as one of the 40 most
influential books in the History of the People’s Republic of China (1949–
2009) along with Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations and Milton and
Rose Friedman’s Free to Choose.
Kim and Mauborgne are ranked in the top three management gurus in
