# Introduction

diversiﬁcation. The ability to add value through competing in multiple
businesses can be understood in terms of sharing activities or transferring
proprietary skills across activities. This allows the elusive notion of synergy
to be made concrete and rigorous. Competitive Advantage explores these
questions as well as the organizational challenges of cross-business
collaboration.3 These questions are front and center again as a new wave of
mergers with questionable competitive value is occurring.
Finally, the activity-based view of the ﬁrm offers a powerful framework
for examining international strategy, or, more generally, competing across
locations. In competing internationally, a ﬁrm can spread activities to
different and multiple locations (I term this conﬁguration), while also
gaining potential competitive advantages by coordinating activities across
locations in a global network. I developed the international issues in a
separate book because of Competitive Advantage’s already formidable
length and complexity.4 This line of thinking led naturally to an interest in
the role of location itself in competitive advantage. The third book in this
trilogy, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, explores this question.5
Reﬂecting on Competitive Advantage 13 years after its publication, I am
ﬁrst and foremost heartened by the widespread acceptance of its essential
concepts. The phrases competitive advantage and sustainable competitive
advantage have become commonplace. The concept of activities has not
only been prominent in treatments of competition and strategy but also in
exploring more functional issues such as service management and the role
of information technology in competition. Activity-based costing is
becoming a new standard in management accounting, even though it has yet
to achieve its potential as a tool for strategy.
Looking back, Competitive Advantage is also a source of particular
satisfaction to me as a scholar. While Competitive Strategy drew on a rich
tradition in industrial economics, Competitive Advantage had no clear
antecedents in the literature on management or economics. Instead, it
emerged more from my attempt to solve a puzzle. How could we ﬁnd a
systematic way to examine the roots of competitive advantage that tied
directly to cost and differentiation and revealed the essential differences
between ﬁrms without intractable complexity? I am more persuaded now
than ever that activities provide the essential tool. As my work has
progressed, the concept has proven even more powerful than I anticipated.


Why? Competitive Advantage offers a way to go beyond broad or
unidimensional characterizations of competitive advantage. Much early
work in the ﬁeld ascribed advantage to overall size or market share. This
was clearly too simple for several reasons. First, size and share are far more
important to cost or differentiation in some parts of the business than others.
Moreover, small- and medium-sized ﬁrms outperform larger ﬁrms in many
industries. Finally, even where size and share are associated with superior
performance, they are often outcomes of other competitive advantages, not
the causes.
Other attempts to explain competitive advantage—e.g., strengths and
weaknesses, key success factors, or distinctive competencies—all rightly
recognize that a ﬁrm is multidimensional, but offer no way to explore the
sources of advantage systematically or rigorously, much less link them to
proﬁtability. Competitive Advantage starts with the premise that competitive
advantage can arise from many sources, and shows how all advantage can
be connected to speciﬁc activities and the way that activities relate to each
other, to supplier activities, and to customer activities. The book also
addresses the underlying causes of advantage in an activity: why ﬁrms
achieve lower cost and how activities create tangible buyer value. It
highlights the fact that the most robust competitive positions often cumulate
from many activities. Advantage resting on a few activities is easier to
diagnose and often easier to imitate. Finally, activities and the value chain
provide a view of the ﬁrm as an interdependent system in which individual
parts must be internally consistent.
More broadly, Competitive Advantage has helped make strategy more
concrete and actionable. Activities, because they are what ﬁrms do, are
observable, tangible, and can be managed. Strategy is no longer just a broad
vision, but the particular conﬁguration of activities a ﬁrm adopts compared
to its rivals. A lowest-cost strategy involves one set of activity choices,
differentiation another.
Activities provide the bridge between strategy and implementation.
When strategy was deﬁned in terms of broad positioning concepts, a clear
separation between strategy and structure was meaningful and useful.
“What” and “how” were comparatively distinct. Armed with the recognition
that a ﬁrm is a collection of discrete activities, however, previously common
distinctions between strategy, tactics, and organization blur. Strategy


becomes the particular array of activities aligned to deliver a particular mix
of value to a chosen array of customers. The conﬁguration of each activity
embodies the way that activity is performed, including the types of human
and physical assets employed and the associated organizational
arrangements. Competencies, then, become part of speciﬁc activities rather
than abstract and disconnected from cost and buyer value.
Functions that are normally thought of as organizational, such as
compensation systems, training, and even overall decisionmaking
architecture, are also activities—I call them support activities to distinguish
them from activities directly involved in producing, delivering, marketing,
or servicing a ﬁrm’s product. Support activities can be sources of
competitive advantage in their own right. The conﬁguration of activities for
competing in a particular way also shapes the appropriate contractual
relations with employees and other ﬁrms. Activities also provide a
framework for drawing appropriate organizational boundaries.
Activities, then, make strategy operational. Said differently, seeing the
ﬁrm as a collection of activities makes it clear that everyone in a ﬁrm is part
of strategy. It also makes clear why many employees must understand the
strategy, so that the rationale behind the conﬁguration of their activity and
how it relates to others is evident.
The ideas in Competitive Advantage are perhaps more challenging to
implement than those in Competitive Strategy, because they demand a deep
and textured look at all that the ﬁrm does. In a world where managers are
prone to look for simple prescriptions, detailed activity analysis was and is
challenging. Finding examples to illustrate the value chain at work
confronts practical limits. The complexity of a ﬁrm deﬁes capture in brief
examples. Yet in-depth case studies are hard to obtain, because of the
extraordinary disclosure required of participating companies. Most
successful companies view the detailed conﬁguration of their activities as
proprietary. Indeed, the difﬁculty of understanding activity conﬁgurations
from the outside is one important reason why competitive advantages are
sustainable.
Today, more than a decade after Competitive Advantage was published,
the ideas in the book are still percolating. In the competition and strategy
ﬁeld, where there has been a strong tendency to dichotomize external
factors (industry structure and positioning) and internal ones (core


competencies, critical resources), some argue that the internal factors are
more 
important. 
Contrasting 
Competitive 
Strategy 
and 
core
competencies/critical resources misses the mark, and sets up a false
dichotomy.
It is simplistic to think that positions (product market competition) and
supposedly more enduring internal skills, reputation, and organizational
competencies can be disconnected. In fact, activities connect the two. Is a
ﬁrm a collection of activities or a set of resources and capabilities? Clearly,
a ﬁrm is both. But activities are what ﬁrms do, and they deﬁne the resources
and capabilities that are relevant. Activities provide the connections
between factor markets and product market positions. Activities are
observable, operational, and directly connected to cost and differentiation. It
is a particular strategy that makes most resources and capabilities valuable,
and their value is diminished by a different strategy. If resources or
capabilities are isolated from activities, strategy, and industry, companies
become inward-looking. There is much to learn from thinking about a
ﬁrm’s stock of assets, but not in isolation.
Competitive Advantage provides the architecture for describing and
assessing strategy, linking it to company behavior, and understanding the
sources of competitive advantage. It provides the foundation needed to go
deeper. Looking back, it is clear that Competitive Advantage has led me to
the next level of questions that are the subject of my current research: Why
do activity differences leading to distinct competitive positions arise? When
do tradeoffs occur between positions? What makes activities hard to
imitate? How do activities ﬁt together? How are unique positions developed
over time?6
One thing is certain. There is still more to learn about why ﬁrms
outperform one another. There is even more to be learned about the
processes by which ﬁrms discover unique strategies, put them in place, and
modify them when conditions change. The answers will be complex, and
good answers will involve integrative thinking.
Michael E. Porter
Brookline, Massachusetts
January 1998


Preface
Competitive advantage is at the heart of a ﬁrm’s performance in competitive
markets. After several decades of vigorous expansion and prosperity,
however, many ﬁrms lost sight of competitive advantage in their scramble
for growth and pursuit of diversiﬁcation. Today the importance of
competitive advantage could hardly be greater. Firms throughout the world
face slower growth as well as domestic and global competitors that are no
longer acting as if the expanding pie were big enough for all.
This book is about how a ﬁrm can create and sustain a competitive
advantage. It grows out of my research and practice in competitive strategy
over the past decade. The book reﬂects my deepening belief that the failure
of many ﬁrms’ strategies stems from an inability to translate a broad
competitive strategy into the speciﬁc action steps required to gain
competitive advantage. The concepts in this book aim to build a bridge
between strategy formulation and implementation, rather than treating the
two subjects separately as has been characteristic of much of the writing in
the ﬁeld.
My earlier book, Competitive Strategy, set forth a framework for
analyzing industries and competitors. It also described three generic
strategies 
for 
achieving 
competitive 
advantage: 
cost 
leadership,
differentiation, and focus. Competitive Advantage is about how a ﬁrm
actually puts the generic strategies into practice. How does a ﬁrm gain a
sustainable cost advantage? How can it differentiate itself from
competitors? How does a ﬁrm choose a segment so that competitive
advantage grows out of a focus strategy? When and how can a ﬁrm gain
competitive advantage from competing with a coordinated strategy in
related industries? How is uncertainty introduced into the pursuit of
