# Preface

competitive advantage? How can a ﬁrm defend its competitive position?
These are some of the questions that preoccupy this book.
Competitive advantage grows fundamentally out of the value a ﬁrm is
able to create for its buyers. It may take the form of prices lower than
competitors’ for equivalent beneﬁts or the provision of unique beneﬁts that
more than offset a premium price. This book uses a tool I call the value
chain to disaggregate buyers, suppliers, and a ﬁrm into the discrete but
interrelated activities from which value stems. The value chain will be a
recurring theme throughout the book, and with it the speciﬁc sources of
competitive advantage and how they relate to buyer value.
Competitive advantage is hardly a new subject. In one way or another,
many books about business deal directly or indirectly with it. The control of
cost has long been of concern, as has differentiation and segmentation. This
book cuts across many disciplines, because marketing, production, control,
ﬁnance, and many other activities in a ﬁrm have a role in competitive
advantage. Similarly, a long tradition of research in business policy and in
industrial economics bears on this subject. However, competitive advantage
cannot be truly understood without combining all these disciplines into a
holistic view of the entire ﬁrm. By examining all the sources of competitive
advantage in a broad and integrated way, I hope to provide a new
perspective that draws from, rather than substitutes for, previous research. It
is not possible to acknowledge all the contributions in the various
disciplines that have inﬂuenced in some way the ideas presented here. This
book, however, would not have been possible without them.
This book is written for practitioners who are responsible for a ﬁrm’s
strategy and must decide how to gain competitive advantage, as well as
those who seek to understand ﬁrms and their performance better. Potential
sources of competitive advantage are everywhere in a ﬁrm. Every
department, facility, branch ofﬁce, and other organizational unit has a role
that must be deﬁned and understood. All employees, regardless of their
distance from the strategy formulation process, must recognize their role in
helping a ﬁrm achieve and sustain competitive advantage. Scholars working
on the subject of competition outside the strategy ﬁeld also need to be able
to relate their research to some overall concept of competitive advantage. I
hope that all these audiences will ﬁnd this book valuable.


I have had a great deal of help in writing this book. The Harvard
Business School has provided a uniquely fertile environment in which to
explore this topic. I have drawn heavily on the multidisciplinary tradition at
the School as well as the close connection between research and practice
that exists there. Dean John McArthur has not only been a friend and source
of encouragement to me for many years, but also extremely generous with
resources and in providing the opportunity to integrate my research closely
with my teaching responsibilities. Raymond Corey, Director of the Division
of Research, has also been a staunch and valued ally. My heritage in the
Business Policy group at Harvard has shaped my view of the subject, and I
am particularly grateful to C. Roland Christensen for his support and to
both he and Kenneth Andrews for sharing their wisdom with me. I have also
drawn heavily on my work in industrial economics, and the constant
intellectual stimulation of Richard Caves.
This book would not have been possible without the creative
contributions of a number of colleagues and friends who have worked
directly with me during the last several years. John R. Wells, Assistant
Professor at Harvard, has not only taught with me but contributed greatly to
the ideas in Chapters 3 and 9. John’s own research in competitive strategy
promises to make an important contribution to the ﬁeld. Pankaj Ghemawat,
Assistant Professor at Harvard, has also taught my strategy formulation
course with me as well as provided many useful comments. He is also doing
important research in the ﬁeld. Mark B. Fuller, formerly Assistant Professor
at Harvard and now at Monitor Company, has taught and worked with me
for many years. His ideas have had a major impact on Chapter 11 and have
inﬂuenced my thinking throughout the book. Catherine Hayden, also at
Monitor, has been a constant source of encouragement and comments. Her
ideas were of particular beneﬁt to me in Chapter 4.
Joseph B. Fuller has worked with me in research and course
development as well as in practicing in the strategy ﬁeld. He has been a
truly invaluable source of thoughtful comments and conceptual insights
throughout the writing of manuscript. Richard Rawlinson, Associates
Fellow at Harvard, has worked with me in my research as well as
commented perceptively on the entire book. Others who have given
generously of their time in commenting on the book and contributing ideas
include Mark Albion, Robert Eccles, Douglas Anderson, Elon Kohlberg,


and Richard Meyer, all Harvard colleagues. Michael Bell, Thomas Craig,
Mary Kearney, and Mark Thomas have most ably worked with me in
putting these ideas into practice, and contributed greatly to my thinking in
the process. Jane Kenney Austin, Eric Evans, and Paul Rosetti were
invaluable in commenting or in researching important topic areas. Finally, I
have beneﬁted from comments from colleagues at other schools, including
Richard Schmalensee and John Stengrevics.
I could not have stood up under the demands of preparing this book
without my assistant Kathleen Svensson. She has not only organized my
activities but also supervised the preparation of the manuscript. I am also
grateful to Robert Wallace, my editor, as well as to others at The Free Press,
for their patience and support in dealing with a sometimes recalcitrant
author. I must also thank my many able Harvard MBA and doctoral students
who have both stimulated my thinking and been a source of joy in using
these ideas. I also want to thank Deborah Zylberberg for her constant
encouragement. Finally, I owe a great deal to a number of thoughtful
practitioners who have shared their concerns and problems with me.


1
Competitive Strategy: The Core Concepts
Competition is at the core of the success or failure of ﬁrms. Competition
determines the appropriateness of a ﬁrm’s activities that can contribute to its
performance, such as innovations, a cohesive culture, or good
implementation. Competitive strategy is the search for a favorable
competitive position in an industry, the fundamental arena in which
competition occurs. Competitive strategy aims to establish a proﬁtable and
sustainable position against the forces that determine industry competition.
Two central questions underlie the choice of competitive strategy. The
ﬁrst is the attractiveness of industries for long-term proﬁtability and the
factors that determine it. Not all industries offer equal opportunities for
sustained proﬁtability, and the inherent proﬁtability of its industry is one
essential ingredient in determining the proﬁtability of a ﬁrm. The second
central question in competitive strategy is the determinants of relative
competitive position within an industry. In most industries, some ﬁrms are
much more proﬁtable than others, regardless of what the average
proﬁtability of the industry may be.
Neither question is sufﬁcient by itself to guide the choice of competitive
strategy. A ﬁrm in a very attractive industry may still not earn attractive
proﬁts if it has chosen a poor competitive position. Conversely, a ﬁrm in an
excellent competitive position may be in such a poor industry that it is not
very proﬁtable, and further efforts to enhance its position will be of little
beneﬁt.1 Both questions are dynamic; industry attractiveness and
competitive position change. Industries become more or less attractive over
time, and competitive position reﬂects an unending battle among
