# Chapter 1: Competitive Strategy: The Core Concepts

competitors. Even long periods of stability can be abruptly ended by
competitive moves.
Both industry attractiveness and competitive position can be shaped by a
ﬁrm, and this is what makes the choice of competitive strategy both
challenging and exciting. While industry attractiveness is partly a reﬂection
of factors over which a ﬁrm has little inﬂuence, competitive strategy has
considerable power to make an industry more or less attractive. At the same
time, a ﬁrm can clearly improve or erode its position within an industry
through its choice of strategy. Competitive strategy, then, not only responds
to the environment but also attempts to shape that environment in a ﬁrm’s
favor.
These two central questions in competitive strategy have been at the core
of my research. My book Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing
Industries and Competitors presents an analytical framework for
understanding industries and competitors, and formulating an overall
competitive strategy. It describes the ﬁve competitive forces that determine
the attractiveness of an industry and their underlying causes, as well as how
these forces change over time and can be inﬂuenced through strategy. It
identiﬁes three broad generic strategies for achieving competitive
advantage. It also shows how to analyze competitors and to predict and
inﬂuence their behavior, and how to map competitors into strategic groups
and assess the most attractive positions in an industry. It then goes on to
apply the framework to a range of important types of industry environments
that I term structural settings, including fragmented industries, emerging
industries, industries undergoing a transition to maturity, declining
industries, and global industries. Finally, the book examines the important
strategic decisions that occur in the context of an industry, including vertical
integration, capacity expansion, and entry.
This book takes the framework in Competitive Strategy as a starting
point. The central theme of this book is how a ﬁrm can actually create and
sustain a competitive advantage in its industry—how it can implement the
broad generic strategies. My aim is to build a bridge between strategy and
implementation, rather than treat these two subjects independently or
consider implementation scarcely at all as has been characteristic of much
previous research in the ﬁeld.


Competitive advantage grows fundamentally out of value a ﬁrm is able
to create for its buyers that exceeds the ﬁrm’s cost of creating it. Value is
what buyers are willing to pay, and superior value stems from offering
lower prices than competitors for equivalent beneﬁts or providing unique
beneﬁts that more than offset a higher price. There are two basic types of
competitive advantage: cost leadership and differentiation. This book
describes how a ﬁrm can gain a cost advantage or how it can differentiate
itself. It describes how the choice of competitive scope, or the range of a
ﬁrm’s activities, can play a powerful role in determining competitive
advantage. Finally, it translates these concepts, combined with those in my
earlier book, into overall implications for offensive and defensive
competitive strategy, including the role of uncertainty in inﬂuencing
strategic choices. This book considers not only competitive strategy in an
individual industry but also corporate strategy for the diversiﬁed ﬁrm.
Competitive advantage in one industry can be strongly enhanced by
interrelationships with business units competing in related industries, if
these interrelationships can actually be achieved. Interrelationships among
business units are the principal means by which a diversiﬁed ﬁrm creates
value, and thus provide the underpinnings for corporate strategy. I will
describe how interrelationships among business units can be identiﬁed and
translated into a corporate strategy, as well as how interrelationships can be
achieved in practice despite the organizational impediments to doing so that
are present in many diversiﬁed ﬁrms.
Though the emphases of this book and my earlier book are different,
they are strongly complementary. The emphasis of Competitive Strategy is
on industry structure and competitor analysis in a variety of industry
environments, though it contains many implications for competitive
advantage. This book begins by assuming an understanding of industry
structure and competitor behavior, and is preoccupied with how to translate
that understanding into a competitive advantage. Actions to create
competitive advantage often have important consequences for industry
structure and competitive reaction, however, and thus I will return to these
subjects frequently.
This book can be read independently of Competitive Strategy, but its
power to aid practitioners in formulating strategy is diminished if the reader
is not familiar with the core concepts presented in the earlier book. In this


chapter, I will describe and elaborate on some of those concepts. The
discussion of the core concepts will also provide a good means of
introducing the concepts and techniques in this book. In the process, I will
address some of the most important questions that arise in applying the core
concepts in practice. Thus even readers familiar with my earlier book may
ﬁnd the review of interest.
The Structural Analysis of Industries
The ﬁrst fundamental determinant of a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability is industry
attractiveness. Competitive strategy must grow out of a sophisticated
understanding of the rules of competition that determine an industry’s
attractiveness. The ultimate aim of competitive strategy is to cope with and,
ideally, to change those rules in the ﬁrm’s favor. In any industry, whether it
is domestic or international or produces a product or a service,2 the rules of
competition are embodied in ﬁve competitive forces: the entry of new
competitors, the threat of substitutes, the bargaining power of buyers, the
bargaining power of suppliers, and the rivalry among the existing
competitors (see Figure 1–1).
The collective strength of these ﬁve competitive forces determines the
ability of ﬁrms in an industry to earn, on average, rates of return on
investment in excess of the cost of capital. The strength of the ﬁve forces
varies from industry to industry, and can change as an industry evolves. The
result is that all industries are not alike from the standpoint of inherent
proﬁtability. In industries where the ﬁve forces are favorable, such as
pharmaceuticals, soft drinks, and data base publishing, many competitors
earn attractive returns. But in industries where pressure from one or more of
the forces is intense, such as rubber, steel, and video games, few ﬁrms
command attractive returns despite the best efforts of management. Industry
proﬁtability is not a function of what the product looks like or whether it
embodies high or low technology, but of industry structure. Some very
mundane industries such as postage meters and grain trading are extremely
proﬁtable, while some more glamorous, high-technology industries such as
personal computers and cable television are not proﬁtable for many
participants.
