# The Structural Analysis of Industries

Figure 1–1. The Five Competitive Forces that Determine Industry Proﬁtability
The ﬁve forces determine industry proﬁtability because they inﬂuence
the prices, costs, and required investment of ﬁrms in an industry—the
elements of return on investment. Buyer power inﬂuences the prices that
ﬁrms can charge, for example, as does the threat of substitution. The power
of buyers can also inﬂuence cost and investment, because powerful buyers
demand costly service. The bargaining power of suppliers determines the
costs of raw materials and other inputs. The intensity of rivalry inﬂuences
prices as well as the costs of competing in areas such as plant, product
development, advertising, and sales force. The threat of entry places a limit
on prices, and shapes the investment required to deter entrants.
The strength of each of the ﬁve competitive forces is a function of
industry structure, or the underlying economic and technical characteristics
of an industry. Its important elements are shown in Figure 1–2.3 Industry
structure is relatively stable, but can change over time as an industry
evolves. Structural change shifts the overall and relative strength of the
competitive forces, and can thus positively or negatively inﬂuence industry
proﬁtability. The industry trends that are the most important for strategy are
those that affect industry structure.


Figure 1–2. Elements of Industry Structure


If the ﬁve competitive forces and their structural determinants were
solely a function of intrinsic industry characteristics, then competitive
strategy would rest heavily on picking the right industry and understanding
the ﬁve forces better than competitors. But while these are surely important
tasks for any ﬁrm, and are the essence of competitive strategy in some
industries, a ﬁrm is usually not a prisoner of its industry’s structure. Firms,
through their strategies, can inﬂuence the ﬁve forces. If a ﬁrm can shape
structure, it can fundamentally change an industry’s attractiveness for better
or for worse. Many successful strategies have shifted the rules of
competition in this way.
Figure 1–2 highlights all the elements of industry structure that may
drive competition in an industry. In any particular industry, not all of the
ﬁve forces will be equally important and the particular structural factors that
are important will differ. Every industry is unique and has its own unique
structure. The ﬁve-forces framework allows a ﬁrm to see through the
complexity and pinpoint those factors that are critical to competition in its
industry, as well as to identify those strategic innovations that would most
improve the industry’s—and its own—proﬁtability. The ﬁve-forces
framework does not eliminate the need for creativity in ﬁnding new ways of
competing in an industry. Instead, it directs managers’ creative energies
toward those aspects of industry structure that are most important to long-
run proﬁtability. The framework aims, in the process, to raise the odds of
discovering a desirable strategic innovation.
Strategies that change industry structure can be a double-edged sword,
because a ﬁrm can destroy industry structure and proﬁtability as readily as
it can improve it. A new product design that undercuts entry barriers or
increases the volatility of rivalry, for example, may undermine the long-run
proﬁtability of an industry, though the initiator may enjoy higher proﬁts
temporarily. Or a sustained period of price cutting can undermine
differentiation. In the tobacco industry, for example, generic cigarettes are a
potentially serious threat to industry structure. Generics may enhance the
price sensitivity of buyers, trigger price competition, and erode the high
advertising barriers that have kept out new entrants.4 Joint ventures entered
into by major aluminum producers to spread risk and lower capital cost may
have similarly undermined industry structure. The majors invited a number
of potentially dangerous new competitors into the industry and helped them


overcome the signiﬁcant entry barriers to doing so. Joint ventures also can
raise exit barriers because all the participants in a plant must agree before it
can be closed down.
Often ﬁrms make strategic choices without considering the long-term
consequences for industry structure. They see a gain in their competitive
position if a move is successful, but they fail to anticipate the consequences
of competitive reaction. If imitation of a move by major competitors has the
effect of wrecking industry structure, then everyone is worse off. Such
industry “destroyers” are usually second-tier ﬁrms that are searching for
ways to overcome major competitive disadvantages, ﬁrms that have
encountered serious problems and are desperately seeking solutions, or
“dumb” competitors that do not know their costs or have unrealistic
assumptions about the future. In the tobacco industry, for example, the
Liggett Group (a distant follower) has encouraged the trend toward
generics.
The ability of ﬁrms to shape industry structure places a particular burden
on industry leaders. Leaders’ actions can have a disproportionate impact on
structure, because of their size and inﬂuence over buyers, suppliers, and
other competitors. At the same time, leaders’ large market shares guarantee
that anything that changes overall industry structure will affect them as
well. A leader, then, must constantly balance its own competitive position
against the health of the industry as a whole. Often leaders are better off
taking actions to improve or protect industry structure rather than seeking
greater competitive advantage for themselves. Such industry leaders as
Coca-Cola and Campbell’s Soup appear to have followed this principle.
Industry Structure and Buyer Needs
It has often been said that satisfying buyer needs is at the core of success
in business endeavor. How does this relate to the concept of industry
structural analysis? Satisfying buyer needs is indeed a prerequisite to the
viability of an industry and the ﬁrms within it. Buyers must be willing to
pay a price for a product that exceeds its cost of production, or an industry
will not survive in the long run. Chapter 4 will describe in detail how a ﬁrm
can differentiate itself by satisfying buyer needs better than its competitors.


Satisfying buyer needs may be a prerequisite for industry proﬁtability,
but in itself is not sufﬁcient. The crucial question in determining
proﬁtability is whether ﬁrms can capture the value they create for buyers, or
whether this value is competed away to others. Industry structure
determines who captures the value. The threat of entry determines the
likelihood that new ﬁrms will enter an industry and compete away the
value, either passing it on to buyers in the form of lower prices or
dissipating it by raising the costs of competing. The power of buyers
determines the extent to which they retain most of the value created for
themselves, leaving ﬁrms in an industry only modest returns. The threat of
substitutes determines the extent to which some other product can meet the
same buyer needs, and thus places a ceiling on the amount a buyer is
willing to pay for an industry’s product. The power of suppliers determines
the extent to which value created for buyers will be appropriated by
suppliers rather than by ﬁrms in an industry. Finally, the intensity of rivalry
acts similarly to the threat of entry. It determines the extent to which ﬁrms
already in an industry will compete away the value they create for buyers
among themselves, passing it on to buyers in lower prices or dissipating it
in higher costs of competing.
Industry structure, then, determines who keeps what proportion of the
value a product creates for buyers. If an industry’s product does not create
much value for its buyers, there is little value to be captured by ﬁrms
regardless of the other elements of structure. If the product creates a lot of
value, structure becomes crucial. In some industries such as automobiles
and heavy trucks, ﬁrms create enormous value for their buyers but, on
average, capture very little of it for themselves through proﬁts. In other
industries such as bond rating services, medical equipment, and oil ﬁeld
services and equipment, ﬁrms also create high value for their buyers but
have historically captured a good proportion of it. In oil ﬁeld services and
equipment, for example, many products can signiﬁcantly reduce the cost of
drilling. Because industry structure has been favorable, many ﬁrms in the
oil ﬁeld service and equipment sector have been able to retain a share of
these savings in the form of high returns. Recently, however, the structural
attractiveness of many industries in the oil ﬁeld services and equipment
sector has eroded as a result of falling demand, new entrants, eroding
product differentiation, and greater buyer price sensitivity. Despite the fact


that products offered still create enormous value for the buyer, both ﬁrm and
industry proﬁts have fallen signiﬁcantly.
Industry Structure and the Supply/Demand Balance
Another commonly held view about industry proﬁtability is that proﬁts
are a function of the balance between supply and demand. If demand is
greater than supply, this leads to high proﬁtability. Yet, the long-term
supply/demand balance is strongly inﬂuenced by industry structure, as are
the consequences of a supply/demand imbalance for proﬁtability. Hence,
even though short-term ﬂuctuations in supply and demand can affect short-
term proﬁtability, industry structure underlies long-term proﬁtability.
Supply and demand change constantly, adjusting to each other. Industry
structure determines how rapidly competitors add new supply. The height of
entry barriers underpins the likelihood that new entrants will enter an
industry and bid down prices. The intensity of rivalry plays a major role in
determining whether existing ﬁrms will expand capacity aggressively or
choose to maintain proﬁtability. Industry structure also determines how
rapidly competitors will retire excess supply. Exit barriers keep ﬁrms from
leaving an industry when there is too much capacity, and prolong periods of
excess capacity. In oil tanker shipping, for example, the exit barriers are
very high because of the specialization of assets. This has translated into
short peaks and long troughs of prices. Thus industry structure shapes the
supply/demand balance and the duration of imbalances.
The consequences of an imbalance between supply and demand for
industry proﬁtability also differs widely depending on industry structure. In
some industries, a small amount of excess capacity triggers price wars and
low proﬁtability. These are industries where there are structural pressures
for intense rivalry or powerful buyers. In other industries, periods of excess
capacity have relatively little impact on proﬁtability because of favorable
structure. In oil tools, ball valves, and many other oil ﬁeld equipment
products, for example, there has been intense price cutting during the recent
sharp downturn. In drill bits, however, there has been relatively little
discounting. Hughes Tool, Smith International, and Baker International are
good competitors (see Chapter 6) operating in a favorable industry


structure. Industry structure also determines the proﬁtability of excess
demand. In a boom, for example, favorable structure allows ﬁrms to reap
extraordinary proﬁts, while a poor structure restricts the ability to capitalize
on it. The presence of powerful suppliers or the presence of substitutes, for
example, can mean that the fruits of a boom pass to others. Thus industry
structure is fundamental to both the speed of adjustment of supply to
demand and the relationship between capacity utilization and proﬁtability.
Generic Competitive Strategies
The second central question in competitive strategy is a ﬁrm’s relative
position within its industry. Positioning determines whether a ﬁrm’s
proﬁtability is above or below the industry average. A ﬁrm that can position
itself well may earn high rates of return even though industry structure is
unfavorable and the average proﬁtability of the industry is therefore modest.
The fundamental basis of above-average performance in the long run is
sustainable competitive advantage.5 Though a ﬁrm can have a myriad of
strengths and weaknesses vis-à-vis its competitors, there are two basic types
of competitive advantage a ﬁrm can possess: low cost or differentiation. The
signiﬁcance of any strength or weakness a ﬁrm possesses is ultimately a
function of its impact on relative cost or differentiation. Cost advantage and
differentiation in turn stem from industry structure. They result from a
ﬁrm’s ability to cope with the ﬁve forces better than its rivals.
The two basic types of competitive advantage combined with the scope
of activities for which a ﬁrm seeks to achieve them lead to three generic
strategies for achieving above-average performance in an industry: cost
leadership, differentiation, and focus. The focus strategy has two variants,
cost focus and differentiation focus. The generic strategies are shown in
Figure 1–3.
Each of the generic strategies involves a fundamentally different route to
competitive advantage, combining a choice about the type of competitive
advantage sought with the scope of the strategic target in which competitive
advantage is to be achieved. The cost leadership and differentiation
strategies seek competitive advantage in a broad range of industry
segments, while focus strategies aim at cost advantage (cost focus) or
