# Generic Competitive Strategies

differentiation (differentiation focus) in a narrow segment. The speciﬁc
actions required to implement each generic strategy vary widely from
industry to industry, as do the feasible generic strategies in a particular
industry. While selecting and implementing a generic strategy is far from
simple, however, they are the logical routes to competitive advantage that
must be probed in any industry.
Figure 1–3. Three Generic Strategies
The notion underlying the concept of generic strategies is that
competitive advantage is at the heart of any strategy, and achieving
competitive advantage requires a ﬁrm to make a choice—if a ﬁrm is to
attain a competitive advantage, it must make a choice about the type of
competitive advantage it seeks to attain and the scope within which it will
attain it. Being “all things to all people” is a recipe for strategic mediocrity
and below-average performance, because it often means that a ﬁrm has no
competitive advantage at all.
Cost Leadership
Cost leadership is perhaps the clearest of the three generic strategies. In
it, a ﬁrm sets out to become the low-cost producer in its industry. The ﬁrm
has a broad scope and serves many industry segments, and may even
operate in related industries—the ﬁrm’s breadth is often important to its
cost advantage. The sources of cost advantage are varied and depend on the


structure of the industry. They may include the pursuit of economies of
scale, proprietary technology, preferential access to raw materials, and other
factors I will describe in detail in Chapter 3. In TV sets, for example, cost
leadership requires efﬁcient size picture tube facilities, a low-cost design,
automated assembly, and global scale over which to amortize R&D. In
security guard services, cost advantage requires extremely low overhead, a
plentiful source of low-cost labor, and efﬁcient training procedures because
of high turnover. Low-cost producer status involves more than just going
down the learning curve. A low-cost producer must ﬁnd and exploit all
sources of cost advantage. Low-cost producers typically sell a standard, or
no-frills, product and place considerable emphasis on reaping scale or
absolute cost advantages from all sources.
If a ﬁrm can achieve and sustain overall cost leadership, then it will be
an above-average performer in its industry provided it can command prices
at or near the industry average. At equivalent or lower prices than its rivals,
a cost leader’s low-cost position translates into higher returns. A cost leader,
however, cannot ignore the bases of differentiation. If its product is not
perceived as comparable or acceptable by buyers, a cost leader will be
forced to discount prices well below competitors’ to gain sales. This may
nullify the beneﬁts of its favorable cost position. Texas Instruments (in
watches) and Northwest Airlines (in air transportation) are two low-cost
ﬁrms that fell into this trap. Texas Instruments could not overcome its
disadvantage in differentiation and exited the watch industry. Northwest
Airlines recognized its problem in time, and has instituted efforts to
improve marketing, passenger service, and service to travel agents to make
its product more comparable to those of its competitors.
A cost leader must achieve parity or proximity in the bases of
differentiation relative to its competitors to be an above-average performer,
even though it relies on cost leadership for its competitive advantage. Parity
in the bases of differentiation allows a cost leader to translate its cost
advantage directly into higher proﬁts than competitors’.6 Proximity in
differentiation means that the price discount necessary to achieve an
acceptable market share does not offset a cost leader’s cost advantage and
hence the cost leader earns above-average returns.
The strategic logic of cost leadership usually requires that a ﬁrm be the
cost leader, not one of several ﬁrms vying for this position.7 Many ﬁrms


have made serious strategic errors by failing to recognize this. When there
is more than one aspiring cost leader, rivalry among them is usually ﬁerce
because every point of market share is viewed as crucial. Unless one ﬁrm
can gain a cost lead and “persuade” others to abandon their strategies, the
consequences for proﬁtability (and long-run industry structure) can be
disastrous, as has been the case in a number of petrochemical industries.
Thus cost leadership is a strategy particularly dependent on preemption,
unless major technological change allows a ﬁrm to radically change its cost
position.
Differentiation
The second generic strategy is differentiation. In a differentiation
strategy, a ﬁrm seeks to be unique in its industry along some dimensions
that are widely valued by buyers. It selects one or more attributes that many
buyers in an industry perceive as important, and uniquely positions itself to
meet those needs. It is rewarded for its uniqueness with a premium price.
The means for differentiation are peculiar to each industry.
Differentiation can be based on the product itself, the delivery system by
which it is sold, the marketing approach, and a broad range of other factors.
In construction equipment, for example, Caterpillar Tractor’s differentiation
is based on product durability, service, spare parts availability, and an
excellent dealer network. In cosmetics, differentiation tends to be based
more on product image and the positioning of counters in the stores. I will
describe how a ﬁrm can create sustainable differentiation in Chapter 4.
A ﬁrm that can achieve and sustain differentiation will be an above-
average performer in its industry if its price premium exceeds the extra
costs incurred in being unique. A differentiator, therefore, must always seek
ways of differentiating that lead to a price premium greater than the cost of
differentiating. A differentiator cannot ignore its cost position, because its
premium prices will be nulliﬁed by a markedly inferior cost position. A
differentiator thus aims at cost parity or proximity relative to its
competitors, by reducing cost in all areas that do not affect differentiation.
The logic of the differentiation strategy requires that a ﬁrm choose
attributes in which to differentiate itself that are different from its rivals’. A


ﬁrm must truly be unique at something or be perceived as unique if it is to
expect a premium price. In contrast to cost leadership, however, there can
be more than one successful differentiation strategy in an industry if there
are a number of attributes that are widely valued by buyers.
Focus
The third generic strategy is focus. This strategy is quite different from
the others because it rests on the choice of a narrow competitive scope
within an industry. The focuser selects a segment or group of segments in
the industry and tailors its strategy to serving them to the exclusion of
others. By optimizing its strategy for the target segments, the focuser seeks
to achieve a competitive advantage in its target segments even though it
does not possess a competitive advantage overall.
The focus strategy has two variants. In cost focus a ﬁrm seeks a cost
advantage in its target segment, while in differentiation focus a ﬁrm seeks
differentiation in its target segment. Both variants of the focus strategy rest
on differences between a focuser’s target segments and other segments in
the industry. The target segments must either have buyers with unusual
needs or else the production and delivery system that best serves the target
segment must differ from that of other industry segments. Cost focus
exploits differences in cost behavior in some segments, while differentiation
focus exploits the special needs of buyers in certain segments. Such
differences imply that the segments are poorly served by broadly-targeted
competitors who serve them at the same time as they serve others. The
focuser can thus achieve competitive advantage by dedicating itself to the
segments exclusively. Breadth of target is clearly a matter of degree, but the
essence of focus is the exploitation of a narrow target’s differences from the
balance of the industry.8 Narrow focus in and of itself is not sufﬁcient for
above-average performance.
A good example of a focuser who has exploited differences in the
production process that best serves different segments is Hammermill
Paper. Hammermill has increasingly been moving toward relatively low-
volume, high-quality specialty papers, where the larger paper companies
with higher volume machines face a stiff cost penalty for short production


runs. Hammermill’s equipment is more suited to shorter runs with frequent
setups.
A focuser takes advantage of suboptimization in either direction by
broadly-targeted competitors. Competitors may be underperforming in
meeting the needs of a particular segment, which opens the possibility for
differentiation 
focus. 
Broadly-targeted 
competitors 
may 
also 
be
overperforming in meeting the needs of a segment, which means that they
are bearing higher than necessary cost in serving it. An opportunity for cost
focus may be present in just meeting the needs of such a segment and no
more.
If a focuser’s target segment is not different from other segments, then
the focus strategy will not succeed. In soft drinks, for example, Royal
Crown has focused on cola drinks, while Coca-Cola and Pepsi have broad
product lines with many ﬂavored drinks. Royal Crown’s segment, however,
can be well served by Coke and Pepsi at the same time they are serving
other segments. Hence Coke and Pepsi enjoy competitive advantages over
Royal Crown in the cola segment due to the economies of having a broader
line.9
If a ﬁrm can achieve sustainable cost leadership (cost focus) or
differentiation (differentiation focus) in its segment and the segment is
structurally attractive, then the focuser will be an above-average performer
in its industry. Segment structural attractiveness is a necessary condition
because some segments in an industry are much less proﬁtable than others.
There is often room for several sustainable focus strategies in an industry,
provided that focusers choose different target segments. Most industries
have a variety of segments, and each one that involves a different buyer
need or a different optimal production or delivery system is a candidate for
a focus strategy. How to deﬁne segments and choose a sustainable focus
strategy is described in detail in Chapter 7.
Stuck in the Middle
A ﬁrm that engages in each generic strategy but fails to achieve any of
them is “stuck in the middle.” It possesses no competitive advantage. This
strategic position is usually a recipe for below-average performance. A ﬁrm


that is stuck in the middle will compete at a disadvantage because the cost
leader, differentiators, or focusers will be better positioned to compete in
any segment. If a ﬁrm that is stuck in the middle is lucky enough to discover
a proﬁtable product or buyer, competitors with a sustainable competitive
advantage will quickly eliminate the spoils. In most industries, quite a few
competitors are stuck in the middle.
A ﬁrm that is stuck in the middle will earn attractive proﬁts only if the
structure of its industry is highly favorable, or if the ﬁrm is fortunate
enough to have competitors that are also stuck in the middle. Usually,
however, such a ﬁrm will be much less proﬁtable than rivals achieving one
of the generic strategies. Industry maturity tends to widen the performance
differences between ﬁrms with a generic strategy and those that are stuck in
the middle, because it exposes ill-conceived strategies that have been
carried along by rapid growth.
Becoming stuck in the middle is often a manifestation of a ﬁrm’s
unwillingness to make choices about how to compete. It tries for
competitive advantage through every means and achieves none, because
achieving different types of competitive advantage usually requires
inconsistent actions. Becoming stuck in the middle also afﬂicts successful
ﬁrms, who compromise their generic strategy for the sake of growth or
prestige. A classic example is Laker Airways, which began with a clear cost
focus strategy based on no-frills operation in the North Atlantic market,
aimed at a particular segment of the traveling public that was extremely
price-sensitive. Over time, however, Laker began adding frills, new
services, and new routes. It blurred its image, and suboptimized its service
and delivery system. The consequences were disastrous, and Laker
eventually went bankrupt.
The temptation to blur a generic strategy, and therefore become stuck in
the middle, is particularly great for a focuser once it has dominated its target
segments. Focus involves deliberately limiting potential sales volume.
Success can lead a focuser to lose sight of the reasons for its success and
compromise its focus strategy for growth’s sake. Rather than compromise
its generic strategy, a ﬁrm is usually better off ﬁnding new industries in
which to grow where it can use its generic strategy again or exploit
interrelationships.


Pursuit of More Than One Generic Strategy
Each generic strategy is a fundamentally different approach to creating
and sustaining a competitive advantage, combining the type of competitive
advantage a ﬁrm seeks and the scope of its strategic target. Usually a ﬁrm
must make a choice among them, or it will become stuck in the middle. The
beneﬁts of optimizing the ﬁrm’s strategy for a particular target segment
(focus) cannot be gained if a ﬁrm is simultaneously serving a broad range of
segments (cost leadership or differentiation). Sometimes a ﬁrm may be able
to create two largely separate business units within the same corporate
entity, each with a different generic strategy. A good example is the British
hotel ﬁrm Trusthouse Forte, which operates ﬁve separate hotel chains each
targeted at a different segment. However, unless a ﬁrm strictly separates the
units pursuing different generic strategies, it may compromise the ability of
any of them to achieve its competitive advantage. A suboptimized approach
to competing, made likely by the spillover among units of corporate policies
and culture, will lead to becoming stuck in the middle.
Achieving cost leadership and differentiation are also usually
inconsistent, because differentiation is usually costly. To be unique and
command a price premium, a differentiator deliberately elevates costs, as
Caterpillar has done in construction equipment. Conversely, cost leadership
often requires a ﬁrm to forego some differentiation by standardizing its
product, reducing marketing overhead, and the like.
Reducing cost does not always involve a sacriﬁce in differentiation.
Many ﬁrms have discovered ways to reduce cost not only without hurting
their differentiation but while actually raising it, by using practices that are
both more efﬁcient and effective or employing a different technology.
Sometimes dramatic cost savings can be achieved with no impact on
differentiation at all if a ﬁrm has not concentrated on cost reduction
previously. However, cost reduction is not the same as achieving a cost
advantage. When faced with capable competitors also striving for cost
leadership, a ﬁrm will ultimately reach the point where further cost
reduction requires a sacriﬁce in differentiation. It is at this point that the
generic strategies become inconsistent and a ﬁrm must make a choice.
If a ﬁrm can achieve cost leadership and differentiation simultaneously,
the rewards are great because the beneﬁts are additive—differentiation leads


to premium prices at the same time that cost leadership implies lower costs.
An example of a ﬁrm that has achieved both a cost advantage and
differentiation in its segments is Crown Cork and Seal in the metal
container industry. Crown has targeted the so-called “hard to hold” uses of
cans in the beer, soft drink, and aerosol industries. It manufactures only
steel cans rather than both steel and aluminum. In its target segments,
Crown has differentiated itself based on service, technological assistance,
and offering a full line of steel cans, crowns, and canning machinery.
Differentiation of this type would be much more difﬁcult to achieve in other
industry segments which have different needs. At the same time, Crown has
dedicated its facilities to producing only the types of cans demanded by
buyers in its chosen segments and has aggressively invested in modern two-
piece steel canning technology. As a result, Crown has probably also
achieved low-cost producer status in its segments.
There are three conditions under which a ﬁrm can simultaneously
achieve both cost leadership and differentiation:
Competitors are stuck in the middle. Where competitors are stuck in the
middle, none is well enough positioned to force a ﬁrm to the point where
cost and differentiation become inconsistent. This was the case with Crown
Cork. Its major competitors were not investing in low-cost steel can
production technology, so Crown achieved cost leadership without having
to sacriﬁce differentiation in the process. Were its competitors pursuing an
aggressive cost leadership strategy, however, an attempt by Crown to be
both low-cost and differentiated might have doomed it to becoming stuck in
the middle. Cost reduction opportunities that did not sacriﬁce differentiation
would have already been adopted by Crown’s competitors.
While stuck-in-the-middle competitors can allow a ﬁrm to achieve both
differentiation and low cost, this state of affairs is often temporary.
Eventually a competitor will choose a generic strategy and begin to
implement it well, exposing the tradeoffs between cost and differentiation.
Thus a ﬁrm must choose the type of competitive advantage it intends to
preserve in the long run. The danger in facing weak competitors is that a
ﬁrm will begin to compromise its cost position or differentiation to achieve
both and leave itself vulnerable to the emergence of a capable competitor.


Cost is strongly affected by share or interrelationships. Cost leadership
and differentiation may also be achieved simultaneously where cost position
is heavily determined by market share, rather than by product design, level
of technology, service provided, or other factors. If one ﬁrm can open up a
big market share advantage, the cost advantages of share in some activities
allow the ﬁrm to incur added costs elsewhere and still maintain net cost
leadership, or share reduces the cost of differentiating relative to
competitors (see Chapter 4). In a related situation, cost leadership and
differentiation can be achieved at the same time when there are important
interrelationships between industries that one competitor can exploit and
others cannot (see Chapter 9). Unmatched interrelationships can lower the
cost of differentiation or offset the higher cost of differentiation.
Nonetheless, simultaneous pursuit of cost leadership and differentiation is
always vulnerable to capable competitors who make a choice and invest
aggressively to implement it, matching the share or interrelationship.
A ﬁrm pioneers a major innovation. Introducing a signiﬁcant
technological innovation can allow a ﬁrm to lower cost and enhance
differentiation at the same time, and perhaps achieve both strategies.
Introducing new automated manufacturing technologies can have this
effect, as can the introduction of new information system technology to
manage logistics or design products on the computer. Innovative new
practices unconnected to technology can also have this effect. Forging
cooperative relations with suppliers can lower input costs and improve input
quality, for example, as described in Chapter 3.
The ability to be both low cost and differentiated is a function of being
the only ﬁrm with the new innovation, however. Once competitors also
introduce the innovation, the ﬁrm is again in the position of having to make
a tradeoff. Will its information system be designed to emphasize cost or
differentiation, for example, compared to the competitor’s information
system? The pioneer may be at a disadvantage if, in the pursuit of both low
cost and differentiation, its innovation has not recognized the possibility of
imitation. It may then be neither low cost nor differentiated once the
innovation is matched by competitors who pick one generic strategy.
A ﬁrm should always aggressively pursue all cost reduction
opportunities that do not sacriﬁce differentiation. A ﬁrm should also pursue


all differentiation opportunities that are not costly. Beyond this point,
however, a ﬁrm should be prepared to choose what its ultimate competitive
advantage will be and resolve the tradeoffs accordingly.
Sustainability
A generic strategy does not lead to above-average performance unless it
is sustainable vis-à-vis competitors, though actions that improve industry
structure may improve industrywide proﬁtability even if they are imitated.
The sustainability of the three generic strategies demands that a ﬁrm’s
competitive advantage resists erosion by competitor behavior or industry
evolution. Each generic strategy involves different risks which are shown in
Table 1–1.
The sustainability of a generic strategy requires that a ﬁrm possess some
barriers that make imitation of the strategy difﬁcult. Since barriers to
imitation are never insurmountable, however, it is usually necessary for a
ﬁrm to offer a moving target to its competitors by investing in order to
continually improve its position. Each generic strategy is also a potential
threat to the others—as Table 1–1 shows, for example, focusers must worry
about broadly-targeted competitors and vice versa. The factors that lead to
sustainability of each of the generic strategies will be discussed extensively
in Chapters 3, 4, and 7.
TABLE 1–1 Risks of the Generic Strategies
RISKS OF COST
LEADERSHIP
RISKS OF DIFFERENTIATION
RISKS OF FOCUS
Cost leadership is not sustained
• competitors imitate
• technology changes
• other bases for cost
leadership erode
Differentiation is not sustained
• competitors imitate
• bases for differentiation
become less important to
buyers
The focus strategy is imitated
The target segment becomes
structurally unattractive
• structure erodes
• demand disappears
Proximity in differentiation is
lost
Cost proximity is lost
Broadly-targeted competitors
overwhelm the segment
• the segment’s differences
from other segments narrow
• the advantages of a broad
line increase


Cost focusers achieve even
lower cost in segments
Differentiation focusers achieve
even greater differentiation in
segments
New focusers sub-segment the
industry
Table 1–1 can be used to analyze how to attack a competitor that
employs any of the generic strategies. A ﬁrm pursuing overall
differentiation, for example, can be attacked by ﬁrms who open up a large
cost gap, narrow the extent of differentiation, shift the differentiation
desired by buyers to other dimensions, or focus. Each generic strategy is
vulnerable to different types of attacks, as discussed in more detail in
Chapter 15.
In some industries, industry structure or the strategies of competitors
eliminate the possibility of achieving one or more of the generic strategies.
Occasionally no feasible way for one ﬁrm to gain a signiﬁcant cost
advantage exists, for example, because several ﬁrms are equally placed with
respect to scale economies, access to raw materials, or other cost drivers.
Similarly, an industry with few segments or only minor differences among
segments, such as low-density polyethylene, may offer few opportunities
for focus. Thus the mix of generic strategies will vary from industry to
industry.
In many industries, however, the three generic strategies can proﬁtably
coexist as long as ﬁrms pursue different ones or select different bases for
differentiation or focus. Industries in which several strong ﬁrms are
pursuing differentiation strategies based on different sources of buyer value
are often particulary proﬁtable. This tends to improve industry structure and
lead to stable industry competition. If two or more ﬁrms choose to pursue
the same generic strategy on the same basis, however, the result can be a
protracted and unproﬁtable battle. The worst situation is where several ﬁrms
are vying for overall cost leadership. The past and present choice of generic
strategies by competitors, then, has an impact on the choices available to a
ﬁrm and the cost of changing its position.
The concept of generic strategies is based on the premise that there are a
number of ways in which competitive advantage can be achieved,
depending on industry structure. If all ﬁrms in an industry followed the
principles of competitive strategy, each would pick different bases for
competitive advantage. While not all would succeed, the generic strategies


provide alternate routes to superior performance. Some strategic planning
concepts have been narrowly based on only one route to competitive
advantage, most notably cost. Such concepts not only fail to explain the
success of many ﬁrms, but they can also lead all ﬁrms in an industry to
pursue the same type of competitive advantage in the same way—with
predictably disastrous results.
Generic Strategies and Industry Evolution
Changes in industry structure can affect the bases on which generic
strategies are built and thus alter the balance among them. For example, the
advent of electronic controls and new image developing systems has greatly
eroded the importance of service as a basis for differentiation in copiers.
Structural change creates many of the risks shown in Table 1–1.10
Structural change can shift the relative balance among the generic
strategies in an industry, since it can alter the sustainability of a generic
strategy or the size of the competitive advantage that results from it. The
automobile industry provides a good example. Early in its history, leading
automobile ﬁrms followed differentiation strategies in the production of
expensive touring cars. Technological and market changes created the
potential for Henry Ford to change the rules of competition by adopting a
classic overall cost leadership strategy, based on low-cost production of a
standard model sold at low prices. Ford rapidly dominated the industry
worldwide. By the late 1920s, however, economic growth, growing
familiarity with the automobile, and technological change had created the
potential for General Motors to change the rules once more—it employed a
differentiation strategy based on a wide line, features, and premium prices.
Throughout this evolution, focused competitors also continued to succeed.
Another long-term battle among generic strategies has occurred in
general merchandising. K Mart and other discounters entered with cost
leadership strategies against Sears and conventional department stores,
featuring low overhead and nationally branded merchandise. K Mart,
however, now faces competition from more differentiated discounters who
sell fashion-oriented merchandise, such as Wal-Mart. At the same time,
focused discounters have entered and are selling such products as sporting


goods (Herman’s), health and beauty aids (CVS), and books (Barnes and
Noble). Catalog showrooms have also focused on appliances and jewelry,
employing low-cost strategies in those segments. Thus the bases for K
Mart’s competitive advantage have been compromised and it is having
difﬁculty outperforming the industry average.
Another more recent example of the jockeying among generic strategies
has occurred in vodka. Smirnoff has long been the differentiated producer in
the industry, based on early positioning as a high-class brand and heavy
supporting advertising. As growth has slowed and the industry has become
more competitive, however, private label vodkas and low price brands are
undermining Smirnoff’s position. At the same time, PepsiCo’s Stolichnaya
vodka has established an even more differentiated position than Smirnoff
through focus. Smirnoff is caught in a squeeze that is threatening its long-
standing superior performance. In response, it has introduced several new
brands, including a premium brand positioned against Stolichnaya.
Generic Strategies and Organizational Structure
Each generic strategy implies different skills and requirements for
success, which commonly translate into differences in organizational
structure and culture. Cost leadership usually implies tight control systems,
overhead minimization, pursuit of scale economies, and dedication to the
learning curve; these could be counterproductive for a ﬁrm attempting to
differentiate itself through a constant stream of creative new products.11
The organizational differences commonly implied by each generic
strategy carry a number of implications. Just as there are often economic
inconsistencies in achieving more than one generic strategy, a ﬁrm does not
want its organizational structure to be suboptimal because it combines
inconsistent practices. It has become fashionable to tie executive selection
and motivation to the “mission” of a business unit, usually expressed in
terms of building, holding, or harvesting market share. It is equally—if not
more—important to match executive selection and motivation to the generic
strategy being followed.
The concept of generic strategies also has implications for the role of
culture in competitive success. Culture, that difﬁcult to deﬁne set of norms


and attitudes that help shape an organization, has come to be viewed as an
important element of a successful ﬁrm. However, different cultures are
implied by different generic strategies. Differentiation may be facilitated by
a culture encouraging innovation, individuality, and risk-taking (Hewlett-
Packard), while cost leadership may be facilitated by frugality, discipline,
and attention to detail (Emerson Electric). Culture can powerfully reinforce
the competitive advantage a generic strategy seeks to achieve, if the culture
is an appropriate one. There is no such thing as a good or bad culture per se.
Culture is a means of achieving competitive advantage, not an end in itself.
The link between generic strategy and organization also has implications
for the diversiﬁed ﬁrm. There is a tendency for diversiﬁed ﬁrms to pursue
the same generic strategy in many of their business units, because skills and
conﬁdence are developed for pursuing a particular approach to competitive
advantage. Moreover, senior management often gains experience in
overseeing a particular type of strategy. Emerson Electric is well known for
its pursuit of cost leadership in many of its business units, for example, as is
H. J. Heinz.
Competing with the same generic strategy in many business units is one
way in which a diversiﬁed ﬁrm can add value to those units, a subject I will
discuss in Chapter 9 when I examine interrelationships among business
units. However, employing a common generic strategy entails some risks
that should be highlighted. One obvious risk is that a diversiﬁed ﬁrm will
impose a particular generic strategy on a business unit whose industry (or
initial position) will not support it. Another, more subtle risk is that a
business unit will be misunderstood because of circumstances in its industry
that are not consistent with the prevailing generic strategy. Worse yet, such
business units may have their strategies undermined by senior management.
Since each generic strategy often implies a different pattern of investments
and different types of executives and cultures, there is a risk that a business
unit that is “odd man out” will be forced to live with inappropriate
corporate policies and targets. For example, an across-the-board cost
reduction goal or ﬁrmwide personnel policies can be disadvantageous to a
business unit attempting to differentiate itself on quality and service, just as
policies toward overhead appropriate for differentiation can undermine a
business unit attempting to be the low-cost producer.


Generic Strategies and the Strategic Planning Process
Given the pivotal role of competitive advantage in superior performance,
the centerpiece of a ﬁrm’s strategic plan should be its generic strategy. The
generic strategy speciﬁes the fundamental approach to competitive
advantage a ﬁrm is pursuing, and provides the context for the actions to be
taken in each functional area. In practice, however, many strategic plans are
lists of action steps without a clear articulation of what competitive
advantage the ﬁrm has or seeks to achieve and how. Such plans are likely to
have overlooked the fundamental purpose of competitive strategy in the
process of going through the mechanics of planning. Similarly, many plans
are built on projections of future prices and costs that are almost invariably
wrong, rather than on a fundamental understanding of industry structure and
competitive advantage that will determine proﬁtability no matter what the
actual prices and costs turn out to be.
As part of their strategic planning processes, many diversiﬁed ﬁrms
categorize business units by using a system such as build, hold, or harvest.
These categorizations are often used to describe or summarize the strategy
of business units. While such categorizations may be useful in thinking
about resource allocation in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm, it is very misleading to
mistake them for strategies. A business unit’s strategy is the route to
competitive advantage that will determine its performance. Build, hold, and
harvest are the results of a generic strategy, or recognition of the inability to
achieve any generic strategy and hence of the need to harvest. Similarly,
acquisition and vertical integration are not strategies but means of achieving
them.
Another common practice in strategic planning is to use market share to
describe a business unit’s competitive position. Some ﬁrms go so far as to
set the goal that all their business units should be leaders (number one or
number two) in their industries. This approach to strategy is as dangerous as
it is deceptively clear. While market share is certainly relevant to
competitive position (due to scale economies, for example), industry
leadership is not a cause but an effect of competitive advantage. Market
share per se is not important competitively; competitive advantage is. The
strategic mandate to business units should be to achieve competitive
advantage. Pursuit of leadership for its own sake may guarantee that a ﬁrm


never achieves a competitive advantage or that it loses the one it has. A goal
of leadership per se also embroils managers in endless debates over how an
industry should be deﬁned to calculate shares, obscuring once more the
search for competitive advantage that is the heart of strategy.
In some industries, market leaders do not enjoy the best performance
because industry structure does not reward leadership. A recent example is
Continental Illinois Bank, which adopted the explicit goal of market
leadership in wholesale lending. It succeeded in achieving this goal, but
leadership did not translate into competitive advantage. Instead, the drive
for leadership led to making loans that other banks would not, and to
escalating costs. Leadership also meant that Continental Illinois had to deal
with large corporations that are extremely powerful and price-sensitive
buyers of loans. Continental Illinois will be paying the price of leadership
for some years. In many other ﬁrms, such as Burlington Industries in fabrics
and Texas Instruments in electronics, the pursuit of leadership for its own
sake seems to have sometimes diverted attention from achieving and
maintaining competitive advantage.
Overview of This Book
Competitive Advantage describes the way a ﬁrm can choose and
implement a generic strategy to achieve and sustain competitive advantage.
It addresses the interplay between the types of competitive advantage—cost
and differentiation—and the scope of a ﬁrm’s activities. The basic tool for
diagnosing competitive advantage and ﬁnding ways to enhance it is the
value chain, which divides a ﬁrm into the discrete activities it performs in
designing, producing, marketing, and distributing its product. The scope of
a ﬁrm’s activities, which I term competitive scope, can have a powerful role
in competitive advantage through its inﬂuence on the value chain. I describe
how narrow scope (focus) can create competitive advantage through
tailoring the value chain, and how broader scope can enhance competitive
advantage through the exploitation of interrelationships among the value
chains that serve different segments, industries or geographic areas. While
this book addresses competitive advantage, it also sharpens the ability of the
