# Overview of this Book

practitioner to analyze industries and competitors and hence supplements
my earlier book.
This book is organized into four parts. Part I describes the types of
competitive advantage and how a ﬁrm can achieve them. Part II discusses
competitive scope within an industry and its affect on competitive
advantage. Part III addresses competitive scope in related industries, or how
corporate strategy can contribute to the competitive advantage of business
units. Part IV develops overall implications for competitive strategy,
including ways of coping with uncertainty and to improve or defend
position.
Chapter 2 presents the-concept of the value chain, and shows how it can
be used as the fundamental tool in diagnosing competitive advantage. The
chapter describes how to disaggregate the ﬁrm into the activities that
underlie competitive advantage, and identify the linkages among activities
that are central to competitive advantage. It also shows the role of
competitive scope in affecting the value chain, and how coalitions with
other ﬁrms can substitute for performing activities in the chain internally.
The chapter also brieﬂy considers the use of the value chain in designing
organizational structure.
Chapter 3 describes how a ﬁrm can gain a sustainable cost advantage. It
shows how to use the value chain to understand the behavior of costs and
the implications for strategy. Understanding cost behavior is necessary not
only for improving a ﬁrm’s relative cost position but also for exposing the
cost of differentiation.
Chapter 4 describes how a ﬁrm can differentiate itself from its
competitors. The value chain provides a way to identify a ﬁrm’s sources of
differentiation, and the fundamental factors that drive it. The buyer’s value
chain is the key to understanding the underlying basis of differentiation—
creating value for the buyer through lowering the buyer’s cost or improving
buyer performance. Differentiation results from both actual uniqueness in
creating buyer value and from the ability to signal that value so that buyers
perceive it.
Chapter 5 explores the relationship between technology and competitive
advantage. Technology is pervasive in the value chain and plays a powerful
role in determining competitive advantage, in both cost and differentiation.
The chapter shows how technological change can inﬂuence competitive


advantage as well as industry structure. It also describes the variables that
shape the path of technological change in an industry. The chapter then
describes how a ﬁrm can choose a technology strategy to enhance its
competitive advantage, encompassing the choice of whether to be a
technological leader and the strategic use of technology licensing. The idea
of ﬁrst-mover advantages and disadvantages is developed to highlight the
potential risks and rewards of pioneering any change in the way a ﬁrm
competes.
Chapter 6 discusses competitor selection, or the role of competitors in
enhancing competitive advantage and industry structure. The chapter shows
why the presence of the right competitors can be beneﬁcial to a ﬁrm’s
competitive position. It describes how to identify “good” competitors and
how to inﬂuence the array of competitors faced. It also describes how a ﬁrm
can decide what market share it should hold, an important issue since a very
large share is rarely optimal.
Chapter 7 begins Part II of the book and examines how industries can be
segmented. It draws on Chapters 3 and 4, since segments stem from
intraindustry differences in buyer needs and cost behavior. Segmentation is
clearly pivotal to the choice of focus strategies, as well as to assessing the
risks borne by broadly-targeted ﬁrms. The chapter describes how proﬁtable
and defensible focus strategies can be identiﬁed.
Chapter 8 discusses the determinants of substitution, and how a ﬁrm can
substitute its product for another or defend against a substitution threat.
Substitution, one of the ﬁve competitive forces, is driven by the interplay of
the relative value of a substitute compared to its cost, switching costs, and
the way individual buyers evaluate the economic beneﬁts of substitution.
The analysis of substitution is of central importance in ﬁnding ways to
widen industry boundaries, exposing industry segments that face a lower
substitution risk than others, and developing strategies to promote
substitution or defend against a substitution threat. Hence understanding
substitution is important both to broadening and to narrowing scope. The
analysis of substitution draws on Chapters 3 through 7.
Chapter 9 begins Part III of the book, and is the ﬁrst of four chapters
about corporate strategy for the diversiﬁed ﬁrm. The central concern of
corporate strategy is the way in which interrelationships among business
units can be used to create a competitive advantage. Chapter 9 explains the


strategic logic of interrelationships. It describes the three types of
interrelationships among industries, and why they have grown in
importance over time. It then shows how the signiﬁcance of
interrelationships for competitive advantage can be assessed.
Chapter 10 addresses the implications of interrelationships for horizontal
strategy, or strategy that encompasses multiple distinct business units. A
ﬁrm with multiple business units in related industries must formulate
strategies at the group, sector, and corporate levels that coordinate the
strategies of individual units. The chapter describes the principles for doing
so, as well as the implications of interrelationships for diversiﬁcation into
new industries.
Chapter 11 describes how interrelationships among business units can
actually be achieved. Many organizational impediments stand in the way,
ranging from the protection of turf to faulty incentives. The chapter
identiﬁes these impediments in detail, and shows how they can be overcome
through what I call horizontal organization. Firms competing in related
industries must have a horizontal organization that links business units
together, that supplements but does not replace the hierarchical organization
to manage and control them.
Chapter 12 treats a special but important case of interrelationships,
where an industry’s product is used or purchased with complementary
products. The chapter describes the circumstances in which a ﬁrm must
control complementary products rather than let other ﬁrms supply them. It
also examines the strategy of bundling, or selling separate products together
as a single package, and the circumstances in which such a strategy is
appropriate. Finally, the chapter examines cross-subsidization, or pricing
complementary products to reﬂect the relationship among them rather than
setting each price separately.
Part IV of the book draws on the concepts in this book and Competitive
Strategy to develop broad principles for offensive and defensive strategy.
Chapter 13 discusses the problem of formulating competitive strategy in the
face of signiﬁcant uncertainty. It describes the concept of industry
scenarios, and shows how scenarios can be constructed to illuminate the
range of future industry structures that might occur. The chapter then
outlines the alternative ways in which a ﬁrm can cope with uncertainty in its
choice of strategy. Competitive strategy is more effective if there is explicit


consideration of the range of industry scenarios that might occur, and
recognition of the extent to which strategies for dealing with different
scenarios are consistent or inconsistent.
Competitive Advantage concludes with a treatment of defensive and
offensive strategy. Chapters 14 and 15 serve to pull together many of the
other chapters. Chapter 14, on defensive strategy, describes the process by
which a ﬁrm’s position is challenged and the defensive tactics available to
deter or block a competitor. The chapter then develops the implications of
these ideas for a defensive strategy. Chapter 15 shows how to attack an
industry leader. It lays out the conditions a ﬁrm must meet to challenge a
leader, and the approaches to changing the rules of competition in order to
do so successfully. The same principles involved in attacking a leader can
be used in offensive strategy against any competitor.


I
Principles of Competitive Advantage
