# Chapter 2: The Value Chain and Competitive Advantage

buyer. Channels perform additional activities that affect the buyer, as well
as inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s own activities. A ﬁrm’s product eventually becomes
part of its buyer’s value chain. The ultimate basis for differentiation is a
ﬁrm and its product’s role in the buyer’s value chain, which determines
buyer needs. Gaining and sustaining competitive advantage depends on
understanding not only a ﬁrm’s value chain but how the ﬁrm ﬁts in the
overall value system.
The value chains of ﬁrms in an industry differ, reﬂecting their histories,
strategies, and success at implementation. One important difference is that a
ﬁrm’s value chain may differ in competitive scope from that of its
competitors, representing a potential source of competitive advantage.
Serving only a particular industry segment may allow a ﬁrm to tailor its
value chain to that segment and result in lower costs or differentiation in
serving that segment compared to competitors. Widening or narrowing the
geographic markets served can also affect competitive advantage. The
extent of integration into activities plays a key role in competitive
advantage. Finally, competing in related industries with coordinated value
chains can lead to competitive advantage through interrelationships. A ﬁrm
may exploit the beneﬁts of broader scope internally or it may form
coalitions with other ﬁrms to do so. Coalitions are long-term alliances with
other ﬁrms that fall short of outright merger, such as joint ventures, licenses,
and supply agreements. Coalitions involve coordinating or sharing value
chains with coalition partners that broadens the effective scope of the ﬁrm’s
chain.
This chapter describes the fundamental role of the value chain in
identifying sources of competitive advantage. I begin by describing the
value chain and its component parts. Every ﬁrm’s value chain is composed
of nine generic categories of activities which are linked together in
characteristic ways. The generic chain is used to demonstrate how a value
chain can be constructed for a particular ﬁrm, reﬂecting the speciﬁc
activities it performs. I also show how the activities in a ﬁrm’s value chain
are linked to each other and to the activities of its suppliers, channels, and
buyers, and how these linkages affect competitive advantage. I then describe
how scope of a ﬁrm’s activities affects competitive advantage through its
impact on the value chain. Subsequent chapters will illustrate in detail how
the value chain can be used as a strategic tool to analyze relative cost


position, differentiation, and the role of competitive scope in achieving
competitive advantage.


Figure 2–1. The Value System


The Value Chain
Every ﬁrm is a collection of activities that are performed to design,
produce, market, deliver, and support its product. All these activities can be
represented using a value chain, shown in Figure 2–2. A ﬁrm’s value chain
and the way it performs individual activities are a reﬂection of its history, its
strategy, its approach to implementing its strategy, and the underlying
economics of the activities themselves.1
The relevant level for constructing a value chain is a ﬁrm’s activities in a
particular industry (the business unit). An industry- or sector-wide value
chain is too broad, because it may obscure important sources of competitive
advantage. Though ﬁrms in the same industry may have similar chains the
value chains of competitors often differ. People Express and United Airlines
both compete in the airline industry, for example, but they have very
different value chains embodying signiﬁcant differences in boarding gate
operations, crew policies, and aircraft operations. Differences among
competitor value chains are a key source of competitive advantage. A ﬁrm’s
value chain in an industry may vary somewhat for different items in its
product line, or different buyers, geographic areas, or distribution channels.
The value chains for such subsets of a ﬁrm are closely related, however, and
can only be understood in the context of the business unit chain.2


Figure 2–2. The Generic Value Chain


In competitive terms, value is the amount buyers are willing to pay for
what a ﬁrm provides them. Value is measured by total revenue, a reﬂection
of the price a ﬁrm’s product commands and the units it can sell. A ﬁrm is
proﬁtable if the value it commands exceeds the costs involved in creating
the product. Creating value for buyers that exceeds the cost of doing so is
the goal of any generic strategy. Value, instead of cost, must be used in
analyzing competitive position since ﬁrms often deliberately raise their cost
in order to command a premium price via differentiation.
The value chain displays total value, and consists of value activities and
margin. Value activities are the physically and technologically distinct
activities a ﬁrm performs. These are the building blocks by which a ﬁrm
creates a product valuable to its buyers. Margin is the difference between
total value and the collective cost of performing the value activities. Margin
can be measured in a variety of ways. Supplier and channel value chains
also include a margin that is important to isolate in understanding the
sources of a ﬁrm’s cost position, since supplier and channel margin are part
of the total cost borne by the buyer.
Every value activity employs purchased inputs, human resources (labor
and management), and some form of technology to perform its function.
Each value activity also uses and creates information, such as buyer data
(order entry), performance parameters (testing), and product failure
statistics. Value activities may also create ﬁnancial assets such as inventory
and accounts receivable, or liabilities such as accounts payable.
Value activities can be divided into two broad types, primary activities
and support activities. Primary activities, listed along the bottom of Figure
2–2, are the activities involved in the physical creation of the product and its
sale and transfer to the buyer as well as after-sale assistance. In any ﬁrm,
primary activities can be divided into the ﬁve generic categories shown in
Figure 2–2. Support activities support the primary activities and each other
by providing purchased inputs, technology, human resources, and various
ﬁrmwide functions. The dotted lines reﬂect the fact that procurement,
technology development, and human resource management can be
associated with speciﬁc primary activities as well as support the entire
chain. Firm intrastructure is not associated with particular primary activities
but supports the entire chain.


Value activities are therefore the discrete building blocks of competitive
advantage. How each activity is performed combined with its economics
will determine whether a ﬁrm is high or low cost relative to competitors.
How each value activity is performed will also determine its contribution to
buyer needs and hence differentiation. Comparing the value chains of
competitors exposes differences that determine competitive advantage.3
An analysis of the value chain rather than value added is the appropriate
way to examine competitive advantage. Value added (selling price less the
cost of purchased raw materials) has sometimes been used as the focal point
for cost analysis because it was viewed as the area in which a ﬁrm can
control costs. Value added is not a sound basis for cost analysis, however,
because it incorrectly distinguishes raw materials from the many other
purchased inputs used in a ﬁrm’s activities. Also, the cost behavior of
activities cannot be understood without simultaneously examining the costs
of the inputs used to perform them. Moreover, value added fails to highlight
the linkages between a ﬁrm and its suppliers that can reduce cost or enhance
differentiation.
Identifying Value Activities
Identifying value activities requires the isolation of activities that are
technologically and strategically distinct. Value activities and accounting
classiﬁcations are rarely the same. Accounting classiﬁcations (e.g., burden,
overhead, direct labor) group together activities with disparate technologies,
and separate costs that are all part of the same activity.
PRIMARY ACTIVITIES
There are ﬁve generic categories of primary activities involved in
competing in any industry, as shown in Figure 2–2. Each category is
divisible into a number of distinct activities that depend on the particular
industry and ﬁrm strategy:
•  Inbound Logistics. Activities associated with receiving, storing, and
disseminating inputs to the product, such as material handling,


warehousing, inventory control, vehicle scheduling, and returns to
suppliers.
•  Operations. Activities associated with transforming inputs into the
ﬁnal product form, such as machining, packaging, assembly,
equipment maintenance, testing, printing, and facility operations.
• Outbound Logistics. Activities associated with collecting, storing, and
physically distributing the product to buyers, such as ﬁnished goods
warehousing, material handling, delivery vehicle operation, order
processing, and scheduling.
• Marketing and Sales. Activities associated with providing a means by
which buyers can purchase the product and inducing them to do so,
such as advertising, promotion, sales force, quoting, channel selection,
channel relations, and pricing.
•  Service. Activities associated with providing service to enhance or
maintain the value of the product, such as installation, repair, training,
parts supply, and product adjustment.
Each of the categories may be vital to competitive advantage depending
on the industry. For a distributor, inbound and outbound logistics are the
most critical. For a service ﬁrm providing the service on its premises such
as a restaurant or retailer, outbound logistics may be largely nonexistant and
operations the vital category. For a bank engaged in corporate lending,
marketing and sales are a key to competitive advantage through the
effectiveness of the calling ofﬁcers and the way in which loans are
packaged and priced. For a high speed copier manufacturer, service
represents a key source of competitive advantage. In any ﬁrm, however, all
the categories of primary activities will be present to some degree and play
some role in competitive advantage.
SUPPORT ACTIVITIES
Support value activities involved in competing in any industry can be
divided into four generic categories, also shown in Figure 2–2. As with
primary activities, each category of support activities is divisible into a
number of distinct value activities that are speciﬁc to a given industry. In


technology development, for example, discrete activities might include
component design, feature design, ﬁeld testing, process engineering, and
technology selection. Similarly, procurement can be divided into activities
such as qualifying new suppliers, procurement of different groups of
purchased inputs, and ongoing monitoring of supplier performance.
Procurement. Procurement refers to the function of purchasing inputs
used in the ﬁrm’s value chain, not to the purchased inputs themselves.
Purchased inputs include raw materials, supplies, and other consumable
items as well as assets such as machinery, laboratory equipment, ofﬁce
equipment, and buildings. Though purchased inputs are commonly
associated with primary activities, purchased inputs are present in every
value activity including support activities. For example, laboratory supplies
and independent testing services are common purchased inputs in
technology development, while an accounting ﬁrm is a common purchased
input in ﬁrm infrastructure. Like all value activities, procurement employs a
“technology,” such as procedures for dealing with vendors, qualiﬁcation
rules, and information systems.
Procurement tends to be spread throughout a ﬁrm. Some items such as
raw materials are purchased by the traditional purchasing department, while
other items are purchased by plant managers (e.g., machines), ofﬁce
managers (e.g., temporary help), salespersons (e.g., meals and lodging), and
even the chief executive ofﬁcer (e.g., strategic consulting). I use the term
procurement rather than purchasing because the usual connotation of
purchasing is too narrow among managers. The dispersion of the
procurement function often obscures the magnitude of total purchases, and
means that many purchases receive little scrutiny.
A given procurement activity can normally be associated with a speciﬁc
value activity or activities which it supports, though often a purchasing
department serves many value activities and purchasing policies apply
ﬁrmwide. The cost of procurement activities themselves usually represents
a small if not insigniﬁcant portion of total costs, but often has a large impact
on the ﬁrm’s overall cost and differentiation. Improved purchasing practices
can strongly affect the cost and quality of purchased inputs, as well as of
other activities associated with receiving and using the inputs, and
interacting with suppliers. In chocolate manufacturing and electric utilities,


for example, procurement of cocoa beans and fuel respectively is by far the
most important determinant of cost position.
Technology Development. Every value activity embodies technology, be
it know-how, procedures, or technology embodied in process equipment.
The array of technologies employed in most ﬁrms is very broad, ranging
from those technologies used in preparing documents and transporting
goods to those technologies embodied in the product itself. Moreover, most
value activities use a technology that combines a number of different
subtechnologies involving different scientiﬁc disciplines. Machining, for
example, involves metallurgy, electronics, and mechanics.
Technology development consists of a range of activities that can be
broadly grouped into efforts to improve the product and the process. I term
this category of activities technology development instead of research and
development because R&D has too narrow a connotation to most managers.
Technology development tends to be associated with the engineering
department or the development group. Typically, however, it occurs in many
parts of a ﬁrm, although this is not explicitly recognized. Technology
development may support any of the numerous technologies embodied in
value activities, including such areas as telecommunications technology for
the order entry system, or ofﬁce automation for the accounting department.
It does not solely apply to technologies directly linked to the end product.
Technology development also takes many forms, from basic research and
product design to media research, process equipment design, and servicing
procedures. Technology development that is related to the product and its
features supports the entire chain, while other technology development is
associated with particular primary or support activities.
Technology development is important to competitive advantage in all
industries, holding the key in some. In steel, for example, a ﬁrm’s process
technology is the single greatest factor in competitive advantage. The
competitive implications of the array of technologies in the value chain are
treated in Chapter 5.
Human Resource Management. Human resource management consists of
activities involved in the recruiting, hiring, training, development, and
compensation of all types of personnel. Human resource management


supports both individual primary and support activities (e.g., hiring of
engineers) and the entire value chain (e.g., labor negotiations). Human
resource management activities occur in different parts of a ﬁrm, as do other
support activities, and the dispersion of these activities can lead to
inconsistent policies. Moreover, the cumulative costs of human resource
management are rarely well understood nor are the tradeoffs in different
human resource management costs, such as salary compared to the cost of
recruiting and training due to turnover.
Human resource management affects competitive advantage in any ﬁrm,
through its role in determining the skills and motivation of employees and
the cost of hiring and training. In some industries it holds the key to
competitive advantage. The world’s leading accounting ﬁrm Arthur
Andersen, for example, draws a signiﬁcant competitive advantage from its
approach to recruiting and training its tens of thousands of professional
staff. Arthur Andersen has bought a former college campus near Chicago,
and has invested heavily in codifying its practice and regularly bringing
staff from around the world to its college for training in the ﬁrmwide
methodology. Having a deeply understood methodology throughout the ﬁrm
not only makes all engagements more effective but also greatly facilitates
the servicing of national and multinational clients.
Firm Infrastructure. Firm infrastructure consists of a number of activities
including general management, planning, ﬁnance, accounting, legal,
government affairs, and quality management. Infrastructure, unlike other
support activities, usually supports the entire chain and not individual
activities. Depending on whether a ﬁrm is diversiﬁed or not, ﬁrm
infrastructure may be self-contained or divided between a business unit and
the parent corporation.4 In diversiﬁed ﬁrms, infrastructure activities are
typically split between the business unit and corporate levels (e.g., ﬁnancing
is often done at the corporate level while quality management is done at the
business unit level). Many infrastructure activities occur at both the business
unit and corporate levels, however.
Firm infrastructure is sometimes viewed only as “overhead,” but can be a
powerful source of competitive advantage. In a telephone operating
company, for example, negotiating and maintaining ongoing relations with
regulatory bodies can be among the most important activities for


competitive advantage. Similarly, proper management information systems
can contribute signiﬁcantly to cost position, while in some industries top
management plays a vital role in dealing with the buyer.
ACTIVITY TYPES
Within each category of primary and support activities, there are three
activity types that play a different role in competitive advantage:
• Direct. Activities directly involved in creating value for the buyer, such
as assembly, parts machining, sales force operation, advertising,
product design, recruiting, etc.
• Indirect. Activities that make it possible to perform direct activities on
a continuing basis, such as maintenance, scheduling, operation of
facilities, sales force administration, research administration, vendor
record keeping, etc.
• Quality Assurance. Activities that ensure the quality of other activities,
such as monitoring, inspecting, testing, reviewing, checking, adjusting,
and reworking. Quality assurance is not synonymous with quality
management, because many value activities contribute to quality, as
will be discussed in Chapter 4.
Every ﬁrm has direct, indirect, and quality assurance value activities. All
three types are present not only among primary activities but also among
support activities. In technology development, for example, actual
laboratory teams are direct activities, while research administration is an
indirect activity.
The role of indirect and quality assurance activities is often not well
understood, making the distinction among the three activity types an
important one for diagnosing competitive advantage. In many industries,
indirect activities represent a large and rapidly growing proportion of cost
and can play a signiﬁcant role in differentiation through their effect on
direct activities. Despite this, indirect activities are frequently lumped
together with direct activities when managers think about their ﬁrms,
though the two often have very different economics. There are often
tradeoffs between direct and indirect activities—more spending on


maintenance lowers machine costs. Indirect activities are also frequently
grouped together into “overhead” or “burden” accounts, obscuring their cost
and contribution to differentiation.
Quality assurance activities are also prevalent in nearly every part of a
ﬁrm, though they are seldom recognized as such. Testing and inspection are
associated with many primary activities. Quality assurance activities outside
of operations are often less apparent though equally prevalent. The
cumulative cost of quality assurance activities can be very large, as recent
attention to the cost of quality has demonstrated. Quality assurance
activities often affect the cost or effectiveness of other activities, and the
way other activities are performed in turn affects the need for and types of
quality assurance activities. The possibility of simplifying or eliminating the
need for quality assurance activities through performing other activities
better is at the root of the notion that quality can be “free.”
Deﬁning the Value Chain
To diagnose competitive advantage, it is necessary to deﬁne a ﬁrm’s
value chain for competing in a particular industry. Starting with the generic
chain, individual value activities are identiﬁed in the particular ﬁrm. Each
generic category can be divided into discrete activities, as illustrated for one
generic category in Figure 2–3. An example of a complete value chain is
shown in Figure 2–4, the value chain of a copier manufacturer.
Deﬁning relevant value activities requires that activities with discrete
technologies and economics be isolated. Broad functions such as
manufacturing or marketing must be subdivided into activities. The product
ﬂow, order ﬂow or paper ﬂow can be useful in doing so. Subdividing
activities can proceed to the level of increasingly narrow activities that are
to some degree discrete. Every machine in a factory, for example, could be
treated as a separate activity. Thus the number of potential activities is often
quite large.
The appropriate degree of disaggregation depends on the economics of
the activities and the purposes for which the value chain is being analyzed.
Though I will return to this question in later chapters, the basic principle is
that activities should be isolated and separated that (1) have different


economics, (2) have a high potential impact of differentiation, or (3)
represent a signiﬁcant or growing proportion of cost. In using the value
chain, successively ﬁner disaggregations of some activities are made as the
analysis exposes differences important to competitive advantage; other
activities are combined because they prove to be unimportant to competitive
advantage or are governed by similar economics.
Selecting the appropriate category in which to put an activity may
require judgment and can be illuminating in its own right. Order processing,
for example, could be classiﬁed as part of outbound logistics or as part of
marketing. In a distributor, the role of order processing is more a marketing
function. Similarly, the sales force often performs service functions. Value
activities should be assigned to categories that best represent their
contribution to a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage. If order processing is an
important way in which a ﬁrm interacts with its buyers, for example, it
should be classiﬁed under marketing. Similarly, if inbound material
handling and outbound material handling use the same facilities and
personnel, then both should probably be combined into one value activity
and classiﬁed wherever the function has the greatest competitive impact.
Firms have often gained competitive advantage by redeﬁning the roles of
traditional activities—Vetco, an oil ﬁeld equipment supplier, uses customer
training as a marketing tool and a way to build switching costs, for example.


Figure 2–3. Subdividing a Generic Value Chain


Figure 2–4. Value Chain for a Copier Manufacturer


Everything a ﬁrm does should be captured in a primary or support
activity. Value activity labels are arbitrary and should be chosen to provide
the best insight into the business. Labeling activities in service industries
often causes confusion because operations, marketing, and after-sale
support are often closely tied. Ordering of activities should broadly follow
the process ﬂow, but ordering is judgmental as well. Often ﬁrms perform
parallel activities, whose order should be chosen to enhance the intuitive
clarity of the value chain to managers.
Linkages within the Value Chain
Although value activities are the building blocks of competitive
advantage, the value chain is not a collection of independent activities but a
system of interdependent activities. Value activities are related by linkages
within the value chain. Linkages are relationships between the way one
value activity is performed and the cost or performance of another. For
example, purchasing high-quality, precut steel sheets can simplify
manufacturing and reduce scrap. In a fast food chain, the timing of
promotional campaigns can inﬂuence capacity utilization. Competitive
advantage frequently derives from linkages among activities just as it does
from the individual activities themselves.
Linkages can lead to competitive advantage in two ways: optimization
and coordination. Linkages often reﬂect tradeoffs among activities to
achieve the same overall result. For example, a more costly product design,
more stringent materials speciﬁcations, or greater in-process inspection may
reduce service costs. A ﬁrm must optimize such linkages reﬂecting its
strategy in order to achieve competitive advantage.
Linkages may also reﬂect the need to coordinate activities. On-time
delivery, for example, may require coordination of activities in operations,
outbound logistics, and service (e.g., installation). The ability to coordinate
linkages often reduces cost or enhances differentiation. Better coordination,
for example, can reduce the need for inveninventory throughout the ﬁrm.
Linkages imply that a ﬁrm’s cost or differentiation is not merely the result
of efforts to reduce cost or improve performance in each value activity
individually. Much of the recent change in philosophy towards


manufacturing and towards quality—strongly inﬂuenced by Japanese
practice—is a recognition of the importance of linkages.
Linkages are numerous, and some are common to many ﬁrms. The most
obvious linkages are those between support activities and primary activities
represented by the dotted lines on the generic value chain. Product design
usually affects the manufacturing cost of a product, for example, while
procurement practices often affect the quality of purchased inputs and hence
production costs, inspection costs, and product quality. More subtle
linkages are those between primary activities. For example, enhanced
inspection of incoming parts may reduce quality assurance costs later in the
production process, while better maintenance often reduces the downtime of
a machine. An interactive order entry system may reduce salesperson time
required per buyer because salespersons can place orders faster and are
freed from the need to follow up on inquiries and problems. More thorough
inspection of ﬁnished goods often improves the reliability of products in the
ﬁeld, reducing servicing costs. Finally, frequent deliveries to buyers may
reduce inventory and accounts receivable. Linkages that involve activities in
different categories or of different types are often the most difﬁcult to
recognize.
Linkages among value activities arise from a number of generic causes,
among them the following:
• The same function can be performed in different ways. For example,
conformance to speciﬁcations can be achieved through high quality
purchased inputs, specifying close tolerances in the manufacturing
process, or 100 percent inspection of ﬁnished goods.
•  The cost or performance of direct activities is improved by greater
efforts in indirect activities. For example, better scheduling (an indirect
activity) reduces sales force travel time or delivery vehicle time (direct
activities); or better maintenance improves the tolerances achieved by
machines.
•  Activities performed inside a ﬁrm reduce the need to demonstrate,
explain, or service a product in the ﬁeld. For example, 100 percent
inspection can substantially reduce service costs in the ﬁeld.


• Quality assurance functions can be performed in different ways. For
example, incoming inspection is a substitute for ﬁnished goods
inspection.
Though linkages within the value chain are crucial to competitive
advantage, they are often subtle and go unrecognized. The importance of
procurement in affecting manufacturing cost and quality may not be
obvious, for example. Nor is the link between order processing,
manufacturing scheduling practices, and sales force utilization. Identifying
linkages is a process of searching for ways in which each value activity
affects or is affected by others. The generic causes of linkages discussed
above provide a starting point. The disaggregation of procurement and
technology development to relate them to speciﬁc primary activities also
helps to highlight linkages between support and primary activities.
Exploiting linkages usually requires information or information ﬂows
that allow optimization or coordination to take place. Thus, information
systems are often vital to gaining competitive advantages from linkages.
Recent developments in information systems technology are creating new
linkages and increasing the ability to achieve old ones. Exploiting linkages
also frequently requires optimization or coordination that cuts across
conventional organizational lines. Higher costs in the manufacturing
organization, for example, may result in lower costs in the sales or service
organization. Such tradeoffs may not be measured in a ﬁrm’s information
and control systems. Managing linkages thus is a more complex
organizational task than managing value activities themselves. Given the
difﬁculty of recognizing and managing linkages, the ability to do so often
yields a sustainable source of competitive advantage. The speciﬁc role of
linkages in cost and differentiation will be discussed in more detail in
Chapters 3 and 4.
Vertical Linkages
Linkages exist not only within a ﬁrm’s value chain but between a ﬁrm’s
chain and the value chains of suppliers and channels. These linkages, which
I term vertical linkages, are similar to the linkages within the value chain—


the way supplier or channel activities are performed affects the cost or
performance of a ﬁrm’s activities (and vice versa). Suppliers produce a
product or service that a ﬁrm employs in its value chain, and suppliers’
value chains also inﬂuence the ﬁrm at other contact points. A ﬁrm’s
procurement and inbound logistics activities interact with a supplier’s order
entry system, for example, while a supplier’s applications engineering staff
works with a ﬁrm’s technology development and manufacturing activities.
A supplier’s product characteristics as well as its other contact points with a
ﬁrm’s value chain can signiﬁcantly affect a ﬁrm’s cost and differentiation.
For example, frequent supplier shipments can reduce a ﬁrm’s inventory
needs, appropriate packaging of supplier products can lower handling cost,
and supplier inspection can remove the need for incoming inspection by a
ﬁrm.
The linkages between suppliers’ value chains and a ﬁrm’s value chain
provide opportunities for the ﬁrm to enhance its competitive advantage. It is
often possible to beneﬁt both the ﬁrm and suppliers by inﬂuencing the
conﬁguration of suppliers’ value chains to jointly optimize the performance
of activities, or by improving coordination between a ﬁrm’s and suppliers’
chains. Supplier linkages mean that the relationship with suppliers is not a
zero sum game in which one gains only at the expense of the other, but a
relationship in which both can gain. By agreeing to deliver bulk chocolate
to a confectionery producer in tank cars instead of solid bars, for example,
an industrial chocolate ﬁrm saves the cost of molding and packaging while
the confectionery manufacturer lowers the cost of in-bound handling and
melting. The division of the beneﬁts of coordinating or optimizing linkages
between a ﬁrm and its suppliers is a function of suppliers’ bargaining power
and is reﬂected in suppliers’ margins. Supplier bargaining power is partly
structural and partly a function of a ﬁrm’s purchasing practices.5 Thus both
coordination with suppliers and hard bargaining to capture the spoils are
important to competitive advantage. One without the other results in missed
opportunities.
Channel linkages are similar to supplier linkages. Channels have value
chains through which a ﬁrm’s product passes. The channel markup over a
ﬁrm’s selling price (which I term channel value) often represents a large
proportion of the selling price to the end user—it represents as much as 50
percent or more of selling price to the end user in many consumer goods,


such as wine. Channels perform such activities as sales, advertising, and
display that may substitute for or complement the ﬁrm’s activities. There
are also multiple points of contact between a ﬁrm’s and channels’ value
chains in activities such as the sales force, order entry, and outbound
logistics. As with supplier linkages, coordinating and jointly optimizing
with channels can lower cost or enhance differentiation. The same issues
that existed with suppliers in dividing the gains of coordination and joint
optimization also exist with channels.
Vertical linkages, like linkages within a ﬁrm’s value chain, are frequently
overlooked. Even if they are recognized, independent ownership of
suppliers or channels or a history of an adversary relationship can impede
the coordination and joint optimization required to exploit vertical linkages.
Sometimes vertical linkages are easier to achieve with coalition partners or
sister business units than with independent ﬁrms, though even this is not
assured. As with linkages within the value chain, exploiting vertical
linkages requires information and modern information systems are creating
many new possibilities. I will discuss the role of supplier and channel
linkages in competitive advantage more fully in Chapters 3 and 4.
The Buyer’s Value Chain
Buyers also have value chains, and a ﬁrm’s product represents a
purchased input to the buyer’s chain. Understanding the value chains of
industrial, commercial, and institutional buyers is intuitively easy because
of their similarities to that of a ﬁrm. Understanding households’ value
chains is less intuitive, but nevertheless important. Households (and the
individual consumers within them) engage in a wide range of activities, and
products purchased by households are used in conjunction with this stream
of activities. A car is used for the trip to work and for shopping and leisure,
while a food product is consumed as part of the process of preparing and
eating meals. Though it is quite difﬁcult to construct a value chain that
encompasses everything a household and its occupants do, it is quite
possible to construct a chain for those activities that are relevant to how a
particular product is used. Chains need not be constructed for every
household, but chains for representative households can provide an


important tool for use in differentiation analysis, to be discussed in more
detail in Chapter 4.
A ﬁrm’s differentiation stems from how its value chain relates to its
buyer’s chain. This is a function of the way a ﬁrm’s physical product is used
in the particular buyer activity in which it is consumed (e.g., a machine used
in the assembly process) as well as all the other points of contact between a
ﬁrm’s value chain and the buyer’s chain. Many of a ﬁrm’s activities interact
with some buyer activities. In optoelectronic parts, for example, a ﬁrm’s
product is assembled into the buyer’s equipment—an obvious point of
contact—but the ﬁrm also works closely with the buyer in designing the
part, providing ongoing technical assistance, troubleshooting, order
processing, and delivery. Each of these contact points is a potential source
of differentiation. “Quality” is too narrow a view of what makes a ﬁrm
unique, because it focuses attention on the product rather than the broader
array of value activities that impact the buyer.
Differentiation, then, derives fundamentally from creating value for the
buyer through a ﬁrm’s impact on the buyer’s value chain. Value is created
when a ﬁrm creates competitive advantage for its buyer—lowers its buyer’s
cost or raises its buyer’s performance.6 The value created for the buyer must
be perceived by the buyer if it is to be rewarded with a premium price,
however, which means that ﬁrms must communicate their value to buyers
through such means as advertising and the sales force. How this value is
divided between the ﬁrm (a premium price) and the buyer (higher proﬁts or
more satisfaction for the money) is reﬂected in a ﬁrm’s margin, and is a
function of industry structure. The relationship between the buyer’s value
chain and the ﬁrm’s value chain in creating and sustaining differentiation
will be described in detail in Chapter 4.7
Competitive Scope and the Value Chain
Competitive scope can have a powerful effect on competitive advantage,
because it shapes the conﬁguration and economics of the value chain. There
are four dimensions of scope that affect the value chain:8
• Segment Scope. The product varieties produced and buyers served.


• Vertical Scope. The extent to which activities are performed in-house
instead of by independent ﬁrms.
•  Geographic Scope. The range of regions, countries, or groups of
countries in which a ﬁrm competes with a coordinated strategy.
•  Industry Scope. The range of related industries in which the ﬁrm
competes with a coordinated strategy.
Broad scope can allow a ﬁrm to exploit the beneﬁts of performing more
activities internally. It may also allow the ﬁrm to exploit interrelationships
between the value chains that serve different segments, geographic areas or
related industries.9 For example, a shared sales force may sell the products
of two business units, or a common brand name may be employed
worldwide. Sharing and integration have costs, however, that may nullify
their beneﬁts.
Narrow scope can allow the tailoring of the chain to serve a particular
target segment, geographic area or industry to achieve lower cost or to serve
the target in a unique way. Narrow scope in integration may also improve
competitive advantage through the ﬁrm’s purchasing activities that
independent ﬁrms perform better or cheaper. The competitive advantage of
a narrow scope rests on differences among product varieties, buyers, or
geographic regions within an industry in terms of the value chain best suited
to serve them, or on differences in resources and skills of independent ﬁrms
that allow them to perform activities better.
The breadth or narrowness of scope is clearly relative to competitors. In
some industries, a broad scope involves only serving the full range of
product and buyer segments within the industry. In others, it may require
both vertical integration and competing in related industries. Since there are
many ways to segment an industry and multiple forms of interrelationships
and integration, broad and narrow scope can be combined. A ﬁrm may
create competitive advantage by tuning its value chain to one product
segment and exploiting geographic interrelationships by serving that
segment worldwide. It may also exploit interrelationships with business
units in related industries. I will discuss these possibilities in more detail in
Chapter 15.


Segment Scope
Differences in the needs or value chains required to serve different
product or buyer segments can lead to a competitive advantage of focusing.
For example, the value chain required to serve sophisticated minicomputer
buyers with in-house servicing capabilities is different from that required to
serve small business users. They need extensive sales assistance, less
demanding hardware performance, user-friendly software, and service
capability.
Just as differences among segments favor narrow scope, however,
interrelationships between the value chains serving different segments favor
broad scope. General Motors’ value chain for large cars is different from
that for small cars, for example, but many value activities are shared. This
creates a tension between tailoring the value chain to a segment and sharing
it among segments. This tension is fundamental to industry segmentation
and to the choice of focus strategies, the subject of Chapter 7.
Vertical Scope
Vertical integration deﬁnes the division of activities between a ﬁrm and
its suppliers, channels, and buyers. A ﬁrm may purchase components rather
than fabricate them itself, for example, or contract for service rather than
maintain a service organization. Similarly, channels may perform many
distribution, service, and marketing functions instead of a ﬁrm. A ﬁrm and
its buyers can also divide activities in differing ways. One way a ﬁrm may
be able to differentiate itself is by assuming a greater number of buyer
activities. In the extreme case, a ﬁrm completely enters the buyer’s industry.
When one views the issue of integration from the perspective of the
value chain, it becomes apparent that opportunities for integration are richer
than is often recognized. Vertical integration tends to be viewed in terms of
physical products and replacing whole supplier relationships rather than in
terms of activities, but it can encompass both. For example, a ﬁrm may rely
on a supplier’s applications engineering and service capability, or it may
perform these activities internally. Thus there are many options regarding


what value activities a ﬁrm performs internally and what value activities it
purchases. The same principles apply to channel and buyer integration.
Whether or not integration (or de-integration) lowers cost or enhances
differentiation depends on the ﬁrm and the activity involved. I have
discussed the factors that bear on this question in Competitive Strategy. The
value chain allows a ﬁrm to identify more clearly the potential beneﬁts of
integration by highlighting the role of vertical linkages. The exploitation of
vertical linkages does not require vertical integration, but integration may
sometimes allow the beneﬁts of vertical linkages to be achieved more easily.
Geographic Scope
Geographic scope may allow a ﬁrm to share or coordinate value
activities used to serve different geographic areas. Canon develops and
manufactures copiers primarily in Japan, for example, but sells and services
them separately in many countries. Canon gains a cost advantage from
sharing technology development and manufacturing instead of performing
these activities in each country. Interrelationships are also common among
partially distinct value chains serving geographic regions in a single
country. For example, food service distributors such as Monarch and SISCO
have many largely distinct operating units in major metropolitan areas that
share ﬁrm infrastructure, procurement, and other support value activities.
Geographic interrelationships can enhance competitive advantage if
sharing or coordinating value activities lowers cost or enhances
differentiation. There may be costs of coordination as well as differences
among regions or countries that reduce the advantage of sharing, however.
The sources of competitive advantage from a global strategy and the
impediments to employing one are discussed in Competitive Strategy and
elsewhere.10 The same principles apply to national or regional coordination
of value chains.
Industry Scope
Potential interrelationships among the value chains required to compete
in related industries are widespread. They can involve any value activity,


including both primary (e.g., a shared service organization) and support
activities (e.g., joint technology development or shared procurement of
common inputs). Interrelationships among business units are similar in
concept to geographic interrelationships among value chains.
Interrelationships among business units can have a powerful inﬂuence on
competitive advantage, either by lowering cost or enhancing differentiation.
A shared logistical system may allow a ﬁrm to reap economies of scale, for
example, while a shared sales force offering related products can improve
the salesperson’s effectiveness with the buyer and thereby enhance
differentiation. All interrelationships do not lead to competitive advantage.
Not all activities beneﬁt from sharing. There are also always costs of
sharing activities that must be offset against the beneﬁts, because the needs
of different business units may not be the same with respect to a value
activity. I will describe interrelationships among business units and their
implications for both corporate and business unit strategy in Chapters 9–11.
Coalitions and Scope
A ﬁrm can pursue the beneﬁts of a broader scope internally, or enter into
coalitions with independent ﬁrms to achieve some or all of the same
beneﬁts. Coalitions are long-term agreements among ﬁrms that go beyond
normal market transactions but fall short of outright mergers. Examples of
coalitions include technology licenses, supply agreements, marketing
agreements, and joint ventures. Coalitions are ways of broadening scope
without broadening the ﬁrm, by contracting with an independent ﬁrm to
perform value activities (e.g., a supply agreement) or teaming up with an
independent ﬁrm to share activities (e.g., a marketing joint venture). Thus
there are two basic types of coalition—vertical coalitions and horizontal
coalitions.
Coalitions can allow sharing of activities without the need to enter new
industry segments, geographic areas, or related industries. Coalitions are
also a means of gaining the cost or differentiation advantages of vertical
linkages without actual integration, but overcoming the difﬁculties of
coordination among purely independent ﬁrms. Because coalitions involve
long-term relationships, it should be possible to coordinate more closely


with a coalition partner than with an independent ﬁrm, though not without
some cost. Difﬁculties in reaching coalition agreements and in ongoing
coordination among partners may block coalitions or nullify their beneﬁts.
Coalition partners remain independent ﬁrms and there is the question of
how the beneﬁts of a coalition are to be divided. The relative bargaining
power of each coalition partner is thus central to how the gains are shared,
and determines impact of the coalition on a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage. A
strong coalition partner may appropriate all the gains of a shared marketing
organization through the terms of the agreement, for example. The role of
coalitions in competitive advantage is discussed in my book on global
strategy, because they are particularly prevalent in international
competition.11
Competitive Scope and Business Deﬁnition
The relationship between competitive scope and the value chain provides
the basis for deﬁning relevant business unit boundaries. Strategically
distinct business units are isolated by weighing the beneﬁts of integration
and de-integration and by comparing the strength of interrelationships in
serving related segments, geographic areas, or industries to the differences
in the value chains best suited for serving them separately. If differences in
geographic areas or product and buyer segments require very distinct value
chains, then segments deﬁne business units. Conversely, strong and
widespread 
beneﬁts 
of 
integration 
or 
geographic 
or 
industry
interrelationships widen the relevant boundaries of business units. Strong
advantages to vertical integration widen the boundaries of a business unit to
encompass upstream or downstream activities, while weak advantages to
integration imply that each stage is a distinct business unit. Similarly, strong
advantages to worldwide coordination of the value chains imply that the
relevant business unit is global, while strong country or regional differences
necessitating largely distinct chains imply narrower geographic business
unit boundaries. Finally, strong interrelationships between one business unit
and another may imply that they should merge into one. Appropriate
business units can be deﬁned, then, by understanding the optimal value
chain for competing in different arenas and how the chains are related. I


will return to this issue after the principles of industry segmentation have
been discussed in Chapter 7.
The Value Chain and Industry Structure
Industry structure both shapes the value chain of a ﬁrm and is a reﬂection
of the collective value chains of competitors. Structure determines the
bargaining relationships with buyers and suppliers that is reﬂected in both
the conﬁguration of a ﬁrm’s value chain and how margins are divided with
buyers, suppliers, and coalition partners. The threat of substitution to an
industry inﬂuences the value activities desired by buyers. Entry barriers
bear on the sustainability of various value chain conﬁgurations.
The array of competitor value chains is, in turn, the basis for many
elements of industry structure. Scale economies and proprietary learning,
for example, stem from the technology employed in competitors’ value
chains. Capital requirements for competing in an industry are the result of
the collective capital required in the chain. Similarly, industry product
differentiation stems from the way ﬁrms’ products are used in buyers’ value
chains. Thus many elements of industry structure can be diagnosed by
analyzing the value chains of competitors in an industry.
The Value Chain and Organizational Structure
The value chain is a basic tool for diagnosing competitive advantage and
ﬁnding ways to create and sustain it, the subject that will dominate the
chapters that follow. However, the value chain can also play a valuable role
in designing organizational structure. Organizational structure groups
certain activities together under organizational units such as marketing or
production. The logic of those groupings is that activities have similarities
that should be exploited by putting them together in a department; at the
same time, departments are separated from other groups of activities
because of their differences. This separation of like activities is what
organizational 
theorists 
call 
“differentiation.” 
With 
separation 
of
organizational units comes the need to coordinate them, usually termed
“integration.” Thus integrating mechanisms must be established in a ﬁrm to


ensure that the required coordination takes place. Organizational structure
balances the beneﬁts of separation and integration.12
The value chain provides a systematic way to divide a ﬁrm into its
discrete activities, and thus can be used to examine how the activities in a
ﬁrm are and could be grouped. Figure 2–5 shows a value chain with a
typical organizational structure superimposed. Organizational boundaries
are often not drawn around the groups of activities that are most similar in
economic terms. Moreover, organizational units such as the purchasing and
R&D departments frequently contain only a fraction of the similar activities
being performed in a ﬁrm.
The need for integration among organizational units is a manifestation of
linkages. There are often many linkages within the value chain, and
organizational structure often fails to provide mechanisms to coordinate or
optimize them. The information necessary for coordinating or optimizing
linkages is also rarely collected throughout the chain. Managers of support
activities such as human resource management and technology development
often do not have a clear view of how they relate to the ﬁrm’s overall
competitive position, something the value chain highlights. Finally, vertical
linkages are often not well provided for in organizational structure.


Figure 2–5. Organizational Structure and the Value Chain


A ﬁrm may be able to draw unit boundaries more in tune with its sources
of competitive advantage and provide for the appropriate types of
coordination by relating its organizational structure to the value chain, and
the linkages within it and with suppliers or channels. An organizational
structure that corresponds to the value chain will improve a ﬁrm’s ability to
create and sustain competitive advantage. While this subject cannot be
treated in detail here, it remains an important issue in the implementation of
strategy.


3
Cost Advantage
Cost advantage is one of the two types of competitive advantage a ﬁrm may
possess. Cost is also of vital importance to differentiation strategies because
a differentiator must maintain cost proximity to competitors. Unless the
resulting price premium exceeds the cost of differentiating, a differentiator
will fail to achieve superior performance. The behavior of cost also exerts a
strong inﬂuence on overall industry structure.
Managers recognize the importance of cost, and many strategic plans
establish “cost leadership” or “cost reduction” as goals. However, the
behavior of cost is rarely well understood. Wide disagreement often exists
among managers about a ﬁrm’s relative cost position and the reasons
underlying it. Cost studies tend to concentrate on manufacturing costs and
overlook the impact of other activities such as marketing, service, and
infrastructure on relative cost position. Moreover, the cost of individual
activities is analyzed sequentially, without recognizing the linkages among
activities that can affect cost. Finally, ﬁrms have great difﬁculty assessing
the cost positions of competitors, an essential step in assessing their own
relative positions. They often resort to simplistic comparisons of labor rates
and raw material costs.
This chapter has beneﬁted from joint work with John R. Wells.
The absence of a systematic framework for cost analysis in most ﬁrms
underlies these problems. Most cost studies address narrow issues and take
a short-term viewpoint. Popular tools like the experience curve are often
misused in cost analysis. The experience curve can serve as a starting point,
