# Chapter 3: Cost Advantage

but it ignores many of the important drivers of cost behavior and obscures
important relationships among them. Cost analyses also tend to rely heavily
on existing accounting systems. While accounting systems do contain
useful data for cost analysis, they often get in the way of strategic cost
analysis. Cost systems categorize costs in line items—such as direct labor,
indirect labor, and burden—that may obscure the underlying activities a
ﬁrm performs. This leads to aggregation of the costs of activities with very
different economics, and to the artiﬁcial separation of labor, material, and
overhead costs related to the same activity.
This chapter describes a framework for analyzing the behavior of costs,
the determinants of relative cost position, and the way ﬁrms can gain a
sustainable cost advantage or minimize their cost disadvantage. The
framework can also reveal the cost of differentiation, and the ways a
differentiated competitor can lower costs in the areas that do not undermine
its differentiation. The same tools can also be used to analyze supplier and
buyer cost behavior, important to both cost position and achieving
differentiation.
The value chain provides the basic tool for cost analysis. I begin by
showing how to deﬁne a value chain for cost analysis purposes and how to
associate costs and assets with value activities. I then describe how to
analyze the behavior of cost, using the concept of cost drivers. Cost drivers
are the structural determinants of the cost of an activity, and differ in the
extent to which a ﬁrm controls them. Cost drivers determine the behavior of
costs within an activity, reﬂecting any linkages or interrelationships that
affect it. A ﬁrm’s cost performance in each of its major discrete activities
cumulates to establish its relative cost position.
Having presented a framework for analyzing cost behavior, I turn to how
a ﬁrm can assess the relative cost of competitors and achieve a sustainable
cost advantage. I then describe some important pitfalls in developing an
understanding of cost position. The chapter concludes with a discussion of
the steps in strategic cost analysis. The techniques outlined in this chapter
do not constitute a substitute for the detailed analysis of cost necessary for
operations management or pricing, nor do they diminish the need for
ﬁnancial and cost accounting. Rather, the framework aims to help a ﬁrm
understand the behavior of cost in a broad, holistic way that will guide the


search for a sustainable cost advantage and contribute to the formulation of
competitive strategy.
The Value Chain and Cost Analysis
The behavior of a ﬁrm’s costs and its relative cost position stem from the
value activities the ﬁrm performs in competing in an industry. A meaningful
cost analysis, therefore, examines costs within these activities and not the
costs of the ﬁrm as a whole. Each value activity has its own cost structure
and the behavior of its cost may be affected by linkages and
interrelationships with other activities both within and outside the ﬁrm. Cost
advantage results if the ﬁrm achieves a lower cumulative cost of performing
value activities than its competitors.
Deﬁning the Value Chain for Cost Analysis
The starting point for cost analysis is to deﬁne a ﬁrm’s value chain and to
assign operating costs and assets to value activities. Each activity in the
value chain involves both operating costs and assets in the form of ﬁxed and
working capital. Purchased inputs make up part of the cost of every value
activity, and can contribute to both operating costs (purchased operating
inputs) and assets (purchased assets). The need to assign assets to value
activities reﬂects the fact that the amount of assets in an activity and the
efﬁciency of asset utilization are frequently important to the activity’s cost.
For purposes of cost analysis, the disaggregation of the generic value
chain into individual value activities should reﬂect three principles that are
not mutually exclusive:
• the size and growth of the cost represented by the activity
• the cost behavior of the activity
• competitor differences in performing the activity
Activities should be separated for cost analysis if they represent a
signiﬁcant or rapidly growing percentage of operating costs or assets. While
most ﬁrms can easily identify the large components of their cost, they


frequently overlook smaller but growing value activities that can eventually
change their cost structure. Activities that represent a small and stagnant
percentage of costs or assets can be grouped together into broader
categories.
Activities must also be separated if they have different cost drivers, to be
deﬁned in more detail below. Activities with similar cost drivers can be
safely grouped together. For example, advertising and promotion usually
belong in separate value activities because advertising cost is sensitive to
scale while promotional costs are largely variable. Any activity a business
unit shares with others should also be treated as a separate value activity
since conditions in other business units will affect its cost behavior. The
same logic applies to any activity that has important linkages with other
activities. In practice, one does not always know the drivers of cost behavior
at the beginning of an analysis; hence the identiﬁcation of value activities
tends to require several iterations. The initial breakdown of the value chain
into activities will inevitably represent a best guess of important differences
in cost behavior. Value activities can then be aggregated or disaggregated as
further analysis exposes differences or similarities in cost behavior. Usually
an aggregated value chain is analyzed ﬁrst, and then particular value
activities that prove to be important are investigated in greater detail.
A ﬁnal test for separating value activities is the behavior of competitors.
Signiﬁcant activities should be treated separately when a competitor
performs them in a different way.1 For example, People Express and other
no-frills airlines offer very different on-board service than the established
trunk carriers such as American, Eastern, TWA, and United. Differences
among competitors raise the possibility that an activity is the source of a
relative cost advantage or disadvantage.
Assigning Costs and Assets
After identifying its value chain, a ﬁrm must assign operating costs and
assets to value activities. Operating costs should be assigned to the activities
in which they are incurred. Assets should be assigned to the activities that
employ, control, or most inﬂuence their use. The assignment of operating
costs is straightforward in principle, although it can be time-consuming.


Accounting records must often be recast to match costs with value activities
rather than with accounting classiﬁcations, particularly in areas such as
overhead and purchased inputs.
Since assets are expensive and their selection and use often involve
tradeoffs with operating costs, assets must be assigned to value activities in
some way that will permit an analysis of cost behavior. Assignment of
assets to activities is more complex than assignment of operating costs.
Asset accounts must usually be regrouped to correspond to activities, and
assets must be valued in some consistent way. There are two broad
approaches to assigning assets. They may be assigned at their book or
replacement value and compared to operating costs in this form, or book or
replacement value may be translated into operating costs via capital
charges. Either valuation approach poses difﬁculties. Book value may be
meaningless because it is sensitive to the timing of initial purchase and to
accounting policies. Calculating replacement value is also frequently a
difﬁcult task. Similarly, depreciation schedules are often arbitrary, as are
capital charges for both ﬁxed and current assets. The particular method
chosen to value assets should reﬂect industry characteristics, which in turn
will determine the most signiﬁcant biases inherent in the data and the
practical considerations in collecting it. The analyst must recognize the
biases inherent in whatever method is chosen.2 It may prove illuminating
for cost analysis to assign assets in several ways.
The costs and assets of shared value activities should be allocated
initially to the value chain of the business unit using whatever methodology
the ﬁrm currently employs, typically based on some allocation formula. The
cost behavior of a shared value activity reﬂects the activity as a whole and
not just the part that is attributable to one business unit. The cost of a scale-
sensitive shared activity will depend on the volume of all involved business
units, for example. In addition, the allocation formulas covering shared
activities may not reﬂect their economics but may have been set based on
convenience or political considerations. As the analysis proceeds, the costs
of shared activities can be reﬁned using more meaningful allocation
methods based on the cost behavior of the activities.
The time period chosen for assigning costs and assets to value activities
should be representative of a ﬁrm’s performance. It should recognize
seasonal or cyclical ﬂuctuations and periods of discontinuity that would


affect cost. The comparison of costs at different points in time can
illuminate the effect of strategy changes, as well as help diagnose cost
behavior itself. Looking at the cost of an activity during successive periods
can highlight learning effects, for example, while comparing costs during
periods of widely differing levels of activity may give some indications
about scale sensitivity and the role of capacity utilization.
It is important to remember that assigning costs and assets does not
require the precision needed for ﬁnancial reporting purposes. Estimates are
often more than sufﬁcient to highlight strategic cost issues, and can be
employed in assigning costs and assets to value activities where generating
accurate cost ﬁgures would require great expense. As the analysis proceeds
and particular value activities prove to be important to cost advantage,
greater efforts at precision can be made. Finally, a ﬁrm may ﬁnd that
competitors assign their operating costs and assets differently. The way in
which competitors measure their costs is important because it will inﬂuence
their behavior. Part of the task of competitor cost analysis is to attempt to
diagnose competitor costing practices.
First Cut Analysis of Costs
The allocation of costs and assets will produce a value chain that
illustrates graphically the distribution of a ﬁrm’s costs. It can prove
revealing to separate the cost of each value activity into three categories:
purchased operating inputs, human resource costs, and assets by major
category. The proportions of the value chain can be drawn to reﬂect the
distribution of costs and assets among activities as shown in Figure 3–1.
Even the initial allocation of operating costs and assets to the value chain
may suggest areas for cost improvement. Purchased operating inputs will
often represent a larger proportion of costs than commonly perceived, for
example, because all the purchased inputs in the value chain are rarely
cumulated. Other insights can result from grouping value activities into
direct, indirect and quality assurance activities as deﬁned in Chapter 2, and
cumulating costs in each category. Managers often fail to recognize
burgeoning indirect costs and have a tendency to focus almost exclusively
on direct costs. In many ﬁrms, indirect costs not only represent a large


proportion of total cost but also have grown more rapidly than other cost
elements. The introduction of sophisticated information systems and
automated processes is reducing direct costs but boosting indirect costs by
requiring such things as sophisticated maintenance and computer
programmers to prepare machine tapes. In valve manufacturing, for
example, indirect cost represents more than 10 percent of total cost. Firms
can also ﬁnd that the sum of all quality assurance activities in the value
chain is strikingly large. In many industries, this has led to the growing
conclusion that other approaches to quality assurance besides inspection,
adjusting, and testing can yield large cost savings.


Figure 3–1. Distribution of Operating Costs and Assets in Flow Control Valves


Cost Behavior
A ﬁrm’s cost position results from the cost behavior of its value
activities. Cost behavior depends on a number of structural factors that
inﬂuence cost, which I term cost drivers. Several cost drivers can combine
to determine the cost of a given activity. The important cost driver or drivers
can differ among ﬁrms in the same industry if they employ different value
chains. A ﬁrm’s relative cost position in a value activity depends on its
standing vis-à-vis important cost drivers.
Cost Drivers
Ten major cost drivers determine the cost behavior of value activities:
economies of scale, learning, the pattern of capacity utilization, linkages,
interrelationships, integration, timing, discretionary policies, location, and
institutional factors. Cost drivers are the structural causes of the cost of an
activity and can be more or less under a ﬁrm’s control. Drivers often
interact to determine the cost behavior of a particular activity, and the
relative impact of cost drivers will differ widely among value activities.
Thus no one cost driver, such as scale or the learning curve, is ever the sole
determinant of a ﬁrm’s cost position. Diagnosing the cost drivers of each
value activity allows a ﬁrm to gain a sophisticated understanding of the
sources of its relative cost position and how it might be changed.
ECONOMIES OR DISECONOMIES OF SCALE
The costs of a value activity are often subject to economies or
diseconomies of scale. Economies of scale arise from the ability to perform
activities differently and more efﬁciently at larger volume, or from the
ability to amortize the cost of intangibles such as advertising and R&D over
a greater sales volume. Economies of scale can result from efﬁciencies in
the actual operation of an activity at higher scale as well as from less than
proportional increases in the infrastructure or overhead needed to support an
activity as it grows. In a bauxite mine, for example, actual mining costs go
down less with scale than do infrastructure costs.


Economies of scale must be clearly distinguished from capacity
utilization. Increasing capacity utilization spreads the ﬁxed costs of existing
facilities and personnel over large volume, while economies of scale imply
that an activity operating at full capacity is more efﬁcient at larger scale.
Mistaking capacity utilization for economies of scale can lead a ﬁrm to the
false conclusion that its costs will continue to fall if it expands capacity
once its existing capacity is full.
Increasing complexity and costs of coordination can lead to
diseconomies of scale in a value activity as scale increases. When the
number of lines in a metal can plant exceeds about 15, for example, the
complexity of the plant becomes unwieldy. Increasing scale also sometimes
dampens employee motivation and may increase wage or purchased input
costs. For example, a large plant may have a greater likelihood of
unionization or lead to higher expectations and greater stridency of union
negotiators. Diseconomies of scale in procurement can also occur if large
requirements meet an inelastic supply, forcing up input prices.
Diseconomies of scale appear to be present in many fashion-sensitive
industries and professional services, which rely heavily on fast response
times and creative individuals who do not function well in large
organizations.
The scale sensitivity of activities varies widely. Value activities such as
product development, national advertising, and ﬁrm infrastructure are
typically more scale-sensitive than activities such as procurement and sales
force operations because their costs are heavily ﬁxed no matter what the
ﬁrm’s scale is. However, economies (and diseconomies) of scale can be
found to some extent in virtually every value activity of a ﬁrm.
Economies of scale reﬂect not only the technology in a value activity but
also the manner in which a ﬁrm chooses to operate it. Scale economies in a
plant can be strongly affected by the number of product varieties produced
and the length of runs chosen. Similarly, the deployment of a sales force can
inﬂuence economies of scale in sales force operation. In a sales force
organized geographically, costs tend to fall as regional sales volume grows
because a salesperson can write larger orders on each sales call and/or
because travel time between accounts is reduced by greater density. If the
sales force is organized by product line, however, an increase in volume in


one region may create diseconomies by requiring salespersons to travel
more to that region than to other regions closer to home base.
Economies of scale are not all equivalent. The relevant measure of scale
differs among value activities and industries. Firms that overlook this often
undermine their relative cost positions. For some value activities, global or
worldwide scale is the relevant cost driver. For other value activities,
national scale, regional scale, local scale, plant scale, project scale, scale per
production line, scale per buyer, scale per order, or some other measure of
scale may underlie the behavior of cost.3
In product R&D, for example, global or national scale are often the
relevant measure of scale. Developing a new model requires a ﬁxed
investment that is amortized over all the units sold. The development cost of
a standard model sold worldwide is sensitive to global scale, while the
development cost of a product that must be customized for individual
countries may be more sensitive to national scale. Economies of scale in
transportation typically hinge on regional or local scale or on scale per
buyer, depending on the mode of transportation employed. Local or regional
scale is a proxy for the density of buyers and hence the distances between
deliveries to different buyer’s locations. Transportation suppliers also
frequently offer discounts on containerload, carload, or trainload shipments
to a given area that contribute to local or regional scale sensitivity. Finally,
the cost of delivery to a given buyer often remains largely ﬁxed regardless
of the buyer’s order size, making large buyers less costly to serve.
Understanding how economies of scale affect cost, therefore, requires an
identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc mechanisms underpinning them and the
measure of scale that best captures these mechanisms.
The appropriate measure of scale is a function of how a ﬁrm manages an
activity. For example, modifying products by country instead of selling a
standard product worldwide, a policy choice, changes the appropriate
measure of scale. Similarly, the authorization cost of a credit card
processing ﬁrm that authorizes merchant charges electronically rather than
manually becomes much more sensitive to the overall volume of
transactions. Thus a ﬁrm can inﬂuence not only the extent of economies of
scale but also the type of scale that most determines its cost in an activity.
This suggests that a ﬁrm should manage its activities to maximize their
sensitivity to the type of scale in which the ﬁrm has the greatest advantage


over its competitors. A regional ﬁrm should accentuate the value of its
regional scale, for example, while a national competitor without leadership
in any region should manage its activities to maximize the value of its
national scale.
LEARNING AND SPILLOVERS
The cost of a value activity can decline over time due to learning that
increases its efﬁciency. The mechanisms by which learning can lower cost
over time are numerous, and include such factors as layout changes,
improved scheduling, labor efﬁciency improvement, product design
modiﬁcations that facilitate manufacturing, yield improvements, procedures
that increase the utilization of assets, and better tailoring of raw materials to
the process. Learning can also reduce the cost of constructing plants, retail
outlets, or other facilities. Thus the possibilities for learning in an activity
are much broader than learning by personnel to perform their functions
more efﬁciently.4 The rate of learning varies widely among value activities
because each offers differing possibilities for learning improvements.5
Learning is often the cumulation of many small improvements rather than
major breakthroughs. The rate of learning may increase during slack
periods when attention is focused on reducing costs rather than meeting
demand. Moreover, learning tends to vary with the amount of management
attention devoted to capturing it.
Learning can spill over from one ﬁrm in an industry to another, through
mechanisms such as suppliers, consultants, ex-employees, and reverse
engineering of products. Where spillover of learning among ﬁrms is high in
a value activity, the rate of learning may stem more from total industry
learning than from the learning of one ﬁrm. Since a sustainable cost
advantage results only from proprietary learning, the rate of spillover also
determines whether learning serves to create a cost advantage for a ﬁrm or
simply lowers cost for the industry.6 Analysis of the rate of spillover plays a
crucial role in diagnosing the relative cost differences among competitors
due to differential rates of learning.
As with scale economies, the appropriate measure of the rate of learning
is different for different value activities. The appropriate measure of


learning reﬂects the speciﬁc mechanisms of learning that account for the
fall in costs over time in a value activity. This will vary because
mechanisms for learning are diverse and because of the inﬂuence of
spillovers. In a value activity where learning affects cost behavior through
improving worker efﬁciency, for example, the rate of learning may be tied
to the cumulative volume in that activity. In this case, the rate of learning is
correlated with scale because high scale makes learning accumulate rapidly.
Where learning occurs through the introduction of more efﬁcient
machinery, however, its rate may reﬂect the rate of technological change in
machinery and have little to do with the ﬁrm’s volume. The rate of learning
can also be a function of calendar time or the level of investment expended
in modiﬁcations to an activity. Understanding the speciﬁc mechanisms for
learning in each value activity and identifying the best measure of its rate
are necessary if a ﬁrm is to improve its cost position.7 The rate of learning
is often subject to diminishing returns, and hence it may decline over time
for some value activities as an industry matures.
Some alternative measures that may serve as a proxy for the rate of
learning in an activity and typical value activities in which they apply are
shown in Table 3–1.
PATTERN OF CAPACITY UTILIZATION
Where a value activity has substantial ﬁxed cost associated with it, the
cost of an activity will be affected by capacity utilization. Fixed costs create
a penalty for underutilization, and the ratio of ﬁxed to variable cost
indicates the sensitivity of a value activity to utilization. Different ways of
conﬁguring a value activity will affect its sensitivity to capacity utilization.
For example, the use of food brokers to sell to supermarkets usually reduces
sensitivity to capacity utilization when compared to an in-house sales force.
Brokers typically receive a commission on sales, while an in-house sales
force is paid a ﬁxed salary and expenses over and above commissions.
TABLE 3–1 Typical Measures of Learning
Cumulative volume in the activity (typical for determining machine speed or reject rates in
fabrication operations)
Time in operation (typical for work-ﬂow layout in assembly)


Cumulative investment (typical for plant efﬁciency)
Cumulative industry volume (typical for product design improvements that lower cost where
spillovers are high)
Exogenous technical change (typical for basic process improvements)
Capacity utilization at a given point in time is a function of seasonal,
cyclical, and other demand or supply ﬂuctuations unrelated to competitive
position. Thus the pattern of utilization over the entire cycle is the correct
cost driver instead of utilization at one point in time. Changes in the level of
capacity utilization will involve costs of expanding or contracting, so that a
ﬁrm that changes its utilization will have higher costs than one that keeps its
utilization constant, though they both have the same average utilization. The
pattern of utilization reﬂects such changes, and is thus the appropriate cost
driver rather than the average level of utilization. The pattern of capacity
utilization of an activity is partly determined by environmental conditions
and competitor behavior (particularly competitor investment behavior) and
is partly under a ﬁrm’s control through its policy choices in areas such as
marketing and product selection.
LINKAGES
The cost of a value activity is frequently affected by how other activities
are performed. As described in Chapter 2, two broad types of linkages exist:
linkages within the value chain and vertical linkages with the value chains
of suppliers and channels. These linkages mean that the cost behavior of a
value activity cannot be understood by examining that activity alone.
Linkages create the opportunity to lower the total cost of the linked
activities. They provide a potentially powerful source of cost advantage
because linkages are subtle and require joint optimization or coordination of
activities across organizational lines. Competitors often fail to recognize
their presence or are incapable of harnessing them.
Linkages within the Value Chain
Linkages among value activities pervade the value chain. Some of the
most common linkages are those between direct and indirect activities (e.g.,


machining and maintenance), quality assurance and other activities (e.g.,
inspection and after-sale service), activities that must be coordinated (e.g.,
inbound logistics and operations), and between activities that are alternative
ways of achieving the result (e.g., advertising and direct sales, or writing
airline tickets on-board the plane instead of at ticket counters or gates).
Identifying linkages requires asking the question, “What are all the other
activities elsewhere in a ﬁrm that have or might have an impact on the cost
of performing this activity?”
When activities in the value chain are linked, changing the way one of
them is performed can reduce the total cost of both. Deliberately raising
cost in one activity may not only lower the cost of another activity but also
lower total cost. As described in Chapter 2, linkages lead to opportunities
for cost reduction through two mechanisms: coordination and optimization.
Better coordination of linked activities such as procurement and assembly
can reduce the need for inventory, for example. Inventory is typically a
manifestation of a linkage between activities, and reducing inventory is
possible by managing the linkage better. Jointly optimizing activities that
are linked involves resolving tradeoffs among them. In copier
manufacturing, for example, the quality of purchased parts is linked to the
adjustment of copiers after assembly. Canon found it could virtually
eliminate the need for adjustment in its personal copier line by purchasing
higher precision parts.
Vertical Linkages
Vertical linkages reﬂect interdependencies between a ﬁrm’s activities and
the value chains of suppliers and channels. The ﬁrm can identify them by
examining how the behavior of suppliers or channels affects the cost of each
of its activities and vice versa. Vertical linkages are frequently overlooked,
because identifying them requires a sophisticated understanding of supplier
and channel value chains.
Linkages with suppliers tend to center on the suppliers’ product design
characteristics, service, quality assurance procedures, packaging, delivery
procedures, and order processing. Supplier linkages also take the form of a
supplier performing an activity that the ﬁrm might otherwise undertake. In
these and other areas, the manner in which a supplier performs activities


within its value chain can raise or lower a ﬁrm’s cost. Typical examples of
supplier linkages important to cost include the linkage between the
frequency and timeliness of supplier deliveries and a ﬁrm’s raw material
inventory, the linkage between supplier application engineering and a ﬁrm’s
technology development cost, and the linkage between a supplier’s
packaging and a ﬁrm’s material handling cost. As described in Chapter 2,
for example, delivery of bulk chocolate in liquid form instead of ten pound
molded bars can reduce a confectioner’s processing costs. Often linkages
with suppliers provide opportunities for cost reduction on both sides—e.g.,
delivery of liquid chocolate can reduce the supplier’s cost as well, since it
eliminates the cost of molding bars and packaging them.
Managing supplier linkages can lower total cost through coordination or
joint optimization, as in all linkages. The easiest linkages to exploit are
those where both a ﬁrm’s and a supplier’s cost fall. Sometimes exploiting a
linkage requires that a supplier’s cost go up to achieve a more than
compensating fall in a ﬁrm’s costs, however. A ﬁrm must be prepared to
raise the price it gives suppliers in such cases to make exploiting the linkage
worthwhile. The opposite case is also possible, and the ﬁrm must be
prepared to elevate its own internal cost if the supplier offers a more-than-
compensating price cut.
A similar analysis applies to linkages with channels. The typical linkages
mirror those with suppliers. For example, the location of a channel’s
warehouses and the channel’s materials handling technology can inﬂuence a
ﬁrm’s outbound logistical and packaging cost. Similarly, sales or
promotional activities of channels may reduce a ﬁrm’s sales cost. As with
supplier linkages, channel linkages may allow both the ﬁrm and its channels
to lower cost. However, exploiting channel linkages may require the
channel to raise cost for a more than offsetting reduction in the ﬁrm’s cost.
It may be desirable, then, to raise margins paid to channels in return for
changes in the way they operate that will reduce a ﬁrm’s cost. In the United
States, for example, Seiko paid its jewelers a generous fee for accepting
Seiko watches for repair and shipping them to Seiko. This minimized
Seiko’s need for service locations and lowered the cost of processing repairs
and of informing customers about repair procedures.
Since vertical linkages involve independent ﬁrms, reaching agreement on
how to exploit them and how to divide the resulting gains can be difﬁcult.


Linkages that require a supplier or channel to raise cost to beneﬁt the ﬁrm
are quite difﬁcult to achieve unless the ﬁrm has considerable bargaining
power. Exploiting linkages may also require the creation of switching costs
as a byproduct, tying one or both sides to the other. This often further
complicates the task of agreeing on ways to exploit linkages, because
reaching agreement involves a high level of commitment and trust. The
payout to exploiting linkages may be great, however, because they are hard
for competitors to match.
INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Interrelationships with other business units within a ﬁrm affect cost, as
will be discussed in detail in Chapter 9. The most important form of
interrelationships is when a value activity can be shared with a sister unit.
American Hospital Supply has found that sharing an order processing and
distribution organization across many units producing medical supplies has
yielded a signiﬁcant cost improvement, for example, while shared
marketing and distribution are beneﬁting such ﬁnancial services ﬁrms as
Citicorp and Sears. Another form of interrelationship, that I term an
intangible interrelationship, involves the sharing of know-how between
separate but similar value activities. Emerson Electric, for example, uses
cost reduction expertise gained in one division to help lower cost in others.
Sharing a value activity raises throughput in the activity. It reduces unit
costs if cost in the activity is sensitive to economies of scale or learning, or
if sharing improves the pattern of capacity utilization because different
business units place demands on the value activity at different times.
Sharing is potentially a way to achieve scale, go down the learning curve
faster, or load capacity outside of the boundaries of a single industry.
Sharing is thus a potential substitute for position in a particular industry.
Sharing a value activity always involves costs, however, that must be
weighed against any beneﬁts from sharing. The other form of
interrelationship, sharing know-how between separate activities, lowers cost
if the activities are similar and if the know-how is signiﬁcant to improving
the efﬁciency of the activity. In effect, sharing know-how is transfering the
fruits of learning from one activity to another.


INTEGRATION
The level of vertical integration in a value activity may inﬂuence its cost.
The cost of an order processing system can be lower if the ﬁrm owns its
own computer and software instead of contracting with a computer service
bureau, for example, while the cost of an outbound logistics activity may
vary depending on whether or not a ﬁrm owns its own ﬂeet of trucks. Every
value activity employs or could employ purchased inputs, and thus involves
explicit or implicit integration choices.
Integration can reduce cost in a number of ways. It avoids the costs of
using the market, such as procurement and transportation costs. It can allow
the ﬁrm to avoid suppliers or buyers with considerable bargaining power.
Integration can also lead to economies of joint operation, as where steel
does not have to be reheated if it moves directly from the steelmaking to the
fabrication process. However, integration can raise cost by creating
inﬂexibility, bringing activities in-house that suppliers can perform more
cheaply, undermining incentives for efﬁciency because the relationship with
the supplying unit becomes captive, or raising exit barriers.8 Whether
integration raises, lowers, or has no effect on cost thus depends on the
particular value activity and purchased input involved. Sometimes de-
integration is indicated.
A ﬁrm must assess the potential beneﬁts of integration for each
important purchased input in a value activity. Conversely, it must examine
those functions currently performed internally to determine whether de-
integration would lower the cost of the activity without undermining the
ﬁrm’s strategy. Firms often ignore the de-integration option in their cost
analyses. Integration and de-integration analysis must not limit itself to
major inputs but should also examine ancillary services and other
supporting functions. A product might be purchased without service, for
example, though the two are often bundled.9 Firms can often lower cost by
integrating into some ancillary services while continuing to buy the basic
product.
TIMING


The cost of a value activity often reﬂects timing. Sometimes a ﬁrm may
gain ﬁrst-mover advantages from being among the ﬁrst to take a particular
action. The ﬁrst major brand in the market may have lower costs of
establishing and maintaining a brand name, for example. Gerber exploited
this advantage in baby food. Learning is also inextricably linked to timing,
because the timing of moves determines when learning begins.
Disadvantages may also accrue to ﬁrst movers. Late movers can enjoy
beneﬁts such as purchasing the latest equipment (an advantage today in
computers and steel) or avoiding high product or market development costs
borne by early movers. A late mover may also be able to tailor the value
chain to prevailing factor costs. Another late-mover advantage may be a less
senior, and therefore less costly, workforce. Newly established airlines such
as People Express have much less senior workforces than established
carriers such as PanAm. Furthermore, workforces assembled during
difﬁcult economic conditions may prove less interested in unionization.
First-mover and late-mover advantages are discussed extensively in Chapter
5.
Timing’s role in cost position may depend more on timing with respect
to the business cycle or market conditions than on timing in absolute terms.
For example, the timing of purchase of an offshore drilling rig in the
industry’s cycle strongly inﬂuences not only the interest cost but the
purchase price of the rig. ODECO has purchased rigs during downturns
when prices are depressed as an integral part of its cost leadership strategy.
Depending on the value activity, then, timing can either raise or lower costs
relative to competitors. Timing can lead to either sustainable cost advantage
or a short-term cost advantage. A ﬁrm that has low cost assets because of
fortuitous timing, for example, may ﬁnd that the eventual need to replace
those assets dramatically raises its relative cost position.
DISCRETIONARY POLICIES INDEPENDENT OF OTHER DRIVERS
The cost of a value activity is always affected by policy choices a ﬁrm
makes, quite independently of other cost drivers. Discretionary policy
choices reﬂect a ﬁrm’s strategy and often involve deliberate tradeoffs
between cost and differentiation. For example, an airline’s cost position is
determined by such policy choices as the quality of meals, which airports


are used, the level of amenities in terminals, the baggage allowance offered,
and whether the airline sells tickets on-board or has in-terminal ticketing
and downtown ticket ofﬁces. A “no-frills” airline reduces cost by having no
meals or charging for them, using secondary airports with spartan terminals,
having no free baggage allowance, and ticketing on board.
Some of the policy choices that tend to have the greatest impact on cost
include:
• product conﬁguration, performance, and features
• mix and variety of products offered
• level of service provided
• spending rate on marketing and technology development activities
• delivery time
• buyers served (e.g., small versus large)
•  channels employed (e.g., fewer, more efﬁcient dealers versus many
small ones)
• process technology chosen, independent or scale, timing, or other cost
drivers
• the speciﬁcations of raw materials or other purchased inputs used (e.g.,
raw material quality affects processing yield in semiconductors)
• wages paid and amenities provided to employees, relative to prevailing
norms
• other human resource policies including hiring, training, and employee
motivation
• procedures for scheduling production, maintenance, the sales force and
other activities
Though policy choices always play an independent role in determining
the cost of value activities, they also frequently affect or are affected by
other cost drivers. Process technology is often dictated partly by scale and
partly by what product characteristics are desired, for example. Moreover,
other cost drivers inevitably affect the cost of policies. For example, an
automated ticketing and seat selection system may well be subject to


economies of scale that make such a system very costly for a small airline
to adopt.
Policies typically play a particularly essential role in differentiation
strategies. Differentiation often rests on policy choices that make a ﬁrm
unique in performing one or more value activities, deliberately raising cost
in the process (see Chapter 4). A differentiator must understand the costs
associated with its differentiation and compare them to the price premium
that results. This can be done only by isolating the effects of policies on
cost. Frequently, ﬁrms choose seemingly benign policies to differentiate
themselves that prove enormously costly once their role in cost behavior
becomes clear. In other cases, ﬁrms forego policies that can enhance
differentiation with little impact on cost—or that are less expensive for
them to implement than for their competitors. A market leader such as
Owens-Corning Fiberglas, for example, can potentially differentiate itself at
lower cost than other ﬁberglass competitors through a high spending rate on
advertising. The resulting brand awareness is cheaper for Owens-Corning to
achieve than competitors because of scale economies in advertising that are
driven by national share.
Policies play a vital role in determining cost, and cost analysis must
uncover their impact. Yet many ﬁrms do not recognize the extent to which
the explicit and implicit policy choices they make determine cost. A ﬁrm
must scrutinize each value activity to identify the explicit and implicit
policy choices embodied in it. Sometimes policy choices are nearly
invisible, because they are inherited or represent conventional wisdom that
is unchallenged. An examination of competitors’ policies in each activity
often yields insight into the ﬁrm’s explicit or implicit policy choices and
suggests ways they might be modiﬁed or improved to lower costs. Policy
choices can often be changed rapidly, yielding immediate cost reduction.
LOCATION
The geographic location of a value activity can affect its cost, as can its
location relative to other value activities. While location frequently reﬂects
a policy choice, it can also stem from history, the location of inputs, and
other factors. Hence, location should be treated as a separate cost driver.


The location of a value activity affects cost in a number of ways.
Locations differ in the prevailing costs of labor, management, scientiﬁc
personnel, raw materials, energy, and other factors. Prevailing wage levels
and tax rates vary markedly by country, region within a country, and city,
for example. Eaton Corporation has capitalized on this in automotive
components, employing plants in Spain and Italy to achieve a low-cost
position in Europe. Location can also affect the cost of a ﬁrm’s
infrastructure because of differences in available local infrastructure.
Climate, cultural norms, and tastes also differ by location. These affect not
only product needs but also the way in which a ﬁrm can perform value
activities. The amenities required in a plant, for example, are partly a
function of local norms. Finally, logistical costs often hinge on location.
Location relative to suppliers is an important factor in inbound logistical
cost, while location relative to buyers affects outbound logistical cost.
Location of facilities relative to each other affects the costs of transshipping,
inventory, transportation, and coordination. Location also shapes the
transportation modes and communication systems available to a ﬁrm, which
can affect cost.
Location has some inﬂuence, then, on the cost of almost every value
activity. Firms do not always understand the impact of location beyond
obvious differences such as wage rates and taxes, however. Opportunities
often exist for reducing cost through relocating value activities or by
establishing new patterns of location of facilities relative to each other.
Changing location often involves tradeoffs—it lowers some costs while
raising others. Locating to minimize transportation or other costs also
frequently trades off against scale economies. Technological change that
alters scale economies may alter historical tradeoffs, however, as may shifts
in relative wages and other costs. Thus ﬁrms may be able to create a cost
advantage through recognizing opportunities for changing location ﬁrst.
INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS
Institutional factors, including government regulation, tax holidays and
other ﬁnancial incentives, unionization, tariffs and levies, and local content
rules, constitute the ﬁnal major cost driver. Institutional factors represent
perhaps the single most important cost driver in the trucking industry in the


United States in the 1980s, for example. Regulatory approval for the use of
double trailers could have as much as a 10 percent impact on cost. At the
same time, unionized carriers have much higher wage costs relative to
nonunion carriers. These two factors outweigh all the other major cost
drivers by a considerable margin in determining the relative cost position of
trucking ﬁrms. Another example of the role of institutional factors as a cost
driver is in power costs, the single largest determinant of cost position in
aluminum smelting. Power costs depend on the rates charged by power
companies, a highly political issue in areas where governments own power
companies. Rapid escalation of power rates in some countries has made
them uncompetitive smelting locations. Favorable institutional factors can
lower costs just as unfavorable ones can raise them. While institutional
factors often remain outside a ﬁrm’s control, means may exist to inﬂuence
them or minimize their impact.
DIAGNOSING COST DRIVERS
The same cost drivers determine asset utilization as well as operating
costs in an activity. Finished good inventory turnover, for example, is often
determined by the scale of the order processing activity and policies
regarding delivery time. Tradeoffs can often be made between asset
utilization and operating costs. A large-scale plant may have low operating
costs but less asset turnover than a small-scale one, for example. Such
tradeoffs must be identiﬁed in order to optimize the combination of assets
and operating cost to lower total cost. Some illustrative drivers of asset
utilization are shown in Table 3–2.
The cost behavior of a value activity can be a function of more than one
cost driver. While one driver may exert the strongest inﬂuence on the cost of
a value activity, several drivers often interact to determine cost. For
example, the cost of gate operations for an airline reﬂects policies regarding
how much service the airline provides, local scale (which inﬂuences the
efﬁciency with which personnel and facilities are utilized), and the pattern
of capacity utilization (which is a reﬂection of the ﬂight schedule). Figure
3–2 illustrates the most important cost drivers in a consumer durable
manufacturing ﬁrm.


A ﬁrm must attempt to quantify the relationship between cost drivers and
the cost of a value activity whenever possible. This will require estimating
for each activity the slope of the scale or learning curve, the cost impact of
each important policy, the cost advantage or penalty of timing, and so on for
each driver. Though a high degree of precision is not required, some level of
quantiﬁcation is necessary in order to determine the relative signiﬁcance of
each cost driver. Quantiﬁcation will also greatly facilitate estimates of
relative cost position vis-à-vis competitors.
The technology employed in a value activity is not itself a cost driver,
but rather an outcome of the interplay of cost drivers. Scale, timing,
location, and other drivers shape the technology employed in combination
with policy decisions a ﬁrm makes. The relationship between technology
and the cost drivers is important in determining the feasibility of technology
changes, one of the subjects of Chapter 5.
Interactions Among Drivers. Cost drivers often interact to determine the
cost of an activity. These interactions take two forms: drivers either
reinforce or counteract each other. Drivers frequently reinforce or are
related to each other in affecting cost. The extent of scale economies in an
activity is partly determined by policy choices about how the activity will
be performed as well as product mix, for example. The effect of location on
cost is often related to institutional conditions such as unionization or
regulation, while securing good locations may require early timing in such
industries as retailing. Policy choices can also make linkages easier or more
difﬁcult to achieve, and the cost of policies is often affected by other drivers
as noted earlier. The advantages of early timing can be reinforced by scale
economies or learning effects, as will be discussed in Chapter 5. Integration
also frequently increases scale economies.


TABLE 3–2 Illustrative Drivers of Asset Utilization for Selected Value
Activities


Figure 3–2. Cost Drivers in a Consumer Durable Manufacturing Firm


Cost drivers can also counteract each other, offsetting each other’s
effects. This means that improving position vis-à-vis one driver may worsen
a ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis another. Large scale and high levels of vertical
integration frequently increase the penalty of underutilizing capacity, for
example. Similarly, increased scale can increase the likelihood of
unionization, while scale economies can be offset because a single location
raises transportation costs.
Identifying interactions among cost drivers is a necessary part of
determining the cost behavior of a value activity. Where drivers are
reinforcing, a ﬁrm must coordinate its strategy in order to achieve the
lowest cost. For example, policy choices should enhance the ﬁrm’s ability to
reap the beneﬁts of scale economies or to achieve linkages. Early timing
should be exploited by the aggressive pursuit of learning. Eliminating
inconsistencies and harnessing the reinforcing effects of cost drivers can
signiﬁcantly improve relative cost position.
The presence of counteracting cost drivers implies the need for
optimization. Location must optimize the tradeoff among scale economies,
transportation costs, and wage costs, for example. The choice of plant scale
must weigh the cost of underutilization. Policy choices can sometimes alter
such tradeoffs—for example, the choice of a ﬂexible manufacturing process
can change the tradeoff between scale and product variety. Resolving such
tradeoffs is only possible if the effect of each driver on the cost of an
activity can be quantiﬁed.
Interactions among cost drivers are often subtle. They are frequently not
recognized, especially if they are changing. The ability to translate insight
about the interaction of cost drivers into strategy choices can thus be a
sustainable source of cost advantage.
Identifying Cost Drivers. Identifying cost drivers and quantifying their
effect on cost may not be easy, and a number of methods can be employed.
Sometimes the cost drivers of a value activity will be intuitively clear from
examining its basic economics. For example, sales force costs are often
driven by local share because high local share lowers travel time. A
reasonably accurate estimate of the shape of the relationship between sales
force cost and share can be computed by estimating how rising share would
cut average travel time. It is often illuminating for understanding and


quantifying cost behavior to employ alternative measures of the efﬁciency
of an activity besides total cost. For example, such measures as yield, scrap
rates, labor hours, and others can be employed to probe the sources of cost
changes in a value activity and their logic.
Another method of identifying cost drivers is for a ﬁrm to examine its
own internal experience, particularly if the ﬁrm’s circumstances have
changed over time or it operates multiple units. Past cost data may allow a
ﬁrm to plot its historical learning curve in a value activity, for example, if it
adjusts for inﬂation and changes in policies, product design, and product
mix. Cost levels at different scales of output in the past may shed some light
on scale economies. If a ﬁrm sells in several geographic regions or
manufactures in several plants, differences among them can illuminate cost
drivers.
Cost drivers can also be determined from interviews with experts.
Individuals who have extensive knowledge of a value activity can be asked
“what if” questions about the effects of changing various parameters on
cost. For instance, interviews with production managers might address the
impact of doubling line speed on such factors as manning levels, energy
consumption, and yield.
The ﬁnal method for identifying cost drivers is to compare a ﬁrm’s cost
in a value activity to its competitors’ or compare competitors’ costs to each
other. Since competitors will usually be situated differently vis-à-vis the
cost drivers, such comparisons can expose which cost drivers are most
important. Analyzing competitor cost behavior will be discussed below.
The Cost of Purchased Inputs
Procurement has strategic signiﬁcance in almost every industry, but
rarely has sufﬁcient stature in ﬁrms. Every value activity employs purchased
inputs of some kind, ranging from raw materials used in component
fabrication to professional services, ofﬁce space, and capital goods.
Purchased inputs divide into purchased operating inputs and purchased
assets. The total cost of purchased inputs as a percentage of ﬁrm value
provides an important indicator of the strategic signiﬁcance of procurement.
In many industries, the total cost of purchased inputs is a very large


percentage of value, yet it receives much less attention than reducing labor
costs.
The cost of purchased inputs is an integral part of the cost of a value
activity, and the cost drivers described above determine the behavior of
input costs. However, isolating purchased inputs for separate analysis will
often yield additional insights into cost behavior. The cost of purchased
inputs in an activity is a function of three factors: their unit cost, their rate
of utilization in an activity, and their indirect effects on other activities
through linkages. While utilization of inputs in an activity and linkages with
other activities are best analyzed as part of the overall cost behavior of an
activity, the unit cost of purchased inputs often has similar drivers across
activities. Firmwide procurement practices also affect the unit cost of many
inputs. Thus a ﬁrm can gain insight into how to lower unit cost by analyzing
the unit cost of purchased inputs as a group.
In separating the unit cost of purchased inputs for analysis, however, a
ﬁrm must recognize all three factors noted above. Better quality steel may
improve the yield of a forging operation, as well as simplify machining. In
some instances, then, a ﬁrm may lower total cost by spending more on
purchased inputs. Minimizing the unit cost of purchased inputs is not
necessarily appropriate. However, it is still clearly desirable to seek the best
possible unit cost for purchased inputs after choosing the appropriate type
and quality of inputs.
Firms’ analyses of purchasing typically focus on the most visible items,
especially raw materials and components. However, purchased inputs other
than raw materials and components, when aggregated, often constitute an
even greater percentage of cost. Standard cost systems often distribute the
costs of such inputs among many cost categories rather than highlighting
their importance. Purchased services such as maintenance or professional
services are often overlooked in purchasing analyses, while purchases from
sister units seldom receive the level of examination that is applied to outside
purchases. Finally, purchased assets are frequently bought outside the
normal procurement system and without the associated expertise. A
comprehensive analysis of the unit cost of purchased inputs can be an
important tool in gaining cost advantage.
PURCHASING INFORMATION


The starting point in analyzing the unit cost of purchased inputs is to
develop purchasing information. A ﬁrm should begin by identifying all
signiﬁcant purchased inputs and determining its yearly or quarterly
expenditures on them. The list should include inputs purchased from sister
business units. For purchased operating inputs, usage per period represents
a relatively easy means of calculating cost. This analysis, however, must
account for prepayments, discounts, and inventory changes. For purchased
assets, total purchase price can be used as a measure of cost, adjusted for
supplier concessions such as free service, free spare parts, or low-cost
ﬁnancing.
All signiﬁcant purchased inputs should be identiﬁed, and listed in the
order of importance to total cost. They should then be divided into
purchased operating inputs and purchased assets and, within these
categories, into items purchased regularly such as raw materials and ofﬁce
space, and irregularly purchased items such as equipment and consulting.
Categorizing purchased inputs in this way can direct attention to areas
where opportunities for cost reduction are frequently present. Small
purchased inputs often provide fruitful opportunities for cost reduction.
Managers tend to focus their attention on those few purchases that represent
a signiﬁcant percentage of costs. As a result, suppliers frequently generate
their highest margins on purchases that represent a small cost item to the
buyer. Irregularly purchased inputs frequently receive inadequate attention
as well, while regular purchases are monitored and most ﬁrms have
procedures to govern them. A ﬁrm should also compute the change in the
inﬂation-adjusted cost of each input over time. Such a calculation further
highlights those inputs that should be scrutinized. An increase in the real
unit cost of an input may indicate that a ﬁrm has either paid inadequate
attention to controlling cost or that supplier bargaining power has grown.
After sorting purchased inputs by size, regularity of purchase and real
cost change, a ﬁrm should then identify where it makes the purchasing
decision. Authority for many purchases rests outside the purchasing
department. Yet the purchasing department is the place where procedures,
procurement expertise, systems for tracking the costs of purchases, and the
mandate to manage cost reside. Although the de facto delegation of
procurement authority to other parts of a ﬁrm is often a practical necessity,
it tends to obscure the cost of many purchased inputs and can lead to less


efﬁcient procurement unless the ﬁrm applies the same care as it does in the
purchasing department.
A ﬁnal step in developing information about purchased inputs is to
record the suppliers for each item and the proportion of purchases awarded
to each supplier over an ordering cycle. The number and mix of suppliers
will play an important role in determining the cost of purchased inputs. A
ﬁrm must also systematically track potential suppliers that it does not
currently purchase from. This will ensure that alternative suppliers are
regularly considered and that a ﬁrm can gain perspective on the
performance of its own suppliers. Often a simple list of suppliers for each
input will lead to some interesting conclusions. For example, single-sourced
items may represent a signiﬁcant fraction of total purchases. Unless special
circumstances are present, single sourcing is an indication that suppliers
have created switching costs and that unit costs of inputs may be
unnecessarily high.
DRIVERS OF PURCHASED INPUT COSTS
The same cost drivers identiﬁed above shape the cost behavior of
purchased inputs, in combination with the bargaining relationship between
the ﬁrm and suppliers that grows out of industry structure.10 The structural
bargaining relationship reﬂects the broader industry determinants of
supplier margin, while the cost drivers address how a ﬁrm’s speciﬁc
circumstances can inﬂuence it. While a ﬁrm must expect to pay suppliers
higher margins on some inputs for these structural reasons, the cost of all
inputs can be reduced by controlling the drivers. Some drivers have similar
effects on the cost of many purchased inputs, and Table 3–3 summarizes
some of the most important ones. For each purchased input, position vis-à-
vis the drivers will determine the unit cost of purchased inputs of a given
quality.
As discussed in Chapter 2, a ﬁrm should seek to coordinate or jointly
optimize supplier linkages to lower overall costs in addition to create
bargaining power with its suppliers. Effective communication with suppliers
is necessary to achieve linkages. Ideally, a ﬁrm can exploit the available
linkages and capture its share of their beneﬁts by exercising its bargaining


power. Procurement policies have an important role in both harnessing
supplier linkages and improving a ﬁrm’s bargaining power.
SUPPLIER COST BEHAVIOR AND THE COST OF INPUTS
The cost behavior of suppliers will have an important inﬂuence on both
the cost of inputs and the ability of a ﬁrm to exploit supplier linkages.
Suppliers of a given purchased input will often vary in relative cost position,
and identifying the lowest cost source may lead to lower unit purchasing
costs in the long term if the ﬁrm can exercise its bargaining power. Supplier
cost behavior will determine whether placing larger orders will lower
suppliers’ cost. Supplier cost behavior will also determine the impact on
suppliers’ cost of other practices a ﬁrm adopts or asks its suppliers to adopt.
Supplier cost behavior is analyzed in the same way as a ﬁrm’s cost
behavior. Understanding the cost behavior of key suppliers will thus allow a
ﬁrm to establish better purchasing policies as well as to recognize and
exploit linkages.
TABLE 3–3 Drivers of the Unit Cost of Purchased Inputs
COST
DRIVER
COST DRIVER
APPLIED TO
PROCUREMENT
DESCRIPTION
Economies of
Scale
Purchasing scale
The volume of purchasing with a given supplier affects
bargaining power
Linkages
Linkages with suppliers Coordinating with suppliers on speciﬁcations, delivery,
and other activities can lower total costs
Interrelationships Shared purchasing with
other business units
Combining purchases with sister business units can
improve bargaining power with suppliers
Integration
Make versus buy
Integration may raise or lower the cost of an input
Timing
History of supplier
relationships
Historical loyalty to or problems with suppliers may
affect input costs, access to inputs during tight
periods, and services provided by suppliers
Policies
Purchasing practices*
Purchasing practices can signiﬁcantly improve
bargaining power with suppliers and the willingness
of suppliers to perform extra services, for example:
• Selection of the number and mix of suppliers
• Hedging procedures


• Investment in information on supplier costs and
availability
• Annual contracts versus individual purchases
• Utilization of by-products
Location
Supplier location
Location of suppliers can affect the cost of inputs
through the cost of transportation and the ease of
communication
Institutional
Factors
Government and union
restrictions
Government policy can restrict access to inputs or affect
their cost through tariffs, taxes, and other means.
Unions may affect the ability to out-source or
whether nonunion suppliers can be used
* Purchasing practices that can lower input costs will be treated more completely below.
Segment Cost Behavior
Thus far I have described how to analyze the cost behavior of a business
unit as a whole. In practice, however, a business unit usually produces a
number of different product varieties and sells them to a number of different
buyers. It may also employ a number of different distribution channels. For
example, a shipbuilder constructs both liquid natural gas tankers and
containerships while a bank lends to sophisticated high net-worth
individuals as well as to middle income customers. Any of these differences
may give rise to segments in which the behavior of costs in the value chain
may be different. Unless the ﬁrm recognizes differences in cost behavior
among segments, there is a signiﬁcant danger that incorrect or average-cost
pricing will provide openings for competitors. Thus cost analysis at the
segment level must often supplement analysis at the business unit level.
Chapter 7 discusses the identiﬁcation and analysis of segments in more
detail. Differences in cost behavior among products, buyers, channels, or
geographic areas is one of the key bases for the existence of segments, and
hence cost analysis is an essential input to segmentation. The value chain
for segments generally parallels that of the whole business unit. However,
segment value chains may differ in some respects that affect cost. For
example, the large sizes of a product line may be produced on different
machines than small sizes and require different handling, inspection, and
shipping procedures. Similarly, they may require different purchased inputs.


Identifying important differences in the value activities for different
segments is a starting point in segment cost analysis.
A ﬁrm should analyze the costs of those product lines, buyer types, or
other portions of its activities that
• have signiﬁcantly different value chains
• appear to have different cost drivers
• employ questionable procedures for allocating costs
In practice, a ﬁrm may want to select representative product varieties or
buyers to illuminate differences among segments, rather than analyze every
product variety or buyer in complete detail.
The process used to analyze cost behavior for segments is the same as
that used for business units. The value chain for the segment is identiﬁed
and costs and assets are assigned to it. Then the cost drivers of each activity
are determined and quantiﬁed if possible. While the process remains the
same, however, some complications often arise in practice. The prevalence
of shared value activities among segments (see Chapter 7) requires the
allocation of costs among segments. Standard cost systems often employ
arbitrary measures as the basis for allocating cost to segments, such as sales
volume or other readily measurable variables. While these measures have
the beneﬁt of simplicity, they often have little to do with the true
contribution of the segment to overall costs. For example, allocating the
costs of a value activity to domestic and international buyers by volume of
sales will usually seriously understate the true cost of international sales,
because international sales often make disproportionate demands in terms
of time and attention. The costs of support activities and the costs of
indirect primary activities appear to be most susceptible to misallocation.
Such misallocations result in incorrect costs and inappropriate prices for
product or buyer segments.
The costs of value activities shared among segments should be allocated
based on each segment’s actual impact on the effort or capacity of the value
activity. Such measures will capture the opportunity cost of using a shared
value activity in one segment instead of another. In technology
development, for example, allocation should probably be based on the


estimated time spent by engineers and scientists on particular product lines
rather than on the products’ respective sales volumes.
It is not always feasible or necessary to allocate the costs of shared
activities to segments on an ongoing basis. The required analysis for
strategic purposes does not require a high degree of precision, and periodic
studies can sufﬁce. To allocate R&D costs, for example, engineers can be
interviewed to determine the percentage of their time spent on various
products and buyers over a period of time long enough to eliminate
distortions. Some ﬁrms may also be in a position to compute time allocation
by sampling engineering change orders or requests for product
modiﬁcations ﬂowing to the engineering group from the sales force. Similar
methods of approximation can provide the basis for allocating effort to
segments in almost any shared activity.
Cost Dynamics
In addition to analyzing cost behavior at a point in time, a ﬁrm must
consider how the absolute and relative cost of value activities will change
over time independent of its strategy. I term this cost dynamics. An analysis
of cost dynamics enables a ﬁrm to forecast how the cost drivers of value
activities may change and which value activities will increase or decrease in
absolute or relative cost importance. A ﬁrm with insight into cost dynamics
may be able to position itself to gain a cost advantage by anticipating these
changes and moving quickly to respond to them.
Cost dynamics occur because of the interplay of cost drivers over time,
as a ﬁrm grows or as industry conditions change. The most common
sources of cost dynamics include:
Industry Real Growth. Growth of an industry as a whole often has a
number of effects on costs. Growth can ﬂow through to purchased inputs,
affecting the scale of supplier industries and thereby the cost of inputs. In
some industries, industry growth forces up the cost of purchased inputs by
worsening the supply/demand balance, while in others it lowers the cost of
inputs by making suppliers more efﬁcient. Industry growth can also open up


possibilities for scale economies by making the introduction of new
technologies feasible in value activities.
Differential Scale Sensitivity. Real growth (or decline) in the sales of
ﬁrms can dramatically change the absolute and relative costs of value
activities if activities have differing scale sensitivity. For example, software
cost has become increasingly high relative to hardware cost in many
electronics-related industries such as computers, video games, and
telecommunication equipment, as hardware cost has proven more scale- and
learning-sensitive than software cost. The same process can shift the
relative cost position of ﬁrms that have value chains with differing degrees
of scale sensitivity. For example, Eli Lilly’s DNA-based technology for
manufacturing insulin is believed to be more scale-sensitive than Novo
Industries’ process. If this proves to be true, Lilly’s relative cost position
will improve as volume grows.
Different Learning Rates. The relative cost of different value activities
will change if learning occurs in them at different rates. Learning reduces
the relative costs of those value activities in which it proceeds most rapidly.
For example, rapid learning has dramatically reduced assembly costs as a
percentage of sales for many electronics ﬁrms. As a result, differences
among regions and countries in labor rates for assembly workers have
diminished in importance in determining relative cost position.
Differential Technological Change. Technological changes that proceed
at different rates can clearly affect the relative cost of different value
activities and their cost drivers. For example, the availability of low-cost
computers and the development of airfreight have fundamentally shifted the
economics of many distribution industries. These changes have caused
dramatic reductions in order processing costs as a percentage of total costs,
and have allowed the restructuring of distributors in the direction of fewer
and more centralized warehouses.
Relative Inﬂation of Costs. The rate of inﬂation in key cost elements in
value activities often differs and this can signiﬁcantly shift their relative
cost. Differential inﬂation rates can quickly turn an insigniﬁcant value


activity into one of critical strategic importance, or can convert a modest
cost item within an activity into the dominant one. For example, because of
the rapid inﬂation in oil prices relative to salaries and equipment, fuel costs
now constitute almost 50 percent of airline operating costs. As a result, the
fuel efﬁciency of the ﬂeet, the inherent efﬁciency of the route system, and
operating procedures have taken on critical strategic importance.
Aging. An aging capital base or workforce can shift the relative cost of
value activities. Older offshore drilling rigs require more maintenance and
insurance, for example, and an older workforce typically has higher salary
and beneﬁt costs.
Market Adjustment. The operation of market forces often works to
counteract high or low purchased input costs and to eliminate or reduce cost
differentials based on favorable purchasing by individual ﬁrms. People
Express and other new airlines have enjoyed extremely low aircraft costs by
purchasing used planes during the recent glut. Imitators of their strategy
will eventually eliminate the stock of used planes, and People Express will
compete with other airlines on a more equal basis.
Cost dynamics can lead to signiﬁcant changes in industry structure and
relative cost position. In steelmaking, for example, technological change
and changing material costs have shifted the stage at which the minimum
efﬁcient scale of a steelmaking complex is determined. The primary rolling
mill historically set minimum scale, but now the blast furnace stage does.
Continuous casting has emerged as a lower-cost process than primary
rolling for producing semiﬁnished steel slabs. It is also less scale-sensitive
than primary rolling. These shifts have major implications for the relative
cost positions of competitors, depending on their process conﬁgurations.
They have led to the success of mini-mills such as Nucor and Lone Star that
use continuous casting technology and also have lower-cost labor than
established competitors. Early identiﬁcation of cost dynamics can yield a
signiﬁcant cost advantage by directing a ﬁrm toward those value activities
that will have the greatest leverage for future relative cost position but may
not now be receiving attention.


Cost Advantage
A ﬁrm has a cost advantage if its cumulative cost of performing all value
activities is lower than competitors’ costs.11 The strategic value of cost
advantage hinges on its sustainability. Sustainability will be present if the
sources of a ﬁrm’s cost advantage are difﬁcult for competitors to replicate
or imitate. Cost advantage leads to superior performance if the ﬁrm
provides an acceptable level of value to the buyer so that its cost advantage
is not nulliﬁed by the need to charge a lower price than competitors.
A ﬁrm’s relative cost position is a function of
• the composition of its value chain versus competitors’
• its relative position vis-à-vis the cost drivers of each activity
Competitors have value chains that may be similar to or different from
the ﬁrm’s. In airlines, for example, TWA and United employ similar value
chains that differ from that of People Express. If competitors’ value chains
are different from that of the ﬁrm, the inherent efﬁciency of the two chains
will determine relative cost position. Differences in value chains usually
encompass only a subset of value activities and thus a ﬁrm can isolate the
effect of different chains on relative cost position by comparing the cost of
these differing activities.
A ﬁrm’s relative cost position in value activities that are the same as
competitors’ depends on the ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis the cost drivers of
those activities relative to competitors. If regional scale drives the cost of
the sales force, for example, relative sales force cost will reﬂect the regional
shares of competitors and the steepness of the scale curve. A ﬁrm should
assess the relative cost position of common value activities one by one, and
then accumulate them together with the relative cost of different activities to
determine overall cost position.
Determining the Relative Cost of Competitors
The value chain is the basic tool for determining competitor costs. The
ﬁrst step in determining competitor costs is to identify competitor value
chains and how activities are performed by them. The process is the same as


that employed by a ﬁrm to analyze its own value chain. In practice it is
often extremely difﬁcult to assess competitors’ costs because the ﬁrm does
not have direct information. It is usually possible to estimate directly the
cost of some of a competitor’s value activities from commonly available
public data as well as from interviews with buyers, suppliers and others. For
example, a ﬁrm can often learn the number of salespersons a competitor
employs as well as their approximate compensation and expense account
allowances. In this way, the costs of some of the competitor’s value
activities can be built up to yield an accurate but partial picture of the
competitor’s costs.
For value activities where a competitor’s costs cannot be estimated
directly, the ﬁrm should employ comparisons between itself and the
competitor. This requires that the relative position of the competitor with
respect to the cost drivers of the value activities in question be determined.
A ﬁrm then uses its knowledge of cost behavior to estimate differences in
the competitor’s costs. For example, if local share drives logistical costs and
the competitor has a higher local share, the competitor probably possesses a
cost advantage in that value activity. If the ﬁrm can estimate the scale curve
for logistical costs, the share difference provides a way of estimating the
extent of the ﬁrm’s disadvantage.
Given the extent to which determining a competitor’s costs involves
estimates and deduction, it is sometimes only feasible to estimate the
direction, and not the absolute magnitude, of the relative cost difference
with a competitor in a value activity. However, this can still prove extremely
useful, since the ﬁrm can combine the direction of difference with
knowledge of the proportional size of each value activity to develop a
general picture of a competitor’s relative cost position.
A ﬁrm can typically improve the accuracy of estimates of competitors’
costs by examining several competitors simultaneously. Information
disclosed by one competitor can be cross-checked against the disclosures of
other competitors and used to test the consistency of scale curves or other
cost models for a particular value activity. In fact, analyzing a ﬁrm’s cost
behavior and determining the relative costs of competitors is often an
iterative process.


Gaining Cost Advantage
There are two major ways that a ﬁrm can gain a cost advantage:
• Control cost drivers. A ﬁrm can gain an advantage with respect to the
cost drivers of value activities representing a signiﬁcant proportion of
total costs.
• Reconﬁgure the value chain. A ﬁrm can adopt a different and more
efﬁcient way to design, produce, distribute, or market the product.
The two sources of cost advantage are not mutually exclusive. Even a ﬁrm
with a very different value chain from its competitors will have some
common activities, and its relative cost position in them can enhance or
detract from overall cost position.
Successful cost leaders usually derive their cost advantage from multiple
sources within the value chain. Sustainable cost advantage stems not from
one activity but from many, and reconﬁguring the chain frequently plays a
role in creating cost advantage. Cost leadership requires an examination of
every activity in a ﬁrm for opportunities to reduce cost, and the consistent
pursuit of all of them. More often than not, cost leaders have a culture
emanating from senior management that reinforces such behavior. It often
includes symbolic practices such as spartan facilities and limited executive
perquisites.
Cost reduction may or may not erode differentiation. Every ﬁrm should
aggressively pursue cost reduction in activities that do not inﬂuence
differentiation (see Chapter 4). In activities that contribute to differentiation,
a conscious choice may still be made to sacriﬁce all or part of
differentiation in favor of improving relative cost position.
CONTROLLING COST DRIVERS
Once a ﬁrm has identiﬁed its value chain and diagnosed the cost drivers
of signiﬁcant value activities, cost advantage grows out of controlling those
drivers better than competitors. A ﬁrm can potentially achieve superior
position vis-à-vis the cost drivers of any activity in the value chain.
Activities that represent a signiﬁcant or growing proportion of cost will


offer the greatest potential for improving relative cost position. While the
appropriate cost drivers will vary for each activity, some generalizations
about how controlling each of the ten cost drivers can lead to cost advantage
in an activity are as follows:
CONTROLLING SCALE
Gain the Appropriate Type of Scale. Increasing scale through
acquisitions, product line extensions, market expansion, or marketing
activity can lower cost. However, the type of scale that drives cost differs by
activity. Boosting local or regional scale in an existing region will usually
lower sales force or physical distribution costs, while raising national scale
by entering a new region may actually raise these costs. By looking
throughout the value chain for the types of scale that drive cost, the value of
scale (and hence market share) of different types can be assessed. Pursuit of
scale should be selectively tuned to the type of scale that drives the cost of
important activities in the particular industry. Scale increases in different
activities must be balanced, moreover, so that pursuing scale in one activity
does not create diseconomies in another.
Set Policies to Reinforce Scale Economies in Scale-Sensitive Activities.
Scale economies are partly a function of how activities are managed. Eaton
has maximized its scale economies in engine valves, for example, by
simplifying its product line.
Exploit the Types of Scale Economies Where the Firm Is Favored. A ﬁrm
should manage activities in ways that bring out the types of scale economies
that most favor it. A ﬁrm with high global share should manage product
development to emphasize global scale, for example, by stressing world
products rather than country-tailored ones.
Emphasize Value Activities Driven by Types of Scale Where the Firm Has
an Advantage. Since different types of scale drive the cost of different value
activities, a ﬁrm should set its strategy to emphasize as much as possible the
activities in which it has superior scale of the appropriate type. For a
regional producer competing with national ﬁrms, for example, this may


imply that sales force assistance and service should be emphasized, rather
than rapid new product introduction whose cost is driven by national or
global scale.
CONTROLLING LEARNING
Manage with the Learning Curve. Learning does not occur automatically
but results from the effort and attention of management and employees.
Attention to learning should not be conﬁned to labor costs but also to the
cost of constructing facilities, the cost of scrap, and other signiﬁcant value
activities. Every premise and every practice must be examined for possible
revision. Management must demand learning improvements and establish
targets for them, rather than simply hope that learning will occur. When
setting targets, the rate of learning should be compared across facilities and
regions, as well as to industry standards. A ﬁrm must also establish
mechanisms to facilitate the sharing of learning across facilities and
business units. The sharing of learning is often impeded by geographic
distance and internal rivalry.
Keep Learning Proprietary. Learning can lower a ﬁrm’s relative cost
position if the ﬁrm minimizes the spillover rate to competitors. Keeping
learning proprietary can become an important means of achieving cost
advantage in learning-sensitive value activities. Means for accomplishing
this include:
•  backward integration to protect know-how, such as by building or
modifying production equipment in-house
•  controlling employee publications or other forms of information
dissemination
• retaining key employees
• strict non-disclosure provisions in employment contracts
Learn from Competitors. Pride should not interfere with exploiting the
learning of competitors. Analysis of competitor value chains allows a ﬁrm
to uncover good ideas that can be applied in-house. There are many ways to
acquire competitor learning, including reverse engineering of competitor


products, studying published material including patent ﬁlings and articles
about competitors, and maintaining relationships with competitors’
suppliers to gain access to knowhow and to the latest purchased inputs.
CONTROLLING THE EFFECT OF CAPACITY UTILIZATION
Level Throughput. A ﬁrm can often increase average capacity utilization
by ﬁnding ways to level the ﬂuctuations of volume through its value chain.
For example, Sun-Diamond, the agricultural cooperative that produces Sun
Maid raisins, Diamond walnuts, and other products, has reduced the cost of
underutilization by promoting year-round baking uses for its products.
These have reduced demand differences between the Christmas season and
the rest of the year. Similarly, credit card processors can level throughput by
serving a mix of accounts that have peak volumes spread throughout the
year, e.g., beach clubs and ski areas.
A ﬁrm can level throughput through a variety of means, including:
• peak load or contribution pricing
• marketing activity, such as increasing promotion during slack periods
and ﬁnding off-season uses for the products
•  line extensions into less cyclical products, or into products that can
intermittently utilize excess capacity (e.g., private label)
•  selecting buyers with more stable demand or demands that are
counterseasonal or countercyclical
• ceding share in high demand periods and regaining it in low demand
periods
• letting competitors serve ﬂuctuating segments12
• sharing activities with sister business units with a different pattern of
needs (see Chapter 9).
Reduce the Penalty of Throughput Fluctuations. In addition to smoothing
throughput ﬂuctuations, a ﬁrm can sometimes reduce the costs associated
with ﬂuctuations in the volume of activity. Tapered integration, for example,
is a means of using suppliers to cover peak needs rather than satisfying
them in-house. Canadian steel producers, for example, have avoided excess


capacity despite ﬂuctuating sales by adding capacity for trendline demand
growth rather than year-to-year demand. They sell steel produced by
subcontractors and foreign ﬁrms to cover shortfalls.
CONTROLLING LINKAGES
Exploit Cost Linkages Within the Value Chain. A ﬁrm can improve its
cost position if it recognizes linkages among value activities and exploits
them. The additional cost of achieving higher precision in machining parts
may, for example, be offset by a reduction in inspection costs of the ﬁnished
products. Recent technological advances are making linkages stronger and
more possible to achieve. Information systems are making coordination
among activities easier, while computer-aided design and manufacturing is
just one example of how microelectronics is linking other activities.
Work with Suppliers and Channels to Exploit Vertical Linkages. Vertical
linkages imply that relations with suppliers and channels offer possibilities
for all parties to gain through the coordination and joint optimization of
their respective value chains. Xerox, for example, provides suppliers with
its manufacturing schedule through computer terminals, enabling suppliers
to ship parts precisely when needed. Seeking out and pursuing such
opportunities will require careful study of supplier and channel value
chains, as well as the determination to overcome suspicion, greed, and other
barriers to joint action. A ﬁrm must be prepared to share the gains of
linkages with suppliers and channels in order to ensure that they can be
achieved.
CONTROLLING INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Share Appropriate Activities. A ﬁrm can often reduce its relative costs
signiﬁcantly by sharing value activities with sister business units, or by
entering new businesses in which opportunities for sharing exist. Chapter 9
describes in detail how to identify opportunities for sharing that lower cost.
Transfer Know-how in Managing Similar Activities. A diversiﬁed ﬁrm
may also be able to transfer know-how gained in managing a value activity


to other business units with generically similar activities. The issues
involved in doing so are also discussed in Chapter 9.
CONTROLLING INTEGRATION
Examine Systematically Possibilities for Integration and De-integration.
Both integration and de-integration offer the potential of lowering costs. As
changes in management attitudes and new information system technology
are making supplier linkages easier to achieve, de-integration is becoming
more and more attractive in many industries.
CONTROLLING TIMING
Exploit First-mover or Late-mover Advantages. The ﬁrst mover in an
industry often reaps a long-lasting cost advantage by tying up the best
locations, preempting the best personnel, gaining access to preferred
suppliers, or securing patents. In some industries, in fact, only the ﬁrst
mover can gain a signiﬁcant cost advantage. In other industries, late-movers
may gain cost advantages because technology is changing rapidly or they
can observe and cheaply imitate the actions of the pioneer. First-mover and
late-mover advantages are discussed in Chapter 5.
Time Purchases in the Business Cycle. Purchasing assets during periods
of soft demand can yield a major cost savings. This is the case for many
capital goods such as machinery, ships, and even complete plants.
CONTROLLING DISCRETIONARY POLICIES
Modify Expensive Policies That Do Not Contribute to Differentiation.
Many policies that govern a ﬁrm’s activities raise cost. Sometimes a ﬁrm
consciously does so in the hope of creating differentiation. Often, however,
ﬁrms fail to recognize the cost of a policy. Cost analysis will often highlight
the need to modify such policies, and careful scrutiny may also reveal that a
policy does not contribute meaningfully to differentiation because its costs
outweigh the price premium it generates. Both situations offer opportunities
for cost reduction. Chapter 4 will describe how to evaluate the role of value
activities in differentiation.


Invest in Technology to Skew Cost Drivers in the Firm’s Favor. New
technology often underlies cost advantage. Technology can also allow a
ﬁrm to make its competitor’s advantages vis-à-vis cost drivers obsolete. The
level of technology investment is a policy choice and most cost leaders
invest aggressively. Iowa Beef, for example, spends $20 million or more on
plant renovations annually. Some of the important ways in which
technology investment lowers costs include:13
• Developing low-cost processes. For example, Union Carbide’s Unipol
process for making low-density polyethylene.
•  Facilitating automation. For example, Iowa Beef’s massive beef
processing plants and K Mart’s automated distribution centers.
• Low-cost product designs. For example, Canon’s NP200 copier with
fewer parts.
In some cases, the ability to apply new low-cost technology depends on
scale. In soft contact lenses, for example, Bausch and Lomb’s dramatically
lower-cost spin casting technology for manufacturing lenses is much more
scale-sensitive than lathe technology. However, the choice of technology
can also be related to other cost drivers such as timing, location, or
integration. A ﬁrm should invest in technology development in areas that
will skew cost drivers the most in its favor.
Avoid Frills. Most cost leaders control discretionary expenses throughout
their value chains. National Semiconductor executives work in spartan
surroundings with few private ofﬁces, and similar characteristics apply to
other cost leaders including Lincoln Electric, People Express, and Crown
Cork and Seal. Such policy choices not only reduce costs in their own right
but also seem to have important symbolic value.
CONTROLLING LOCATION
Optimize Location. The location of activities in relation to each other as
well as to buyers and suppliers often contributes signiﬁcantly to such things
as labor rates, logistical efﬁciency, and supplier access. The ﬁrm that locates
its facilities well will often gain a signiﬁcant cost advantage. The optimal


location of activities changes over time, as is happening today in the steel
industry with the emergence of mini-mills.
CONTROLLING INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS
Do Not Take Institutional Factors as a Given. Firms can inﬂuence
institutional factors such as government policies and unionization, despite a
tendency to view institutional factors as beyond their control. For example,
many 
unionized 
trucking 
companies 
have 
established 
nonunion
subsidiaries. Firms can also frequently inﬂuence regulation through
lobbying, as Japanese ﬁrms are actively seeking to do in states that have
begun taxing foreign proﬁts. A number of states are already committed to
repealing their laws to avoid scaring away foreign investors.
PROCUREMENT AND COST ADVANTAGE
Procurement practices have a potentially major impact on cost position
that cuts across activities. A number of possible changes in procurement can
reduce costs:
Tune Speciﬁcations of Purchased Inputs to Meet Needs More Precisely.
A ﬁrm can improve its cost position by ensuring that the quality of
purchased inputs meets, but does not exceed, the ﬁrm’s requirements. Clark
Equipment, for example, has begun to move toward automotive grade
components for some lift truck models, rather than more expensive and
unnecessarily high-quality truck grade components.
Enhance Bargaining Leverage Through Purchasing Policies. Firms
rarely view purchasing strategically or as a bargaining problem, though
purchasing practices can signiﬁcantly affect cost. Firms can take a number
of speciﬁc actions to enhance their bargaining power with suppliers:
•  Increase bargaining power in purchasing by keeping the number of
sources sufﬁcient to ensure competition, but small enough to be an
important buyer to each source.
• Select suppliers who are especially competitive with each other, and
divide purchases among them.


•  Vary the proportion of business awarded to suppliers over time to
ensure that they do not view it as an entitlement.
• Solicit occasional proposals from new suppliers, both to test market
prices and gather technological intelligence.
• Enhance the leverage of purchasing scale through contracting based on
annual volume with phased deliveries, instead of making frequent
smaller purchases.
• Seek out opportunities to combine purchases with sister business units.
•  Appoint high-quality purchasing executives to allow more
sophisticated buying practices.
•  Invest in information to understand suppliers’ costs and market
conditions better.
•  Pursue technology development to eliminate or reduce the need for
expensive inputs where unit costs cannot be reduced.
Select Appropriate Suppliers and Manage Their Costs. A ﬁrm should
select those suppliers which are most efﬁcient or those that offer the least
costly product to use given the ﬁrm’s value chain. Purchasing practices
should also include promoting supplier cost reduction, aiding suppliers
where necessary with technology development, and encouraging supplier
practices that lower the ﬁrm’s cost through linkages. Marks and Spencer, for
example, has achieved a low cost position in retailing in the United
Kingdom through active efforts to help suppliers adopt the most modern
technology. Managing the efﬁciency or effectiveness of the supplier base,
using an analysis of supplier value chains essentially the same as the
analysis of its own chain, can be equally as important to cost position as
enhancing bargaining power over suppliers.
RECONFIGURING THE VALUE CHAIN
Dramatic shifts in relative cost position most often arise from a ﬁrm
adopting a value chain that is signiﬁcantly different from its competitors’.
Reconﬁgured value chains stem from a number of sources, including:
• a different production process


• differences in automation
• direct sales instead of indirect sales
• a new distribution channel
• a new raw material
• major differences in forward or backward vertical integration
• shifting the location of facilities relative to suppliers and customers
• new advertising media
No-frills airlines such as People Express and Southwest Airlines provide
a striking example of strategies based on reconﬁguring the value chain.
They have adopted chains that differ markedly from trunk carriers, as
shown in Table 3–4.
TABLE 3–4 Alternative Value Chains in Airlines
Trunk Airlines
TICKET COUNTER OPERATIONS
Full service
GATE OPERATIONS
Full service
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
Purchase new aircraft
Union pilots
ON-BOARD SERVICE
Full service
BAGGAGE HANDLING
Free baggage checking
TICKET OFFICES
Ticket ofﬁces in downtown locations


No-Frills Carriers
TICKET COUNTER OPERATIONS
Secondary airports and terminals
No ticket counter (or check-in only)
Purchase tickets on board the aircraft or from machines
No interline tickets
Few fare options
GATE OPERATIONS
Secondary airports and terminals
First come, ﬁrst served seating
No ticketing at gates
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
Used aircraft
High-density seating
Nonunion pilots
Smaller crews and more ﬂying hours per day
ON-BOARD SERVICE
Nonunion ﬂight attendants
Snack only or no meals
Charge for food and drink served
BAGGAGE HANDLING
Provide carry-on space
Charge for checked baggage
No interline baggage
TICKET OFFICES
None
Two other examples from different industries illustrate the signiﬁcant
cost advantage to be gained through reconﬁguration of the value chain. In
beef packing, the traditional value chain involved raising cattle on isolated
farms and shipping them live to labor-intensive abattoirs in major rail
centers like Chicago. After the animal was slaughtered and broken, whole


sides of beef were shipped to markets where they were cut into smaller
pieces by retailers. Pursuing an innovative strategy, Iowa Beef Packers built
large automated plants near the cattle supply and processed the meat there
into smaller “boxed” cuts. This signiﬁcantly reduced transportation
expense, a major cost, as well as raised yield by avoiding the weight loss
that occurred when live animals were shipped. Iowa Beef also reduced costs
in the operations activities in the value chain by using cheaper nonunion
labor, readily available in rural areas where its new plants were located.14
Federal Express similarly redeﬁned the value chain for air delivery of
small parcels. Traditional competitors such as Emery and Airborne
collected freight of varying sizes, shipped it via the airlines, and then
delivered it to the addressee. Federal Express limited itself to small
packages and ﬂew them on company-owned planes to its central hub in
Memphis where the parcels were sorted. It then ﬂew the parcels to their
destinations on the same planes and delivered them in company-owned
trucks. Other dramatic reconﬁgurations of the value chain include the early
discount retailers, discount stockbrokers, and new long distance telephone
companies such as MCI and Sprint.
Reconﬁguring the value chain can lead to cost advantage for two
reasons. First, reconﬁguration frequently presents the opportunity to
fundamentally restructure a ﬁrm’s cost, compared to settling for incremental
improvements. The new value chain may prove inherently more efﬁcient
than the old one. The success of the no-frills airlines vividly illustrates how
adopting a different value chain that is inherently cheaper can allow a ﬁrm
to establish a new cost standard for an industry. On some routes, no-frills
airlines have achieved costs that are as much as 50 percent lower than those
of trunk carriers. Not only are activities performed more cheaply in the new
value chain, but linkages are exploited. By ticketing on-board, for example,
People Express signiﬁcantly reduces cost in other value activities such as
gate operations and ticket counter operations.
The second way an alternate value chain can lead to cost advantage is by
altering the basis of competition in a way that favors a ﬁrm’s strengths.
Reconﬁguration of the chain may change the important cost drivers in a
way that favors a ﬁrm. Performing an activity differently can change its
susceptibility to scale economies, interrelationships, locational effects, and
virtually every other cost driver. In aluminum, for example, Japanese ﬁrms


are investing in the new carbothermic reduction process that converts
bauxite and related ore directly into metal, skipping the intermediate
alumina stage. This would nullify the Japanese ﬁrms’ serious disadvantage
in power costs. In the beef processing case, Iowa Beef redeﬁned the role of
location as a cost driver and increased scale sensitivity. A ﬁrm with a large
market share, like Iowa Beef, often beneﬁts from shifting to a more scale-
sensitive value chain. In the case of the no-frills airlines, the new value
chain is less scale-sensitive than the old one because of the reduction in
indirect activities. This has been important to the success of the newly
established no-frills carriers.
Coalitions and other interﬁrm agreements sometimes provide ﬁrms with
a way to reconﬁgure the value chain even if they cannot do so
independently. A number of multiple system operators of cable television
franchises have traded franchises to increase marketing and operating
efﬁciency, for example. Similarly, Allied Chemical and Church & Dwight
have worked out a deal to swap identical raw materials produced in
different locations to save transportation costs.
To identify a new value chain, a ﬁrm must examine everything it does, as
well as its competitors’ value chains, in search of creative options to do
things differently. A ﬁrm should ask questions such as the following for
every activity:
• How can the activity be performed differently or even eliminated?
• How can a group of linked value activities be reordered or regrouped?
• How might coalitions with other ﬁrms lower or eliminate costs?
RECONFIGURING DOWNSTREAM
Where channel costs or other downstream costs represent a signiﬁcant
fraction of cost to the buyer, reconﬁguration of downstream activities can
reduce cost substantially. Gallo’s heavy use of the supermarket channel for
wine provides an example. A supermarket’s costs of distribution are less
than that of the liquor store channel which involves distributors. By
emphasizing supermarkets, Gallo has lowered the cost of getting wine to
buyers. Gallo’s high sales volume and faster turnover also reduce its relative


cost to the supermarket. This has made supermarkets willing to accept
lower margins from Gallo than from its competitors.
The efﬁciency of downstream channels reﬂects their strategies and
degree of fragmentation. Chain stores are often more efﬁcient than single
outlets, for example, and large ofﬁce equipment or automobile dealers are
often more efﬁcient than smaller ones. A ﬁrm can not only choose more
efﬁcient downstream routes to the end user, but also take actions to promote
consolidation or otherwise improve the efﬁciency of downstream entities. In
extreme cases, a ﬁrm may have to integrate forward to achieve downstream
efﬁciency.
The relative bargaining power of a ﬁrm and its downstream channels has
an important inﬂuence on whether the ﬁrm will reduce its relative cost
position through downstream reconﬁguration. In Gallo’s case, supermarkets
would reap the beneﬁts of their greater efﬁciency if they priced wines the
same as liquor stores. However, Gallo’s “pull-through” effect and intense
competition among supermarkets have led to low prices and allowed Gallo
to reap most of the beneﬁts.
COST ADVANTAGE THROUGH FOCUS
A focus strategy may also provide a means for achieving a cost
advantage that rests on using focus to control cost drivers, reconﬁguring the
value chain, or both. Since the cost of value activities as well as the most
efﬁcient value chain may differ for different segments, a ﬁrm that dedicates
its efforts to a well-chosen segment of an industry can often lower its costs
signiﬁcantly. Federal Express based its reconﬁguration of the air parcel
delivery value chain on small packages requiring rapid delivery. People
Express has focused on price-sensitive buyers, allowing it to eliminate many
costs. In the hotel/motel industry, La Quinta offers only guest rooms, and
has lowered its investment and operating costs per room by eliminating
costly restaurants, conference facilities, and other services not desired by its
target buyer—the middle-level manager who travels frequently to the same
area.
The most dramatic improvements in relative cost position through focus
usually stem from employing a different and tailored value chain to serve
the target segment. The Federal Express, People Express, and La Quinta


examples all share this characteristic. Focus can also lower costs if the
target segment is associated with a key cost driver. If regional market share
is a key cost driver, for example, a regional focus strategy can yield a cost
advantage over larger national competitors with small shares in the
particular region.
Successful 
focus 
strategies 
frequently 
stem 
from 
innovative
segmentation of an industry. Chapter 7 will describe how to segment
industries and how to choose appropriate focus strategies. Industry
segments grow, in part, out of product varieties, buyer groups, or
geographic areas that require a different value chain or in which cost drivers
differ.
Sustainability of Cost Advantage
Cost advantage will result in above-average performance only if the ﬁrm
can sustain it. Improving relative cost position in unsustainable ways may
allow a ﬁrm to maintain cost parity or proximity, but a ﬁrm attempting to
achieve cost leadership strategy must also develop sustainable sources of
cost advantage.
Cost advantage is sustainable if there are entry or mobility barriers that
prevent competitors from imitating its sources. Sustainability varies for
different cost drivers and from one industry to another. Some drivers,
however, tend to be more sustainable than others:
• Scale. Scale is a key entry/mobility barrier, and the cost of replicating
scale is often high because competitors must buy share.
•  Interrelationships. Interrelationships with sister business units can
force a competitor to diversify in order to match a cost advantage. If
there are entry barriers into the related industries, sustainability can be
high.
• Linkages. Linkages are often difﬁcult for a ﬁrm to detect and require
coordination across organizational lines or with independent suppliers
and channels.
• Proprietary learning. Learning is difﬁcult to achieve in practice; it can
also be hard for competitors to catch up if learning can be kept


proprietary.
•  Policy choices to create proprietary product or process technology.
Replicating product innovations or new production processes often
poses great difﬁculties for competitors if innovations are protected by
patents or secrecy. Process innovations are often more sustainable than
product innovations because secrecy is easier to maintain.
Timing and integration can also be sources of sustainable cost advantage
because they are often hard to replicate. However, their sustainability will
be greatest in instances where they also translate into scale or learning
advantages. Location, the pattern of capacity utilization, institutional
factors, and policy choices can be sources of sustainable cost advantage in
some industries, although they tend to create less sustainable cost advantage
on average than other drivers. Even sources of cost advantage that are less
sustainable, however, can provide formidable barriers if they interact with
more sustainable drivers or with each other. Policy choices that elevate scale
economies can be difﬁcult to imitate, for example.
Sustainability stems not only from the sources of the cost advantage, but
also from their number. Cost advantage derived from one or two value
activities provides an alluring target for imitation by competitors. Cost
leaders usually accumulate cost advantages gained from numerous sources
in the value chain that interact and reinforce each other. This makes it
difﬁcult and expensive for competitors to replicate their cost position.
Gallo provides a good example of a sustainable cost leadership strategy
based on these principles. Gallo’s value chain, shown in simpliﬁed form in
Figure 3–3, contains numerous sources of cost advantage in many value
activities. The Gallo cost advantage draws heavily on scale and proprietary
technology, two of the most sustainable cost drivers. Gallo has consistently
achieved a 15 percent or greater cost advantage over its major rivals. Gallo’s
strength encouraged Coca-Cola’s exit from the wine industry, because
Gallo’s cost advantage dampened Coke’s proﬁtability.
The creation of a new or reconﬁgured value chain is a ﬁnal source of
sustainability in cost advantage. Competitors almost inevitably face a high
cost of matching a reconﬁgured chain. This is particularly true for well-
established competitors, who face signiﬁcant mobility barriers in moving
away from the industry’s traditional value chain. Iowa Beef and Federal


Express, for example, have both enjoyed enduring advantages while
competitors struggled to respond. Japanese aluminum producers would gain
a similarly durable cost advantage in aluminum smelting if carbothermic
reduction proves a success.
Implementation and Cost Advantage
This chapter has focused on how to achieve a cost advantage through
changes in strategy and the way activities are performed. However, the
success of cost leadership hinges on a ﬁrm’s skills in actually implementing
it on a day to day basis. Costs do not go down automatically or by accident
but rather as a result of hard work and constant attention. Firms differ in
their abilities to lower costs, even when they have similar scale or
cumulative volumes or when guided by similar policies. Improving relative
cost position may not require a major shift in strategy so much as greater
management attention. A ﬁrm should never assume its costs are low
enough.


Figure 3–3. Gallo’s Source of Cost Advantage in Wine


No cost driver works automatically. Scale economies are not achieved in
an activity unless a ﬁrm’s other activities are coordinated to provide the
inputs necessary to operate smoothly at large scale. Policy choices must not
dissipate the advantages of scale through product proliferation.
Interrelationships will not lower cost unless affected business units actually
coordinate their behavior. Learning curve advantages do not occur unless a
ﬁrm’s management strives to capture them.
A number of factors, including the training and motivation of employees,
the ﬁrm’s culture, the adoption of formal cost reduction programs, a
constant pursuit of automation, and a strong belief in the learning curve
contribute to a ﬁrm’s ability to achieve cost leadership. Everyone in a ﬁrm
has the potential to affect cost. Cost leaders have cost control programs in
every value activity, not only in manufacturing. They compare activities
against themselves over time, and among business units and competitors.
The importance of symbolic factors in creating the climate for cost
reduction also cannot be overstated. Successful cost leaders usually pay a
great deal of attention to discretionary costs, in addition to tuning their
strategy to achieve minimum operating costs.
Pitfalls in Cost Leadership Strategies
Many ﬁrms do not fully understand the behavior of their costs from a
strategic perspective and fail to exploit opportunities to improve their
relative cost position. Some of the most common errors made by ﬁrms in
assessing and acting upon cost position include:
Exclusive Focus on the Cost of Manufacturing Activities. When one
mentions “cost,” most managers instinctively think of manufacturing.
However, a signiﬁcant, if not overwhelming, share of total cost is generated
in activities such as marketing, sales, service, technology development, and
infrastructure. These often receive too little attention in cost analysis. An
examination of the entire value chain often results in relatively simple steps
that can signiﬁcantly reduce cost position. For example, recent advances in
computers and computer-aided design are having dramatic impacts on the
cost of performing research.


Ignoring Procurement. Many ﬁrms work diligently to reduce labor costs
but pay scant attention to purchased inputs. They tend to view purchasing as
a secondary staff function and devote few management resources to it.
Analysis within the purchasing department too often centers solely on the
purchase price of key raw materials. Firms often allow many items to be
purchased by individuals with little expertise or motivation to reduce cost.
Linkages between purchased inputs and the costs of other value activities go
unrecognized. Modest changes in purchasing practices could yield major
cost beneﬁts for many ﬁrms.
Overlooking Indirect or Small Activities. Cost reduction programs
usually concentrate on large cost activities and/or direct activities such as
component fabrication and assembly. Activities that represent a small
fraction of total cost seldom receive sufﬁcient scrutiny. Indirect activities,
such as maintenance and regulatory costs, often escape attention altogether.
False Perception of Cost Drivers. Firms often misdiagnose their cost
drivers. For example, a ﬁrm with the largest national market share and the
lowest costs may incorrectly assume that national market share drives cost.
However, cost leadership may actually stem from the ﬁrm’s large regional
share in the regions in which it operates. Failing to understand the sources
of its cost advantage may lead the ﬁrm to attempt to lower cost by raising
national share. As a result it may worsen its cost position by reducing
regional focus. It may also concentrate its defensive strategies on national
competitors and ignore the more signiﬁcant threat posed by strong regional
competitors.15
Failure to Exploit Linkages. Firms rarely recognize all the linkages that
affect cost, particularly linkages with suppliers and linkages among
activities such as quality assurance, inspection, and service. The ability to
exploit linkages underlies the success of many Japanese ﬁrms. Matsushita
and Canon, among others, recognize and exploit linkages despite the fact
that their policies contradict traditional manufacturing and purchasing
practices. Failure to recognize linkages also leads to such errors as requiring
each department to cut costs by the same amount, even though raising cost
in some departments may lower total costs.


Contradictory Cost Reduction. Firms often attempt to reduce cost in
ways that are contradictory. They try to gain market share to reap the
beneﬁts of scale economies while at the same time dissipating scale
economies through model proliferation. They locate close to buyers to save
freight costs but emphasize weight reduction in new product development.
Cost drivers sometimes work in opposite directions, and a ﬁrm must
recognize the tradeoffs.
Unwitting Cross Subsidy. Firms often engage in unwitting cross subsidy
when they fail to recognize the existence of segments in which costs behave
differently.16 Conventional accounting systems rarely measure all the cost
differences among products, buyers, channels, or geographic areas
described above. Thus, a ﬁrm may charge excessive prices on some items in
the line or to some buyers while subsidizing prices charged on others. For
example, white wine requires less costly cooperage than red wine because
of its lower aging requirements. If a winery sets equal prices for white and
red wine based on average costs, then the price of lower-cost white wine
will subsidize the price of red wine. Unwitting cross subsidy often provides
an opening for competitors that understand costs and use them to undercut a
ﬁrm’s prices and improve their market position. Cross subsidy also exposes
the ﬁrm to focused competitors that only compete in the overpriced
segments.17
Thinking Incrementally. Cost reduction efforts often strive for
incremental cost improvements in the existing value chain, rather than
ﬁnding ways to reconﬁgure the chain. Incremental improvement can reach
the point of diminishing returns, while reconﬁguring the chain can lead to a
whole new cost plateau.
Undermining 
Differentiation. 
Cost 
reduction 
can 
undermine
differentiation if it eliminates a ﬁrm’s sources of uniqueness to the buyer.
Though doing so may be strategically desirable, it should be the result of a
conscious choice. Cost reduction efforts should concentrate most on
activities that do not contribute to a ﬁrm’s differentiation. A cost leader will
improve performance, moreover, if it differentiates in activities wherever
differentiation is not costly.


Steps in Strategic Cost Analysis
The techniques described in this chapter can be summarized by outlining
the steps required in strategic cost analysis:
1. Identify the appropriate value chain and assign costs and assets to it.
2. Diagnose the cost drivers of each value activity and how they interact.
3.  Identify competitor value chains, and determine the relative cost of
competitors and the sources of cost differences.
4. Develop a strategy to lower relative cost position through controlling
cost drivers or reconﬁguring the value chain and/or downstream value.
5. Ensure that cost reduction efforts do not erode differentiation, or make
a conscious choice to do so.
6. Test the cost reduction strategy for sustainability.


4
Differentiation
A ﬁrm differentiates itself from its competitors if it can be unique at
something that is valuable to buyers. Differentiation is one of the two types
of competitive advantage a ﬁrm may possess. The extent to which
competitors in an industry can differentiate themselves from each other is
also an important element of industry structure. Despite the importance of
differentiation, its sources are often not well understood. Firms view the
potential sources of differentiation too narrowly. They see differentiation in
terms of the physical product or marketing practices, rather than potentially
arising anywhere in the value chain. Firms are also often different but not
differentiated, because they pursue forms of uniqueness that buyers do not
value. Differentiators also frequently pay insufﬁcient attention to the cost of
differentiation, or to the sustainability of differentiation once achieved.
This chapter presents a framework for analyzing differentiation and
choosing a differentiation strategy. I will ﬁrst describe the sources of
differentiation, which can arise anywhere in a ﬁrm’s value chain. Successful
differentiation strategies grow out of the coordinated actions of all parts of a
ﬁrm, not just the marketing department. Differentiation is usually costly,
and I will show how to determine the cost of differentiation and how it
varies by competitor. I will then describe how to diagnose what types of
differentiation create buyer value, employing the buyer’s value chain as a
tool for doing so. Next I will show how to translate an analysis of buyer
value into speciﬁc buyer purchase criteria. Finally, I will use all of these
concepts to describe how to choose a differentiation strategy, and highlight
some common pitfalls in pursuing one.
