# Chapter 4: Differentiation

Sources of Differentiation
A ﬁrm differentiates itself from its competitors when it provides
something unique that is valuable to buyers beyond simply offering a low
price. Differentiation allows the ﬁrm to command a premium price, to sell
more of its product at a given price, or to gain equivalent beneﬁts such as
greater buyer loyalty during cyclical or seasonal downturns.1 Differentiation
leads to superior performance if the price premium achieved exceeds any
added costs of being unique. A ﬁrm’s differentiation may appeal to a broad
group of buyers in an industry or only to a subset of buyers with particular
needs. Brooks Brothers appeals to buyers wanting traditional clothing, for
example, though many buyers view Brooks Brothers clothing as too
conservative. Differentiation will be treated in general terms in this chapter,
and Chapter 7 will describe how differences in buyer needs within an
industry can lead to opportunities for differentiation through focus.
Differentiation and the Value Chain
Differentiation cannot be understood by viewing the ﬁrm in aggregate,
but stems from the speciﬁc activities a ﬁrm performs and how they affect
the buyer.2 Differentiation grows out of the ﬁrm’s value chain. Virtually any
value activity is a potential source of uniqueness. The procurement of raw
materials and other inputs can affect the performance of the end product and
hence differentiation. For example, Heineken pays particular attention to the
quality and purity of the ingredients for its beer and uses a constant strain of
yeast. Similarly, Steinway uses skilled technicians to choose the ﬁnest
materials for its pianos, and Michelin is more selective than its competitors
about the grades of rubber it uses in its tires.
Other successful differentiators create uniqueness through other primary
and support activities. Technology development activities can lead to
product designs that have unique product performance, as Cray Research
has done in supercomputers. Operations activities can affect such forms of
uniqueness as product appearance, conformance to speciﬁcations, and
reliability. Perdue, for example, has bolstered its differentiation of fresh
chickens by careful control of growing conditions and by feeding chickens


marigolds to improve their color. The outbound logistical system can shape
the speed and consistency of deliveries. For example, Federal Express has
established an integrated logistical system using its Memphis hub that
yields a level of delivery reliability unheard of prior to its entry into the
small-parcel delivery business. Marketing and sales activities also
frequently have an impact on differentiation. Timken’s sales force, for
example, assists its buyers to use roller bearings more effectively in their
manufacturing processes.
Figure 4–1 illustrates how any activity in the value chain can potentially
contribute to differentiation. Even if the physical product is a commodity,
other activities can often lead to substantial differentiation. Similarly,
indirect activities such as maintenance or scheduling can contribute to
differentiation just as do direct activities such as assembly or order
processing. For example, a dust and fume free building can dramatically
improve defect rates in semiconductor manufacturing.
Value activities representing only a small percentage of total cost can
nevertheless have a major impact on differentiation. For example,
inspection may represent only 1 percent of cost, but shipping even one
defective package of drugs to a buyer can have major negative repercussions
for a pharmaceutical ﬁrm’s perceived differentiation. Value chains
developed for purposes of strategic cost analysis, therefore, may not isolate
all activities that are important for differentiation. Differentiation analysis
requires a ﬁner division of some value activities, while others may be
aggregated if they have little differentiation impact.
A ﬁrm may also differentiate itself through the breadth of its activities,
or its competitive scope. Crown Cork and Seal offers crowns (bottle caps)
and ﬁlling machinery plus cans. It thus offers a full line of packaging
services to its buyers, and its expertise in packaging machinery gives it
more credibility and access in selling cans. Citicorp’s breadth of activities in
ﬁnancial services enhances its reputation as well as allowing its sales
channels to offer a broader product range. A number of other differentiating
factors can result from broad competitive scope:


Figure 4–1. Representative Sources of Differentiation in the Value Chain


• ability to serve buyer needs anywhere
•  simpliﬁed maintenance for the buyer if spare parts and design
philosophies are common for a wide line
• single point at which the buyer can purchase
• single point for customer service
• superior compatibility among products
Most of these beneﬁts require consistency or coordination among activities
if a ﬁrm is to achieve them.
Differentiation can also stem from downstream. A ﬁrm’s channels can be
a potent source of uniqueness, and may enhance its reputation, service,
customer training, and many other factors. In soft drinks, for example,
independent bottlers are crucial to differentiation. Coca Cola and Pepsi Cola
spend a great deal of attention and money attempting to upgrade bottlers
and improve their effectiveness. Coke, for example, has been arranging the
sale of less effective bottlers to new, more capable owners. Similarly,
observers credit Caterpillar Tractor’s dealers with providing an important
source of differentiation for Caterpillar. Cat’s approximately 250 dealers are
by far the largest in the industry on average, and their size allows them to
provide extensive service and buyer ﬁnancing. Selective distribution
through well-chosen outlets has also proven to be an extremely important
source of differentiation for such ﬁrms as Estée Lauder and Hathaway.
Firms can enhance the role of channels in differentiation through actions
such as the following:
• channel selection to achieve consistency in facilities, capabilities, or
image
• establishing standards and policies for how channels must operate
• provision of advertising and training materials for use by channels
• providing funding so that channels can offer credit
Firms often confuse the concept of quality with that of differentiation.
While differentiation encompasses quality, it is a much broader concept.
Quality is typically associated with the physical product. Differentiation
strategies attempt to create value for the buyer throughout the value chain.


Drivers of Uniqueness
A ﬁrm’s uniqueness in a value activity is determined by a series of basic
drivers, analogous to the cost drivers described in Chapter 3. Uniqueness
drivers are the underlying reasons why an activity is unique. Without
identifying them, a ﬁrm cannot fully develop means of creating new forms
of differentiation or diagnose how sustainable its existing differentiation is.
The 
principal 
uniqueness 
drivers 
are 
the 
following, 
ordered
approximately in terms of their prominence:
Policy Choices. Firms make policy choices about what activities to
perform and how to perform them. Such policy choices are perhaps the
single most prevalent uniqueness driver. Johns Manville chooses to provide
extensive customer training in installing its rooﬁng products, for example,
while Grey Poupon chooses to advertise mustard at a substantially higher
rate of spending than historical industry practice. Much uniqueness,
therefore, is discretionary.
Some typical policy choices that lead to uniqueness include:
• product features and performance offered
• services provided (e.g., credit, delivery, or repair)
• intensity of an activity adopted (e.g., rate of advertising spending)
•  content of an activity (e.g., the information provided in order
processing)
•  technology employed in performing an activity (e.g., precision of
machine tools, computerization of order processing)
• quality of inputs procured for an activity
•  procedures governing the actions of personnel in an activity (e.g.,
service procedures, nature of sales calls, frequency of inspection or
sampling)
•  skill and experience level of personnel employed in an activity, and
training provided
•  information employed to control an activity (e.g., number of
temperature, pressure, and variables used to control a chemical
reaction)


Linkages. Uniqueness often stems from linkages within the value chain
or with suppliers and channels that a ﬁrm exploits. Linkages can lead to
uniqueness if the way one activity is performed affects the performance of
the other:
LINKAGES WITHIN THE VALUE CHAIN. Meeting buyer needs often involves
coordinating linked activities. For example, delivery time is frequently
determined not only by outbound logistics but also by the speed of order
processing and the frequency of sales calls to take orders. Similarly,
coordination between the sales force and the service organization can lead
to more responsive customer service. Uniquely meeting buyer needs may
also require the optimization of linked activities. In a number of industries
such as copiers and semiconductors, for example, Japanese competitors
have achieved dramatic reductions in defect rates by modifying every
activity that inﬂuences defects instead of relying on a single value activity
such as inspection. Similarly, higher investment in indirect activities such as
maintenance can improve the performance of direct activities such as
ﬁnishing or printing.
SUPPLIER LINKAGES. Uniqueness in meeting buyer needs may also be the
result of coordination with suppliers. Close coordination with suppliers can
shorten new model development time, for example, if suppliers tool up for
producing new parts at the same time as a ﬁrm is completing the design of
equipment to manufacture the new model. Similarly, missionary sales
efforts by suppliers to a ﬁrm’s buyers can sometimes help differentiate a
ﬁrm’s product.
CHANNEL LINKAGES. Linkages with channels can also lead to uniqueness
in a variety of ways. By coordinating with channels or jointly optimizing
the division of activities between the ﬁrm and the channels, uniqueness can
frequently result. Some examples of how linkages with channels can lead to
uniqueness are as follows:
• training channels in selling and other business practices
• joint selling efforts with channels


•  subsidizing for channel investments in personnel, facilities, and
performance of additional activities.
Timing. Uniqueness may result from when a ﬁrm began performing an
activity. Being the ﬁrst to adopt a product image, for example, may preempt
others from doing so and make the ﬁrm unique. This is one of Gerber’s
sources of differentiation in baby food. Early regulatory approval for its soft
contact lens gave Bausch and Lomb its differentiation. In other industries,
moving late may allow a ﬁrm to employ the most modern technology and
thereby differentiate. Chapter 5 discusses ﬁrst-mover and late-mover
advantages in more detail.
Location. Uniqueness may stem from location. For example, a retail
bank may have the most convenient branch and automatic teller machine
locations.
Interrelationships. The uniqueness of a value activity may stem from
sharing it with sister business units. Sharing a sales force for both insurance
and other ﬁnancial products, as some leading ﬁrms are beginning to do,
may allow the salesperson to offer the buyer better service. The analysis of
interrelationships is described in Chapter 9.
Learning and spillovers. The uniqueness of an activity can be the result
of learning about how to perform it better. Achieving consistent quality in a
manufacturing process may be learning-driven, for example. As with cost,
the spillover of learning to competitors erodes its contribution to
differentiation. 
Only 
proprietary 
learning 
leads 
to 
sustainable
differentiation.
Integration. A ﬁrm’s level of integration may make it unique. Integration
into new value activities can make a ﬁrm unique because the ﬁrm is better
able to control the performance of the activities or coordinate them with
other activities. Integration may also provide more activities to be sources
of differentiation. Providing service in-house instead of leaving it to third
party suppliers, for example, may allow a ﬁrm to be the only ﬁrm to also
offer service or to provide service in a unique way compared to competitors.


Integration may encompass not only supplier or channel activities, but it
may involve performing activities currently performed by the buyer. By
connecting hospitals to its computer system and allowing on-line ordering,
for example, American Hospital Supply eliminates the need for some buyer
activities and differentiates itself. Integration also sometimes makes the
achievement of linkages with suppliers and channels easier. Reducing
integration relative to competitors may be a source of differentiation in
some industries. De-integration may exploit the capabilities of suppliers or
independent channels, for example.
Scale. Large scale can allow an activity to be performed in a unique way
that is not possible at smaller volume. For example, Hertz’s scale in car
rental underlies some of its differentiation. Hertz’s many locations in all
areas of the United States provide more convenient pick-up and drop-off of
cars, and faster ﬁeld service. The relevant type of scale that leads to
differentiation will vary—with Hertz it is number of rental and service
locations, while in another industry it might be the scale of plant that allows
precise tolerances due to high speed equipment. In some cases, however,
scale can work against the uniqueness of an activity. Scale may, for
example, reduce the ﬂexibility of fashion-related ﬁrms to buyer needs.
Institutional factors. Institutional factors sometimes play a role in
allowing a ﬁrm to be unique. Similarly, a good relationship with its union
may allow a ﬁrm to establish unique job deﬁnitions for employees.
The drivers of uniqueness vary for each activity and may vary across
industries for the same activity. The drivers interact to determine the extent
to which an activity is unique. A ﬁrm must examine each of its areas of
uniqueness to see what driver or drivers underlie it. This will be critical to
the sustainability of differentiation because some uniqueness drivers
provide more sustainability than others. Policy choices may be easier for
competitors to imitate than uniqueness stemming from interrelationships or
exploiting linkages, for example. Understanding what allows it to be unique
will also ensure that a ﬁrm does not undermine the causes. Finally, the
drivers of uniqueness may suggest new sources of differentiation.


The Cost of Differentiation
Differentiation is usually costly. A ﬁrm must often incur costs to be
unique because uniqueness requires that it perform value activities better
than competitors. Providing superior applications engineering support
usually requires additional engineers, for example, while a highly skilled
sales force typically costs more than a less skilled one. Achieving greater
product durability than competitors may well require more material content
or more expensive materials—Rockwell’s water meters are more durable
than competitors’ because they employ more bronze.
Some forms of differentiation are clearly more costly than others.
Differentiation that results from superior coordination of linked value
activities may not add much cost, for example, nor may better product
performance that results from closer parts tolerances achieved through an
automated machining center. In diesel locomotives, the higher tolerances
achieved through automation improve fuel efﬁciency at low additional cost.
Similarly, differentiating through having more product features is likely to
be more costly than differentiating through having different but more
desired features.
The cost of differentiation reﬂects the cost drivers of the value activities
on which uniqueness is based. The relationship between uniqueness and
cost drivers takes two related forms:
•  what makes an activity unique (uniqueness drivers) can impact cost
drivers
• the cost drivers can affect the cost of being unique
In pursuing differentiation, a ﬁrm often affects the cost drivers of an
activity adversely and deliberately adds cost. Moving an activity close to the
buyer, for example, may raise cost because of the effect of the location cost
driver. Smith International achieved differentiation in drill bits by
maintaining large and more accessible inventories in the ﬁeld, raising its
cost.
At the same time as uniqueness often raises cost by affecting the cost
drivers, the cost drivers determine how costly differentiation will be. A
ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis cost drivers will determine how costly a particular


differentiation strategy will be relative to competitors. The cost of providing
the most sales force coverage, for example, will be affected by whether
there are economies of scale in the operation of the sales force. If
economies of scale exist they may reduce the cost of increased coverage
and make such coverage less costly for a ﬁrm with a large local market
share.
Scale, interrelationships, learning, and timing are particularly important
cost drivers in affecting the cost of differentiation. Though scale can itself
lead to differentiation, it most often affects the cost of differentiation. Scale
can determine the cost of a ﬁrm’s policy choice to advertise heavily, for
example, or the cost of rapid introduction of new models. Sharing also can
reduce the cost of differentiation. IBM’s highly trained, experienced sales
force is made less expensive by sharing it among a variety of related ofﬁce
products, for example. A ﬁrm moving faster down the learning curve in a
differentiating activity will gain a cost advantage in differentiating, while
moving early may lower the cost of differentiating in areas such as
advertising where there is an accumulating stock of goodwill or other
intangible assets.
The cost drivers thus play an important role in determining the success
of differentiation strategies and have important competitive implications. If
competitors have different relative positions vis-à-vis important cost drivers,
their cost of achieving uniqueness in the affected activity will differ.
Similarly, different forms of differentiation are relatively more or less costly
for a ﬁrm depending on its situation vis-à-vis the cost drivers of the affected
activities. Manufacturing parts with higher precision through automation
can be less costly for a ﬁrm that can share the computerized machining
center via interrelationships than for a ﬁrm that cannot. Similarly, Black &
Decker has a faster rate of new product introduction than competitors in
power tools but this rate is proportionally less costly for Black & Decker
because of its leading worldwide market share. In the extreme, a ﬁrm may
have such a large cost advantage in differentiating a particular value activity
that its cost in that activity is actually lower than a ﬁrm not attempting to be
unique in the activity. This is one reason why a ﬁrm can sometimes be both
low cost and differentiated simultaneously, as was discussed in Chapter 1.
Sometimes making an activity unique also simultaneously lowers cost.
For example, integration may make an activity unique but also lower cost if


integration is a cost driver. Where achieving differentiation and reducing
cost can take place simultaneously, however, this suggests that (1) a ﬁrm
has not been fully exploiting all the opportunities to lower cost; (2) being
unique in an activity was formerly judged undesirable; or (3) a signiﬁcant
innovation has occurred which competitors have not adopted, such as a new
automated process that both lowers cost and improves quality.
Firms often fail to exploit opportunities to lower cost through
coordination of linked activities that also raises differentiation. Better
coordination of quotations, procurement, and manufacturing scheduling
may lower inventory cost at the same time as it shortens delivery lead time,
for example. More extensive inspection by suppliers may lower a ﬁrm’s
inspection costs at the same time that the reliability of the end product is
increased. Unexploited opportunities to reduce cost through linkages that
also affect quality, in fact, are the reason underpinning the popular assertion
that “quality is free.” The possibility of simultaneously raising
differentiation and reducing cost through linkages exists, however, because
the ﬁrm has not been fully exploiting cost reduction opportunities and not
because differentiation is not costly.
If a ﬁrm has been aggressively reducing its cost, therefore, attempts to
achieve uniqueness usually raise cost. Similarly, once competitors imitate a
major innovation a ﬁrm can remain differentiated only by adding cost. In
assessing the cost of differentiation, then, a ﬁrm must compare the cost of
being unique in an activity with the cost of being equal to competitors.
Buyer Value and Differentiation
Uniqueness does not lead to differentiation unless it is valuable to the
buyer. A successful differentiator ﬁnds ways of creating value for buyers
that yield a price premium in excess of the extra cost. The starting point for
understanding what is valuable to the buyer is the buyer’s value chain.
Buyers have value chains consisting of the activities they perform just as a
ﬁrm does, as discussed in Chapter 2.3 A ﬁrm’s product or service is a
purchased input to its buyer’s value chain. Steel is a raw material that is
typically cut, bent, machined, or otherwise converted in its buyer’s
production process to become part of components and ultimately end


products, for example. The buyer’s value chain determines the way in which
a ﬁrm’s product is actually used as well as the ﬁrm’s other effects on the
buyer’s activities. These determine the buyer’s needs and are the
underpinnings of buyer value and differentiation.
Although buyer value chains are easiest to visualize for industrial,
commercial, or institutional buyers, individual consumers also have value
chains. A consumer’s value chain represents the sequence of activities
performed by a household and its various members in which the product or
service ﬁts. To understand how a product ﬁts into a household value chain it
is usually necessary to identify those activities in which a product is directly
or indirectly involved, typically not all the activities a household performs.
A television serves as entertainment for various members of a household
during some periods of the day, and serves as a background noise during
others. The set is typically switched on and off a number of times each day
and the channel may be changed frequently. Traveler’s checks are typically
bought in quantity at a bank and then used occasionally in the course of a
vacation or business trip. Redeeming any extra checks after the trip involves
a visit to the bank, which means that many checks are saved for future trips
instead. A commercial, institutional, or industrial buyer’s value chain
reﬂects its strategy and approach to implementation, while a household’s
value chain reﬂects its members’ habits and needs. What is valuable for
either type of buyer, however, grows out of how a product and the ﬁrm
supplying it affect the buyer’s chain.
Buyer Value
A ﬁrm creates value for a buyer that justiﬁes a premium price (or
preference at an equal price) through two mechanisms:4
• by lowering buyer cost5
• by raising buyer performance
For industrial, commercial, and institutional buyers, differentiation
requires that a ﬁrm be uniquely able to create competitive advantage for its
buyer in ways besides selling to them at a lower price. If a ﬁrm is able to


lower its buyer’s cost or enhance its buyer’s performance, the buyer will be
willing to pay a premium price. If the components supplied by a well
respected bicycle parts supplier allow a bicycle assembler to improve
differentiation and thereby charge a higher price, for example, the
assembler will be willing to pay a premium for the components. Similarly,
the fact that Kodak’s Ektaprint copier lowers the cost of a ﬁnished set of
collated documents with a recirculating document feeder and an in-line
automatic stapler that reduces the buyer’s personnel cost means that the
buyer is willing to pay a premium for the copier. In both instances, the ﬁrm
was able to enhance the competitive advantage of its buyer even though not
selling its product at a cheaper price.
The principle is the same for households and individual consumers,
though the measurement of buyer cost and particularly buyer performance
may be more subtle. For household buyers, the cost of a product includes
not only ﬁnancial costs but also time or convenience costs. The cost of time
for a consumer reﬂects the opportunity cost of using it elsewhere, as well as
the implicit cost of frustration, annoyance, or exertion. Buyer value results
from lowering any of these costs for the buyer. A refrigerator that uses less
electricity than other refrigerators can command a premium. A vacuum
cleaner that saves vacuuming time and reduces exertion is also valuable to
the household buyer. Offering direct marketing that saves the buyer
shopping time may not be valuable if the buyer enjoys shopping, however.
Raising buyer performance for consumers involves raising their level of
satisfaction or meeting their needs. If a TV set’s better picture quality and
faster warmup time lead to more satisfaction in watching it relative to
competitors’ sets, for example, the buyer will be willing to pay a premium.
Status or prestige are important needs just as are the features of a product or
its quality. Although it may be difﬁcult to value buyer performance for
consumers, their value chains will suggest the important dimensions of
satisfaction.
Industrial, commercial, and institutional buyers sometimes resemble
consumers in instances where their objectives are not solely proﬁts or
revenue growth. Buyers may value a supplier that provides satisfaction or
prestige for executives or other employees even if it does not contribute to
the proﬁt of the company. This reﬂects the differences that often exist
between employee and company goals. Similarly, a hospital values a


diagnostic device that yields better treatment even if the hospital does not
earn higher proﬁt as a result. This reﬂects both the goal of providing quality
patient care and the fact that a large number of hospitals are nonproﬁt
institutions. Many organizations have other goals in addition to proﬁtability
even if they are proﬁt making, which may enter into buyer value.
The Value Chain and Buyer Value
A ﬁrm lowers buyer cost or raises buyer performance through the impact
of its value chain on the buyer’s value chain. A ﬁrm may affect the buyer’s
chain by simply providing an input to one buyer activity. Frequently,
however, a ﬁrm’s product will have both direct and indirect impacts on the
buyer’s chain that go beyond the activity in which the product is actually
used. For example, weight is important in a typewriter that is moved from
place to place though it is not relevant if one views the buyer activity simply
as typing. Moreover, a ﬁrm typically impacts the buyer not only through its
product but also through such activities as the logistical system, order entry
system, sales force, and applications engineering group. Even ﬁrm activities
representing a small fraction of total cost can have a substantial impact on
differentiation. Sometimes the buyer has individual contact with value
activities of the ﬁrm (e.g., the sales force) while in other cases the buyer
only observes the outcome of a group of activities (e.g., the ultimate on-
time or late delivery). Thus, the value a ﬁrm creates for its buyer is
determined by the whole array of links between the ﬁrm’s value chain and
its buyer’s value chain, represented schematically in Figure 4–2.
Figure 4–2. Representative Linkages Between the Firm and the Buyer’s Value Chain


Heavy trucks offer a useful example of multiple links. A heavy truck
directly inﬂuences its buyer’s logistical costs—a function of the truck’s
carrying capacity, ease of loading and unloading, fuel costs, and
maintenance costs. The truck will also have indirect effects on its buyer’s
other costs. Its capacity will inﬂuence the frequency with which the buyer
makes deliveries. The truck may contribute product quality through the
amount of shaking it subjects the cargo to, as well as the temperature and
humidity conditions in transit. The truck may also affect the buyer’s
packaging costs, a function of the protection required to avoid damage.
Finally, the truck may incrementally affect brand identity through its
appearance and the visibility of the logo painted on the side.
Not only will the truck itself affect the buyer’s value chain, but several
other value activities of the truck manufacturer will probably affect the
buyer as well. Spare parts availability will affect the downtime experienced
by the buyer. Credit policies will affect the ﬁnancing cost of the truck. The
quality of the truck manufacturer’s sales force may well determine their
helpfulness in suggesting new maintenance procedures and truck utilization
practices. All these links between a truck manufacturer’s value activities
and the buyer may potentially add to or subtract from buyer cost or
performance. The principle also holds true for household buyers.
The links between a ﬁrm and its buyer’s value chain that are relevant to
buyer value depend on how the ﬁrm’s product is actually used by the buyer,
not necessarily how it was intended to be used. Even the most carefully
designed product can yield unsatisfactory performance if a buyer does not
understand how to install, operate, or maintain it or if it is used for a
purpose for which it was not intended. For example, a housewife may get
terrible results from a frozen food product if it is cooked at the wrong
temperature. Similarly, a machine can malfunction quickly if it is not oiled
in the right place.
Every impact of a ﬁrm on its buyer’s value chain, including every link
between ﬁrm and buyer value activities, represents a possible opportunity
for differentiation. The more direct and indirect impacts a product has on its
buyer’s value chain, the richer the possibilities for differentiation tend to be
and the greater the overall level of achievable differentiation. A truck
manufacturer with a sophisticated understanding of how it impacts its
buyer’s value chain, for example, can not only design the truck to provide


greater beneﬁts to the buyer, but can perform other value activities such as
service, spare parts supply, and ﬁnancing to be more valuable to the buyer.
Differentiation, then, grows out of all the links between a ﬁrm and its
buyer in which the ﬁrm is unique. The value of being unique in a value
activity is its direct and indirect impact on the buyer’s cost or performance.
A ﬁrm’s overall level of differentiation is the cumulative value to the buyer
of the uniqueness throughout its value chain. This cumulative value can be
calculated and provides the upper limit of the price premium the ﬁrm can
command relative to its competitors. Since the ﬁrm must necessarily share
some of the value it creates with its buyer in order to give the buyer an
incentive to purchase, the actual price premium will be somewhat less in
practice.
Lowering Buyer Cost
Anything a ﬁrm can do that lowers the buyer’s total cost of using a
product or other buyer costs represents a potential basis for differentiation.
Actions that lower the cost of buyer value activities representing a
signiﬁcant fraction of the buyer’s cost constitute the most signiﬁcant
opportunities. There are frequently many ways to lower buyer cost if a ﬁrm
has a sophisticated understanding of how buyers use its product and how its
various marketing, delivery, and other activities affect buyer costs.
A ﬁrm can lower its buyer’s cost in a number of ways:6
• Lower delivery, installation, or ﬁnancing cost
• Lower the required rate of usage of the product
•  Lower the direct cost of using the product, such as labor, fuel,
maintenance, required space
•  Lower the indirect cost of using the product, or the impact of the
product on other value activities. For example, a light component may
reduce the transport costs of the end product
•  Lower the buyer cost in other value activities unconnected with the
physical product
• Lower the risk of product failure and thus the buyer’s expected cost of
failure.


Table 4–1 lists some of the ways in which a ﬁrm’s product itself can
lower the buyer’s direct cost of use. In addition to lowering buyer cost
through its product characteristics as illustrated by the examples in Table 4–
1, a ﬁrm can lower its buyer’s cost of use through many other value
activities. Reliability of deliveries reduces buyer inventory, and short lead
times in supplying spare parts reduce downtime. Ordering and billing
procedures can reduce the buyer’s accounting and procurement costs.
American Hospital Supply’s on-line ordering system for hospitals, for
example, allows purchase orders to be placed by less skilled, lower paid
clerks instead of purchasing agents. A ﬁrm can also provide buyers with
advice or technical assistance that reduces their costs. Intel, for example,
has a development system to help buyers design its microprocessors
cheaply and rapidly into their products. A ﬁrm can also take over buyer
functions, in effect forward integrating into the buyer’s value chain. In
wholesaling, for example, Napco stocks shelves, prices goods, and replaces
slow-moving items for its buyers.7
TABLE 4–1 Illustrative Product Characteristics that Lower the
Buyers’ Direct Cost of Use
DIFFERENTIATING FACTOR
EXAMPLE
Reduced usage of the product to achieve an equivalent
beneﬁt (including scrap percentage)
Cut-to-size steel sheets
Faster time to process
Quick attaching fasteners
Lower labor costs of use (lower labor inputs, less training,
or lower skilled labor required)
Automatic dialers
Reducing quantity of inputs or ancillary equipment
required (e.g. fuel, electricity, required shielding from
interference, etc.)
Fuel-efﬁcient refrigerator
Lower required maintenance/spare parts or ease of
maintenance
Reliable copiers
Less downtime or idle time
Fast-loading cargo ships
Less required adjustment or monitoring
Uniform-quality paints
Lower failure cost or risk
Blowout preventers for oil wells
Lower installation costs
Single-ply rooﬁng material


Less incoming inspection required
Semiconductors
More rapid setup time
Programmable machine tools
Faster processing time
Tailored aluminum alloys
Reduced risk of damage of other products
Filtration equipment
Higher trade-in value
Durable cars
Compatibility with more types of ancillary equipment
Personal computers
A number of more extended examples will illustrate how ﬁrms have
lowered their buyers’ costs and achieved differentiation. Kodak’s copiers,
described earlier, lower the buyer’s cost of making collated and stapled
copies. The industry leader Xerox was more concerned with copying speed
itself, which failed to recognize the buyer’s full cost of using copiers. In the
moving industry, Bekins has offered guaranteed pickup and delivery dates, a
ﬁxed price for a move that is quoted in advance, a $100 late payment to the
buyer if the move does not occur on time, and reimbursement for damaged
goods based on their replacement costs instead of purchase price. All these
lower the buyer’s direct and indirect cost of a move (and increase peace of
mind as well). In fasteners, Velcro uses a system involving many small
plastic hooks that connect to a ﬁbrous pad. Velcro fasteners are easier to
install than other forms of fastening devices and eliminate the need for
skilled labor in the fastening steps on the buyer’s assembly line.
In seeking opportunities to lower buyer costs, a ﬁrm must chart in detail
how its product moves through or affects the buyer’s value chain, including
the 
buyer’s 
inventory, 
handling, 
technology 
development, 
and
administrative activities. It must also be familiar with all other products or
inputs its product is used with, and understand how its product interfaces
with them. The ﬁrm must also identify every other value activity in its value
chain that affects the buyer’s chain.
Raising Buyer Performance
Raising buyer performance will depend on understanding what is
desirable performance from the buyer’s viewpoint. Raising the performance
of industrial, commercial, and institutional buyer depends on what creates


differentiation with their buyers. Thus the needs of the buyer’s buyer must
be understood, requiring the same analysis as the analysis of buyer value. A
truck sold to a buyer who is a consumer goods company that uses it to carry
goods to retail stores provides an example. If the retail stores desire
frequent deliveries, the consumer goods company will be very interested in
a truck with carrying capacity to make frequent deliveries at reasonable
cost. Similarly, in selling to automobile manufacturers Velcro achieves
differentiation because its fasteners are more ﬂexible and allow interior
design options for cars that are appreciated by consumers.
Raising performance of industrial, commercial, or institutional buyers
can also be based on helping them meet their noneconomic goals such as
status, image, or prestige. In heavy trucks, for example, PACCAR has
achieved a high level of differentiation for its Kenworth “K-Whopper”
trucks by careful handcrafting and by tailoring them to individual owner
speciﬁcations. These have little to do with the economic performance of the
truck. However, many Kenworth buyers are owner-operators who derive
value from the appearance and brand image of their trucks.
For products sold to consumers, raising buyer performance will be a
function of better satisfying needs. American Express traveler’s checks are
used in a stream of consumer activities in which cash needs are irregular,
travel plans change, banks are not always available, and a risk of theft or
loss exists. American Express differentiates itself because its buyers value
the security of redemption anywhere as well as rapid replacement of lost
checks. American Express provides easy redemption anywhere via many
ofﬁces throughout the world that operate long hours.
Buyer Perception of Value
Whatever the value a ﬁrm provides its buyers, buyers often have a
difﬁcult time assessing it in advance. Even careful inspection and test
driving of a truck, for example, does not allow the buyer to assess
completely its comfort, durability, fuel usage, and repair frequency. A
detailed understanding of how the physical product affects a buyer’s cost or
performance often requires extensive experience in its use. A buyer faces an
even more difﬁcult challenge in knowing how all the other activities a ﬁrm


performs will affect buyer value. Moreover, a buyer cannot always
completely or accurately gauge the performance of a ﬁrm and its product
even after the product has been purchased and used.
Buyers, then, frequently do not fully understand all the ways in which a
supplier actually or potentially might lower their costs or improve
performance—that is, buyers often do not know what they should be
looking for in a supplier. While buyers are more likely to understand the
direct impacts of a ﬁrm on their value chains, they often fail to recognize
the indirect impacts or the ways in which other supplier activities besides
the product affect them. Buyers can sometimes perceive too much value just
as they can fail to perceive enough. For example, buyers sometimes see
only the price of a product when measuring its value and do not add up
other, more hidden, costs such as freight or installation. The buyer’s
perception of a ﬁrm and its product, therefore, can be as important as the
reality of what the ﬁrm offers in determining the effective level of
differentiation achieved. Moreover, buyers’ incomplete knowledge of what
is valuable to them can become an opportunity for differentiation strategy,
since a ﬁrm may be able to adopt a new form of differentiation
preemptively and educate buyers to value it.
A buyer’s incomplete knowledge implies that the differentiation actually
achieved may well be based in part on the factors used by the buyer to infer
or judge whether a ﬁrm will lower its cost or improve its performance
relative to competitors (or is doing so currently). Buyers use such
indications as advertising, reputation, packaging, the professionalism,
appearance, and personality of supplier employees, the attractiveness of
facilities, and information provided in sales presentations to infer the value
a ﬁrm will or does create. I term such factors that buyers use to infer the
value a ﬁrm creates signals of value.
Some signals of value require ongoing expenditure by a ﬁrm (e.g.,
packaging, advertising) while others reﬂect the stock of goodwill or
reputation a ﬁrm has built up over time. Similarly, some signals of value are
not directly controlled by the ﬁrm at all (e.g., word of mouth). Signaling
may be as necessary, in some industries, to expose hidden costs of a product
on which the ﬁrm has an advantage over competitors as it is to expose
unrecognized beneﬁts. In some, if not many, industries, signals of value are
as important as the actual value created in determining realized


differentiation. This is particularly true where a ﬁrm’s impact on buyer cost
or performance is subjective, indirect, or hard to quantify, when many
buyers are ﬁrst-time buyers, buyers are unsophisticated, or repurchase is
infrequent. Good examples would be legal services, cosmetics, and
consulting. However, the need to signal value is present in virtually every
industry.
Buyers will not pay for value that they do not perceive, no matter how
real it may be. Thus, the price premium a ﬁrm commands will reﬂect both
the value actually delivered to its buyer and the extent to which the buyer
perceives this value. This is illustrated schematically in Figure 4–3. A ﬁrm
that delivers only modest value but signals it more effectively may actually
command a higher price than a ﬁrm that delivers higher value but signals it
poorly.
In the long run, the upper limit of the price premium a ﬁrm can
command reﬂects its actual impact on buyer value—impact on buyer cost
and performance relative to competitors. Through effective signaling of
value, a ﬁrm may be able to command a price in excess of true value for a
time. Eventually, however, the failure of a ﬁrm to deliver perceived value to
match its price tends to become known, partly through the efforts of
competitors.8 The converse is less true, however. By failing to signal its
value effectively, a ﬁrm may never realize the price premium its actual value
deserves.


Figure 4–3. Actual Versus Perceived Buyer Value
Buyer Value and the Real Buyer
A ﬁrm or household does not purchase a product; individual decision
makers do. Both actual value and signals of value are assessed and
interpreted by these decision makers. The identity of the speciﬁc person or
persons who make the purchase decision will inﬂuence, if not determine,
the value attached to a product. The decision maker may not necessarily be
the person who pays for the product (e.g., the doctor, not the patient,
chooses drugs) and may be different from the user (e.g., the purchasing
agent chooses a product used in the plant). The channel may also make its
own decision about whether to stock a ﬁrm’s product and whether the ﬁrm
is a desirable supplier.
Different decision makers will value different things about a supplier and
use different signals to assess them. A purchasing agent may not value
reliability as highly as a plant manager, for example, because the purchasing
agent is more detached from the consequences of product failure. The
purchasing agent may be motivated more to keep the cost of purchase to a
minimum. There may also be more than one decision maker for a product.
Both husband and wife typically decide on buying a house, for example,
and travel agents and tour brokers all can play a role in choosing an airline
or resort hotel. Similarly, the purchasing department and plant engineer
often jointly choose pieces of production equipment. A number of
individuals frequently inﬂuence the decision maker though they may not
participate in the decision directly. Such individuals may be able to veto a
supplier, despite the fact that they do not have the power to choose.
Identifying the value a ﬁrm creates for the buyer and the signals of value
used by the buyer, then, rests on determining the identity of the real buyer.
The process of identifying the real buyer often suggests new dimensions of
performance that are not immediately apparent if the buyer is viewed as the
ﬁrm or household. These can include such factors as prestige, personal
relationships with supplier personnel that are valued in their own right, and
the desire to avoid personal risk in the purchase decision by choosing a
well-known supplier. IBM has exploited its position as a “safe” choice as a
supplier, for example, as has Kodak in amateur photography. The expertise


and sources of information available to the real buyer will also shape what
signals of value will be convincing—an engineer might use technical
publications and advertising in technical journals as signals while an
accounting clerk might be more swayed by polished salespeople and glossy
brochures.
Buyer Purchase Criteria
Applying these fundamentals of buyer value to a particular industry
results in the identiﬁcation of buyer purchase criteria—speciﬁc attributes of
a ﬁrm that create actual or perceived value for the buyer. Buyer purchase
criteria can be divided into two types:
•  Use criteria. Purchase criteria that stem from the way in which a
supplier affects actual buyer value through lowering buyer cost or
raising buyer performance. Use criteria might include such factors as
product quality, product features, delivery time, and applications
engineering support.
• Signaling criteria. Purchase criteria that stem from signals of value, or
means used by the buyer to infer or judge what a supplier’s actual
value is. Signaling criteria might include factors such as advertising,
the attractiveness of facilities, and reputation.
Use criteria are speciﬁc measures of what creates buyer value. Signaling
criteria are measures of how buyers perceive the presence of value. While
use criteria tend to be more oriented to a supplier’s product, outbound
logistics and service activities, signaling criteria often stem from marketing
activities. Nonetheless, every functional department of a ﬁrm (and most
every value activity) can affect both.
The price premium a ﬁrm can command will be a function of its
uniqueness in meeting both use and signaling criteria. Addressing use
criteria without also meeting signaling criteria, a common error, will
undermine a buyer’s perception of a ﬁrm’s value. Addressing signaling
criteria without meeting use criteria will also usually not succeed because
buyers will eventually realize that their substantive needs have gone unmet.


The distinctions among use and signaling criteria are often complex,
since many of a ﬁrm’s activities contribute to meeting use criteria as well as
serve as signals of value. A polished sales force, for example, may both
signal value and be a valuable source of applications knowledge that will
lower the buyer’s cost. Similarly, brand reputation may be valuable to a
buyer because it removes any blame if a supplier does not perform (“How
can you blame me for selecting IBM?”). Despite such situations, however, it
is vital to separate use and signaling criteria and the ﬁrm’s activities that
contribute to both, since only use criteria represent true sources of buyer
value. Buyers do not pay for signals of value per se. A ﬁrm must understand
how well it meets use criteria and the value created in order to determine an
appropriate price premium. The value of meeting signaling criteria is
measured differently. The value of a signaling criterion is how much it
contributes to the buyer perceiving the value created in meeting use criteria.
USE CRITERIA
Use criteria grow out of links between a ﬁrm’s value chain and its
buyer’s value chain, as described earlier. Because these links are numerous,
there are often many use criteria that go well beyond characteristics of the
physical product. Use criteria can encompass the actual product (e.g., Dr
Pepper’s taste difference from Coca-Cola and Pepsi), or the system by
which a ﬁrm delivers and supports its product, even if the physical product
is undifferentiated. While the distinction between a product and other value
activities may only be a matter of degree, it remains an important one since
other value activities often provide more dimensions on which to
differentiate than the physical product. Other value activities besides those
associated with the product can represent an important source of
differentiation because many ﬁrms tend to be preoccupied with the physical
product. Use criteria can also include both the speciﬁcations achieved by a
ﬁrm’s product (or other value activities) as well as the consistency with
which it meets those speciﬁcations (conformance). Conformance may be as
important as or more important than speciﬁcations, although it too is often
overlooked as a differentiating factor.
Use criteria can also include intangibles such as style, prestige, perceived
status, and brand connotation (e.g., designer jeans), particularly in


consumer goods. Intangible use criteria often stem from purchase
motivations that are not economic in the narrow sense. Smirnoff Vodka’s
ability to achieve a premium price for a product that is essentially a
commodity stems largely from the social context in which much drinking
takes place. Buyers want to be seen consuming sophisticated vodka or to
serve vodka perceived as such by their guests. While intangible use criteria
are usually associated with consumers, they can be equally important with
other buyers. Owning a Gulfstream III business jet can lead to considerable
prestige for executives with their peers, for example. Intangible use criteria
are most important in industrial, commercial, or institutional products
where the real buyer is an individual with considerable discretion in
purchasing.
Finally, use criteria also may encompass the characteristics of
distribution channels, or downstream value. Since channels can contribute
to differentiation, use criteria must reﬂect these in areas such as channel-
provided service, and credit provided by channels. In addition, channels
will have their own use criteria that measure sources of value in a ﬁrm’s
dealings with them. For example, channels will often want credit,
responsiveness to inquiries, or technical support that the end buyer may not
notice at all.
Since the performance of a ﬁrm in meeting use criteria may also be
affected by how the buyer actually uses a product, part of a ﬁrm’s challenge
is to ensure that its product is actually used in a way that allows it to
perform to its capabilities. This can be inﬂuenced by product design,
packaging, and training. Flow control valves, for example, are often
designed so they cannot be overtorqued. Factors that improve the chances
that a product is used as intended often become use criteria in their own
right. They may be potential bases for differentiation since ﬁrms often
assume that their products are used as intended.
SIGNALING CRITERIA
Signaling criteria reﬂect the signals of value that inﬂuence the buyer’s
perception of the ﬁrm’s ability to meet its use criteria. Activities a ﬁrm
performs, as well as other attributes, can be signaling criteria. Signaling
criteria may help a particular supplier to be considered and/or may play an


important role in the buyer’s ﬁnal purchase decision. Typical signaling
criteria include:
• reputation or image
• cumulative advertising
• weight or outward appearance of the product
• packaging and labels
• appearance and size of facilities
• time in business
• installed base
• customer list
• market share
• price (where price connotes quality)
• parent company identity (size, ﬁnancial stability, etc.)
• visibility to top management of the buying ﬁrm
Often signaling criteria can be quite subtle. For example, the paint job on
a medical instrument may have an important impact on the buyer’s
perception of its quality even though the paint job has little or no impact on
the instrument’s performance. Similarly, Arm & Hammer’s brand extension
into detergents has been perceived as differentiated in part because a box of
it is heavier than competitors’ products even though it yields the same
number of washes.
Signaling criteria are the most important when buyers have a difﬁcult
time measuring a ﬁrm’s performance, they purchase the product
infrequently, or the product is produced to buyer speciﬁcations and hence
past history with other buyers is an incomplete indication of the future. In
professional services, for example, signaling criteria are extremely
important. Services are typically customized and actually performed only
after the buyer has purchased them. As a result, successful professional
service ﬁrms pay very close attention to such things as ofﬁce decor and the
appearance of employees. Another industry where signaling criteria are
important is pianos, where many buyers are not sophisticated or secure
enough to judge quality very accurately. Steinway, the differentiated


producer, has recognized the use of pianos by concert pianists as a powerful
signaling criterion. Steinway maintains a “piano bank” of grand pianos all
over the United States that approved artists can use for concerts at a
nominal cost.9 As a result, Steinway has developed excellent artist
relationships, and a large percentage of concerts are performed on Steinway
pianos.
Signaling criteria also grow out of the need to reinforce the buyer’s
perception of a ﬁrm even after the purchase of the product. Buyers often
need continued reassurance that they made a good decision in choosing the
ﬁrm and the product. They may also need education to help them evaluate
the extent to which a product is meeting their use criteria. This is because
buyers often remain unable to discern how well a product has met their use
criteria even after purchase, and may have insufﬁcient data or may not pay
enough attention to notice product performance. Regular communication
that describes a ﬁrm’s contribution for its buyers can often have a major
impact on differentiation.10
Some signaling criteria are associated with particular use criteria, while
others are more generalized signals that a supplier will provide value to the
buyer. Advertising may emphasize product characteristics, for example,
while a ﬁrm’s reputation may imply to some buyers that many of their
criteria will be satisﬁed. It is important to attempt to draw the connections
between signals of value and the particular use criteria they are signaling.
This will both help in identifying additional signals of value, and help the
ﬁrm understand exactly those attributes its signaling should convey. If a
ﬁrm recognizes that its customer list is a signal of service reliability, for
example, it can present the list in a form that emphasizes this.
Identifying Purchase Criteria
Identiﬁcation of purchase criteria begins by identifying the decision
maker for a ﬁrm’s product and the other individuals that inﬂuence the
decision maker. The channels may be an intermediate buyer that must be
analyzed as well. Use criteria should be identiﬁed ﬁrst, because they
measure the sources of buyer value and also often determine signaling
criteria. A number of parallel approaches should be employed to identify


use criteria. Internal knowledge of the buyer’s needs constitutes an initial
source of use criteria. However, conventional wisdom may color internal
perception of use criteria; an internal analysis alone is insufﬁcient. No
analysis of buyer purchase criteria should ever be accepted unless it
includes some direct contact with the buyer. However, even talking to
buyers, as essential as it is, is insufﬁcient because buyers often do not fully
understand all the ways in which a ﬁrm can affect their cost or performance
and they may also not tell the truth. In any serious effort to understand
buyer purchase criteria, then, a ﬁrm must identify the buyer’s value chain
and perform a systematic analysis of all existing and potential linkages
between a ﬁrm’s value chain and its buyer’s chain. This sort of analysis can
not only uncover unrecognized use criteria, but also show how to assess the
relative weight of well-known use criteria.
Use criteria must be identiﬁed precisely in order to be meaningful for
developing differentiation strategy. Many ﬁrms speak of their buyers’ use
criteria in vague terms such as “high quality” or “delivery.” At this level of
generality, a ﬁrm cannot begin to calculate the value of meeting a use
criterion to the buyer, nor can the ﬁrm know how to change its behavior to
increase buyer value. Quality could mean higher speciﬁcations or better
conformance, for example. For McDonald’s, consistency of hamburger and
french fry quality over time and across locations is important as is taste and
portion size. Improving these two things involves very different actions by a
ﬁrm. Service can also mean many things, including backing of claims,
repair capability, response time to service requests, and delivery time.
Good performance in meeting each use criteria should be quantiﬁed if
possible. For example, the quality of a food ingredient might be measured
in terms of the particle count of extraneous material or the percentage of fat
content.11 Quantiﬁcation not only forces careful thinking to determine what
precisely the buyer values, but also allows the measurement and tracking of
ﬁrm performance against a use criterion—this often yields major
improvements in performance in and of itself. Quantiﬁcation also allows a
ﬁrm to assess its position against competitors in meeting important criteria.
The ﬁrm can then study the practices that underlie competitors’
performance.
A ﬁrm can calculate the value of meeting each use criterion by
estimating how it affects the buyer’s cost or performance. Such calculations


inevitably involve judgments, but are an indispensable tool in choosing a
sustainable differentiation strategy.12 Determining the buyer value in
meeting each use criterion will allow them to be ranked in order of
importance. For some use criteria a ﬁrm must only meet a threshold value to
satisfy the buyer’s need, while for others more performance against them is
always better. If a TV set warms up in two seconds, for example, there is
little additional beneﬁt if the time is reduced to one second. Nearly all use
criteria will reach a point of diminishing returns, however, after which
further improvement is not valuable or will actually reduce buyer value.
Meeting some use criteria may also involve tradeoffs with others.
Calculating the buyer value from meeting each use criterion will illuminate
the relevant thresholds, tradeoffs, and buyer value that accrues to additional
improvement in meeting it. A ﬁrm can only make its own assessments of
the balance between the value of differentiation and its cost if it understands
these things. The ranking of use criteria in terms of the buyer value of
meeting them will often contradict conventional wisdom.
Signaling criteria can be identiﬁed by understanding the process the
buyer uses to form judgments about a ﬁrm’s potential ability to meet use
criteria, as well as how well it is actually meeting them. Examining each
use criteria to determine possible signals is a good place to start. If a key
use criterion is reliability of delivery, for example, past delivery record and
customer testimonials might be signals of value. Two other analytical steps
can also provide insight into signals of value. By carefully analyzing the
process by which the buyer purchases, including the information sources
consulted, the testing or inspection procedures carried out, and the steps in
reaching the decision, signals of value may become apparent. This sort of
analysis will yield indications about what a buyer consults or notices,
including channels. A related way of identifying signaling criteria is to
identify signiﬁcant points of contact between a ﬁrm and the buyer both
before and after purchase, including the channels, trade shows, accounting
department, and others. Every point of contact represents an opportunity to
inﬂuence the buyer’s perception of a ﬁrm and thus is a possible signaling
criterion.
Like use criteria, signaling criteria should be deﬁned as precisely and
operationally as possible in order to guide differentiation strategy. In a bank,
for example, the appearance of facilities can signal value through its order,


permanence, and security. For a designer clothing store, other dimensions of
appearance would be more appropriate. Signaling criteria vary in
importance, and a ﬁrm must rank them in terms of their impact on buyer
perception in order to make choices about how much to spend on them.
Calculating the contribution of signaling criteria to realized price is often
difﬁcult, but focus groups and interviews may be helpful. As with use
criteria, meeting signaling criteria can reach the point of diminishing
returns. Opulent ofﬁces, for example, may disillusion a buyer by making a
ﬁrm appear wasteful or unprofessional.
The process of identifying buyer purchase criteria should result in a
ranking and sorting of purchase criteria such as that in Figure 4–4, which
illustrates purchase criteria for a chocolate confection product. Price should
be included in the list corresponding to the ranking the buyer places on it.
Use and signaling criteria that derive from the end user and the channel
should be separated, to highlight the different entities involved and to
clarify the actions required to meet each criterion. Use criteria for both end
users and channels can be usefully divided into those factors that lower
buyer cost and those that raise buyer performance. While meeting a use
criterion can sometimes both lower cost and raise performance, often one or
the other modes of value creation is predominant—in the chocolate
confection example taste relates to buyer performance while availability is
predominantly a measure of buyer shopping cost. Then use criteria can be
further divided into those that are easy to measure and those that are
difﬁcult for the buyer to perceive and/or quantify (see Figure 4–5).


Figure 4–4. Ranked Buyer Purchase Criteria for a Chocolate Confection
Figure 4–5. The Relationship Between Use Criteria and Buyer Value
Recognizing the differences in use criteria represented in Figure 4–5 can
be important for a number of reasons. Differentiation that lowers buyer cost
provides a more persuasive justiﬁcation for paying a sustained price
premium with some buyers than differentiation that raises performance.
Financial pressures on buyers (such as in a downturn) often mean that
buyers are willing to pay a premium only to ﬁrms that can demonstrate


persuasively that they lower buyers’ cost. Differentiation with a readily
measurable connection to buyer value is also frequently more translatable
into a price premium than differentiation that creates value in ways that are
hard to perceive or measure. Differentiation that is difﬁcult to measure tends
to translate into a price premium primarily in situations where the buyer
perceives a great deal to be at stake, such as in top level consulting or where
the buyer is seeking to meet status needs. Differentiation on the right-hand
side of Figure 4–5 tends to be expensive to explain, requiring high levels of
investment in signaling. Increasing buyer sophistication tends to threaten
difﬁcult-to-measure forms of differentiation that may have been accepted at
face value in the past.
Each individual buyer to which an industry sells may have a different set
of use and signaling criteria or may rank among them differently. Clustering
of buyers into groups based on similarities in their purchase criteria is one
basis of buyer segments, to which I will return in Chapter 7.
Differentiation Strategy
Differentiation stems from uniquely creating buyer value. It can result
through meeting use or signaling criteria, though in its most sustainable
form it comes from both. Sustainable differentiation requires that a ﬁrm
perform a range of value activities uniquely that impact those purchase
criteria. Meeting some purchase criteria requires that a ﬁrm perform just
one value activity well—for example, clever advertising. Other purchase
criteria are affected by many of a ﬁrm’s activities. Delivery time, for
example, can be inﬂuenced by operations, outbound logistics, and order
processing, among others.
Many value activities typically play a role in meeting some use or
signaling criterion. Figure 4–6 illustrates how purchase criteria can be
arrayed against value activities to help a ﬁrm identify the activities
important to differentiation. The links between the ﬁrm’s value chain and
the buyer’s value chain, highlighted earlier, underlie an analysis such as that
shown in Figure 4–6.
A ﬁrm’s overall level of differentiation is the cumulative value it creates
for buyers in meeting all purchase criteria. The sources of differentiation in


the ﬁrm’s value chain are often multiple, as illustrated by Stouffer’s
successful differentiation strategy in frozen entrees (Figure 4–7). Stouffer’s
has differentiated itself in both use and signaling criteria. Heavy spending
on menu development has led to Stouffer’s having the highest proportion of
unique dishes, as well as superior sauce technology. Care in ingredient
selection and preparation has resulted in dishes of attractive, consistent
appearance. Meals are more sophisticated in their menus and ingredients.
Stouffer’s attractive packaging serves as a signal of value, reinforcing its
quality image. Stouffer’s also pioneered high rates of spending on
advertising in a product category where low spending levels had been the
norm. It also innovated by advertising its frozen entrees as gourmet meals
for busy people rather than as quick, ﬁlling meals for the family. Finally,
Stouffer’s spends a considerable amount on a direct sales force and food
brokers in order to gain attractive retail shelf displays, rapid restocking, and
the removal of damaged merchandise. These multiple sources of uniqueness
in its value chain combine to yield Stouffer’s a signiﬁcant price premium
over its competitors. Differentiation has also led to a substantial market
share.


Figure 4–6. Relationship of Value Activities to Buyer Purchase Criteria


Figure 4–7. Sources of Stouffer’s Differentiation in Frozen Entrees


Differentiation will lead to superior performance if the value perceived
by the buyer exceeds the cost of differentiation. Stouffer’s price premium
exceeds the extra costs it deliberately incurs in advertising, packaging,
ingredients, brokers, and research, and estimates suggest that it has been
signiﬁcantly more proﬁtable than its competitors. Differentiation strategy
aims to create the largest gap between the buyer value created (and hence
the resulting price premium) and the cost of uniqueness in a ﬁrm’s value
chain. The cost of differentiation will vary by value activity, and the ﬁrm
should choose those activities where the contribution to buyer value is
greatest relative to the cost. This may imply pursuing low cost sources of
uniqueness as well as high cost ones that have high buyer value. The cost of
differentiating in various ways will depend on the ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis
cost drivers, which can inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s approach to differentiation and
its resulting performance. Stouffer’s high share has lowered its cost of
advertising, product development, and procurement to the beneﬁt of its
performance.
The ﬁnal component of differentiation strategy is sustainability.
Differentiation will not lead to a premium price in the long run unless its
sources remain valuable to the buyer and cannot be imitated by competitors.
Thus a ﬁrm must ﬁnd durable sources of uniqueness that are protected by
barriers to imitation.
Routes to Differentiation
A ﬁrm can enhance its differentiation in two basic ways. It may become
more unique in performing its existing value activities or it may reconﬁgure
its value chain in some way that enhances its uniqueness. Becoming more
unique in its value activities requires that a ﬁrm manipulate the drivers of
uniqueness described earlier. In both cases, a differentiator must
simultaneously control the cost of differentiation so that it translates into
superior performance. A number of approaches characterize successful
differentiators:
ENHANCE THE SOURCES OF UNIQUENESS


Proliferate the sources of differentiation in the value chain. A ﬁrm can
often increase its overall differentiation by exploiting sources of uniqueness
in additional value activities. Stouffer’s is a good example of how
successful differentiation usually stems from cumulating uniqueness in
many value activities. Other examples include Caterpillar Tractor, which
combines uniqueness in product durability, parts availability, and its dealer
network; and Heineken Beer, which combines raw material quality,
consistency of taste, rapid shipping time to preserve freshness, heavy
advertising, and wide distribution to differentiate in imported beer. Every
value activity should be scrutinized for new ways to enhance buyer value.
Some semiconductor manufacturers, for example, are offering computer-
aided design facilities to their buyers who take over ﬁnal design steps for
their chips.
Make actual product use consistent with intended use. Since the way a
buyer actually uses a product will determine its performance, differentiation
can often suffer if a ﬁrm does not take steps to bring actual and intended use
in line:
• Invest in understanding how the product is actually used by buyers
• Modify the product to make it easier to use correctly
•  Design effective manuals and other instructions for use, rather than
treating them as an afterthought
• Provide training and education to buyers to improve actual use, either
directly or via channels.
Employ signals of value to reinforce differentiation on use criteria. A
ﬁrm cannot gain the fruits of differentiation without adequate attention to
signaling criteria. The activities chosen to inﬂuence signaling criteria must
be consistent with a ﬁrm’s intended bases for differentiation on use criteria.
Pall Corporation, for example, showcases its extensive R&D facilities in the
liquid ﬁltration industry through advertising and buyer visits to reinforce its
differentiation in product performance. Since the buyer may fail to perceive
indirect or hidden costs of a product, signaling may be as necessary to show
the lack of value delivered by competitors as it is to show the value
delivered by the ﬁrm. In addition, a differentiator must provide reassurance


about the correctness of the buyer’s choice after sale. Signaling is only
necessary to the extent that it helps buyers perceive the ﬁrm’s value,
however, and no more.
Employ information bundled with the product to facilitate both use and
signaling. Information and information systems are becoming increasingly
important tools in differentiation, and bundling information with a product
can often enhance differentiation. Effective descriptions of how a product
works, how to use it, and how to service it can align intended use with
actual use, as discussed above. Giving the product the capacity to generate
information as it is used (e.g., a continuous readout of gasoline mileage in a
car) can improve the product’s use as well as be valuable in its own right.
Combining a product with information systems can raise buyer value in
other ways as well. American Greetings, for example, provides retailers
with an automated inventory management system to help them maintain
their stock, thereby raising greeting card sales and at the same time
minimizing inventory requirements. Finally, bundling information with a
product about how the product was made, how unique it is, or how it
performs relative to substitutes is often an effective way of signaling its
value. Partagas ﬁne cigars, for example, includes an insert with every box
that explains the family history of the owners and how they have brought
the Partagas brand from Cuba to the United States.
MAKE THE COST OF DIFFERENTIATION AN ADVANTAGE
Exploit all sources of differentiation that are not costly. Many activities
can be made more unique at little extra cost. A good case in point is the use
of linkages to improve differentiation. A ﬁrm may be able to differentiate
itself simply by coordinating better internally or with suppliers or channels.
Similarly, changing the mix of product features may be less costly than
simply adding features. Other high priority targets for enhancing
differentiation are activities in which cost is also reduced in the process.
Reducing product defects may also reduce service cost, for example.
Minimize the cost of differentiation by controlling cost drivers,
particularly the cost of signaling. A ﬁrm can minimize the cost of


differentiation by recognizing the impact of cost drivers. Firms should
differentiate as efﬁciently as possible by paying careful attention to
controlling the cost drivers of activities on which differentiation is based
using the principles described in Chapter 3. General Motors, for example, is
attempting to lower the cost of product variety through installing ﬂexible
manufacturing systems in a number of its auto plants. It is particularly
important to ﬁnd efﬁcient ways of signaling because signaling does not
itself create value. Signaling that draws on past investments or reputation
(e.g., units in place, cumulative advertising) can be less costly than
signaling that arises only from current expenditures.
Emphasize forms of differentiation where the ﬁrm has a sustainable cost
advantage in differentiating. The cost of differentiating in various ways will
differ among competitors. A ﬁrm should differentiate in those ways where it
has a cost advantage. A large-share ﬁrm will have a cost advantage in
differentiating in scale-sensitive activities such as advertising and R&D, for
example, while a diversiﬁed ﬁrm may have an advantage in differentiating
itself in ways where the cost of doing so is reduced by interrelationships
with sister business units.
Reduce cost in activities that do not affect buyer value. In addition to
seeking a cost advantage in differentiating, a ﬁrm must also pay attention to
lowering cost in activities unrelated to the chosen differentiation strategy.
CHANGE THE RULES TO CREATE UNIQUENESS
Shift the decision maker to make a ﬁrm’s uniqueness more valuable. The
identity of the decision maker in part deﬁnes what is valuable to the buyer,
as well as the appropriate signals of that value. A ﬁrm may be able to
increase its uniqueness or the perceived value of that uniqueness if it can
alter the purchasing process in a way that elevates the role of decision
makers who value more the ﬁrm’s particular forms of uniqueness. A
product with highly sophisticated features, for example, may be perceived
as more unique and more valuable by an engineer than by a purchasing
agent. Shifting the decision maker typically requires modifying a ﬁrm’s
value chain in ways such as the following:


• deploying a new type of salesperson
• involving technical people in the sale
• changing advertising media and content
• changing selling materials
• educating the buyer about new bases for the decision that requires a
different decision maker.
Discover unrecognized purchase criteria. Finding important purchase
criteria that buyers (and competitors) have not recognized offers a major
opportunity to achieve differentiation. It can allow a ﬁrm to preempt a new
basis for differentiation and gain lasting beneﬁts in image and reputation.
Purchase criteria that are unrecognized are often use criteria, particularly
those based on the indirect impacts a ﬁrm or its product has on the buyer’s
value chain. Many great differentiation strategies were not passive
responses to buyer demands, but were based on new approaches to
differentiation. Stouffer’s discovered an entirely new way of differentiating
frozen entrees, for example, just as Procter & Gamble was the ﬁrst to
advertise hand and body lotion year-round to consumers instead of
seasonally. It discovered that hand and body lotion was used by buyers in
ways unrecognized in previous strategies.
Preemptively respond to changing buyer or channel circumstances.
Buyers or channels whose purchase criteria are changing provide another
important opportunity for differentiation strategies. Change creates new
bases for differentiation and can lead buyers to take a new look at products
that have been routinely purchased from an established supplier. Increased
health consciousness by buyers, for example, has led to the rapid
penetration of caffeine-free soft drinks. Increased competition in a buyer’s
industry can also enhance the buyer’s need for applications engineering
assistance, or raise the value of lowering the buyer’s cost. In oil ﬁeld
equipment, for example, increasing ﬁnancial pressure on buyers has favored
suppliers who can demonstrate that they lower buyers’ cost. Similarly,
buyer sophistication in minicomputers may be reducing the ability to
differentiate on the basis of customer service but may be enhancing
possibilities for differentiation based on delivery time, cost of use, and other


more subtle bases. Differentiation that lowers the buyers cost will often fare
best during difﬁcult times for the buyer industry or as buyers get more
sophisticated. Similarly, differentiation based on quantiﬁable performance
improvements for the buyer may command a more lasting price premium
than that based on intangible performance advantages.
RECONFIGURE THE VALUE CHAIN TO BE UNIQUE IN ENTIRELY NEW WAYS
The discovery of an entirely new value chain can unlock possibilities for
differentiation. For example, Federal Express differentiated itself by
reconﬁguring the traditional value chain for small-parcel delivery
completely. It bought its own trucks and aircraft and pioneered the hub
concept. It thereby improved timeliness and reliability compared to
competitors using scheduled airlines and/or long-distance trucks combined
with many distribution points and sorting centers. Hanes’s L’eggs
pantyhose, with its innovative packaging, distinctive in-store displays, and
sales and delivery directly to supermarkets, serves as another example of
how a new value chain can be the key to a successful differentiation
strategy. Opportunities to achieve dramatic levels of differentiation often
result from reconﬁguring the value chain.
Conceiving of a new value chain is a creative process. Working
backward from the buyer’s value chain, a ﬁrm should probe for ways it
might link with the buyer’s chain differently or restructure its own value
activities to meet purchase criteria better. Common reconﬁgurations involve
areas such as the following:
• a new distribution channel or selling approach
•  forward integration to take over buyer functions or eliminate the
channels
• backward integration to control more determinants of product quality
• adoption of an entirely new process technology
The Sustainability of Differentiation


The sustainability of differentiation depends on two things, its continued
perceived value to buyers and the lack of imitation by competitors. There is
an ever-present risk that buyers’ needs or perceptions will change,
eliminating the value of a particular form of differentiation. Competitors
may also imitate the ﬁrm’s strategy or leapfrog the bases of differentiation a
ﬁrm has chosen.
The sustainability of a ﬁrm’s differentiation vis-à-vis competitors
depends on its sources. To be sustainable, differentiation must be based on
sources where there are mobility barriers to competitors replicating them.
As discussed earlier, the drivers of uniqueness differ in their sustainability
while the cost of differentiation may also vary among competitors and
affect sustainability. Differentiation will be more sustainable under the
following conditions:
The ﬁrm’s sources of uniqueness involve barriers. Proprietary learning,
linkages, interrelationships, and ﬁrst-mover advantages tend to be more
sustainable drivers of uniqueness than simply a policy choice to be unique
in an activity as was discussed earlier. Signaling activities such as
advertising can also be sustainable because they involve barriers. However,
differentiation based too heavily on signaling tends to be vulnerable to
increasing buyer sophistication.
The ﬁrm has a cost advantage in differentiating. A ﬁrm with a
sustainable cost advantage in performing the activities that lead to
differentiation will enjoy much greater sustainability.
The sources of differentiation are multiple. The overall difﬁculty of
imitating a differentiation strategy depends in part on how many sources of
uniqueness a ﬁrm has. The sustainability of a differentiation strategy is
usually greatest if differentiation stems from multiple sources, rather than
resting on a single factor such as product design. A single basis for
differentiation provides a strong focal point for competitors. Differentiation
that results from coordinated actions in many value activities will usually be
more durable, since it requires wholesale changes in competitor behavior to
imitate.


A ﬁrm creates switching costs at the same time it differentiates.
Switching costs are ﬁxed costs incurred by the buyer when it changes
suppliers, which allow a ﬁrm to sustain a price premium even if its product
is equal to that of competitors.13 If differentiation at the same time creates
switching costs, the sustainability of differentiation is increased. Switching
costs, like differentiation itself, grow out of the way in which a product is
used by the buyer. Activities that make a ﬁrm unique can frequently raise
the cost of switching since the buyer often tailors its activities to exploit the
ﬁrm’s uniqueness.
The Stouffer’s example described earlier provides an illustration of how
the sustainability of a ﬁrm’s sources of differentiation can be assessed (see
Figure 4–7). Of Stouffer’s sources of differentiation, the most sustainable
are probably its menu and sauce technology, its product positioning and
brand image, its relationships with prime food brokers, and its cost
advantage in advertising because of its leading market share. Heavy
investment by competitors would likely be necessary to replicate these
factors if they could be replicated at all. As a result, Stouffer’s
differentiation has been sustainable over a long period of time. Conversely,
Hanes’s new packaging of pantyhose and direct distribution to grocery
stores were policy choices not protected by proprietary learning, substantial
scale advantages in executing them, or other barriers to imitation. Hanes’s
differentiation has thus been extensively imitated by competitors and has
not yielded a signiﬁcant price premium.
Pitfalls in Differentiation
This chapter has suggested some common pitfalls that afﬂict ﬁrms
pursuing differentiation strategies. Most result from an incomplete
understanding of the underlying bases of differentiation or its cost.
UNIQUENESS THAT IS NOT VALUABLE
The fact that a ﬁrm is unique at something does not necessarily mean it
is differentiated. Uniqueness does not lead to differentiation unless it lowers
buyer cost or raises buyer performance as perceived by the buyer. The most


persuasive differentiation often stems from sources of value the buyer can
perceive and measure, or from difﬁcult-to-measure sources of value that are
extensively signaled. A good test of the value of uniqueness is whether a
ﬁrm can command and sustain a price premium in selling to well-informed
buyers.
TOO MUCH DIFFERENTIATION
If a ﬁrm does not understand the mechanisms by which its activities
affect buyer value or the perception of value, it may be too differentiated. If
product quality or service levels are higher than buyers’ need, for example,
a ﬁrm may be vulnerable to competitors with the correct level of quality and
a lower price. Unnecessary differentiation is the result of failure to diagnose
performance thresholds or diminishing returns in buyer purchase criteria.
This, in turn, stems from a lack of understanding of how a ﬁrm’s activities
relate to the buyer’s value chain.
TOO BIG A PRICE PREMIUM
The price premium from differentiation is a function of value of
differentiation and its sustainability. A differentiated competitor will be
abandoned by buyers if the premium gets too high. Unless a ﬁrm shares
some of the value created with the buyer in the form of a more reasonable
price, moreover, it may tempt the buyer to backward integrate. The
appropriate price premium is a function not only of a ﬁrm’s extent of
differentiation, but also of its overall relative cost position. If a ﬁrm does not
keep its costs in proximity to competitors’, the price premium may grow
beyond sustainable levels even if a ﬁrm’s differentiation is maintained.
IGNORING THE NEED TO SIGNAL VALUE
Firms sometimes ignore the need to signal value, basing their
differentiation strategies on use criteria that are seen as the “real” bases for
differentiation. However, signals of value exist because buyers are not
willing or able to fully discern differences among suppliers. Ignoring
signaling criteria can open a ﬁrm to attack from a competitor providing


inferior value but having a better understanding of the buyer’s purchasing
process.
NOT KNOWING THE COST OF DIFFERENTIATION
Differentiation does not lead to superior performance unless its
perceived value to the buyer exceeds its cost. Firms often do not isolate the
cost of the activities they perform to differentiate themselves, but instead
assume that differentiation makes economic sense. Thus they either spend
more on differentiation than they recover in the price premium, or fail to
exploit ways of reducing the cost of differentiation through understanding
its cost drivers.
FOCUS ON THE PRODUCT INSTEAD OF THE WHOLE VALUE CHAIN
Some ﬁrms see differentiation only in terms of the physical product, and
fail to exploit opportunities to differentiate in other parts of the value chain.
As has been discussed, the entire value chain often provides numerous and
sustainable bases for differentiation, even if the product is a commodity.
FAILURE TO RECOGNIZE BUYER SEGMENTS
Buyer purchase criteria and their ranking usually vary among buyers,
creating buyer segments. If a ﬁrm does not recognize the existence of these
segments, its strategy may not meet the needs of any buyer very well,
making it vulnerable to focus strategies. The existence of buyer segments
does not mean that a ﬁrm must choose a focus strategy, but rather that it
must base its differentiation on widely valued purchase criteria. The
strategic issues raised by industry segmentation will be discussed more
extensively in Chapter 7.
Steps in Differentiation
The concepts in this chapter can be summarized by outlining the
analytical steps necessary for determining the bases for differentiation and
selecting a differentiation strategy.


1.  Determine who the real buyer is. The ﬁrst step in differentiation
analysis is to identify the real buyer. The ﬁrm, institution, or household is
not the real buyer, but rather one or more speciﬁc individuals within the
buying entity who will interpret use criteria as well as deﬁne signaling
criteria. Channels may also be buyers in addition to the end user.
2. Identify the buyer’s value chain and the ﬁrm’s impact on it. A ﬁrm’s
direct and indirect impact on its buyer’s value chain will determine the
value a ﬁrm creates for its buyer through lowering buyer cost or raising
buyer performance. A ﬁrm must clearly understand all the ways it does or
could affect its buyer’s value chain, and how possible changes in the buyer’s
value chain will impact the equation. Channels may play a role in affecting
the buyer’s chain as well as through linkages with the ﬁrm’s chain.
3. Determine ranked buyer purchasing criteria. Analysis of the buyer’s
value chain provides the foundation for determining buyer purchase criteria.
Purchase criteria take two forms, use criteria and signaling criteria.
Uniqueness in meeting use criteria creates buyer value, while uniqueness in
meeting signaling criteria allows that value to be realized. Sometimes an
analysis of the buyer’s value will suggest purchase criteria that the buyer
does not currently perceive. Purchase criteria must be identiﬁed in terms
that are operational, and their link to buyer value calculated and ranked. The
analyst must not shrink from ﬁnding ways to attach a speciﬁc value to
performance and cost savings, even for household buyers. The identiﬁcation
of purchase criteria grows out of buyer value chain analysis, buyer
interviews, and in-house expertise. The process is iterative, and the list of
buyer purchase criteria is reﬁned continuously as an analysis proceeds.
4. Assess the existing and potential sources of uniqueness in a ﬁrm’s
value chain. Differentiation can stem from uniqueness throughout a ﬁrm’s
value chain. A ﬁrm must determine which value activities impact each
purchase criteria (see Figure 4–6). It must then identify its existing sources
of uniqueness relative to competitors, as well as potential new sources of
uniqueness. A ﬁrm must also identify the drivers of uniqueness, because
they bear on the question of sustainability.
Since differentiation is inherently relative, a ﬁrm’s value chain must be
compared to those of competitors. Careful analysis of competitors is also
invaluable in understanding how value activities impact the buyer, and in
seeing possibilities for creating new value chains. Another technique for


uncovering possible new ways to perform value activities is to study
analogies—industries producing similar products or selling to the same
buyer that may do things differently.
5. Identify the cost of existing and potential sources of differentiation.
The cost of differentiation is a function of the cost drivers of the activities
that lead to it. The ﬁrm deliberately spends more in some activities to be
unique. Some forms of differentiation are not very costly and pursuing them
may even lower cost in ways that the ﬁrm has overlooked. Normally,
however, a ﬁrm must deliberately spend more than it would have to
otherwise to be unique. A ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis cost drivers will make
some forms of differentiation more costly than others relative to
competitors.
6.  Choose the conﬁguration of value activities that creates the most
valuable differentiation for the buyer relative to cost of differentiating. A
subtle understanding of the relationship between the ﬁrm’s and the buyer’s
value chains will allow a ﬁrm to select a conﬁguration of activities that
creates the largest gap between buyer value and the cost of differentiation.
Most successful differentiation strategies cumulate multiple forms of
differentiation throughout the value chain, and address both use and
signaling criteria.
7.  Test 
the 
chosen 
differentiation 
strategy 
for 
sustainability.
Differentiation will not lead to superior performance unless it is sustainable
against erosion or imitation. Sustainability grows out of selecting stable
sources of buyer value, and differentiating in ways that involve barriers to
imitation or where the ﬁrm has a sustainable cost advantage in
differentiating.
8.  Reduce cost in activities that do not affect the chosen forms of
differentiation. A successful differentiator reduces cost aggressively in
activities that are unimportant to buyer value. This will not only improve
proﬁtability, but also reduce the vulnerability of differentiators to attack by
cost-oriented competitors because the price premium becomes too large.


5
Technology and Competitive Advantage
Technological change is one of the principal drivers of competition. It plays
a major role in industry structural change, as well as in creating new
industries. It is also a great equalizer, eroding the competitive advantage of
even well-entrenched ﬁrms and propelling others to the forefront. Many of
today’s great ﬁrms grew out of technological changes that they were able to
exploit. Of all the things that can change the rules of competition,
technological change is among the most prominent.
Despite its importance, however, the relationship between technological
change and competition is widely misunderstood. Technological change
tends to be viewed as valuable for its own sake—any technological
modiﬁcation a ﬁrm can pioneer is believed to be good. Competing in “high
technology” industries is widely perceived as being a ticket to proﬁtability,
while other industries that are “low-technology” are viewed with disdain.
The recent success of foreign competition, much of it based on
technological innovation, has encouraged companies even more to invest in
technology, in some cases uncritically.
Technological change is not important for its own sake, but is important
if it affects competitive advantage and industry structure. Not all
technological change is strategically beneﬁcial; it may worsen a ﬁrm’s
competitive position and industry attractiveness. High technology does not
guarantee proﬁtability. Indeed, many high-technology industries are much
less proﬁtable than some “low-technology” industries due to their
unfavorable structures.
