# Chapter 5: Technology and Competitive Advantage

Technology, however, pervades a ﬁrm’s value chain and extends beyond
those technologies associated directly with the product. There is, in fact, no
such thing as a low technology industry if one takes this broader view.
Viewing any industry as technologically mature often leads to strategic
disaster. Moreover, many important innovations for competitive advantage
are mundane and involve no scientiﬁc breakthroughs. Innovation can have
important strategic implications for low tech as well as hi tech companies.
This chapter will describe some of the important links between
technological change and competitive advantage as well as industry
structure. It focuses not on particular technologies or on how to manage
research and development, but on ways to recognize and exploit the
competitive signiﬁcance of technological change. I present a rather broad
view of technology in this chapter because all the technologies embodied in
a ﬁrm’s value chain have potential competitive impacts.
The chapter begins by describing the linkage between technology and
competition. I examine the relationship of technology to competitive
advantage, growing out of technology’s role in the value chain and the
resulting ability of a ﬁrm to achieve low cost and/or differentiation through
its value activities. I then show how technology can shape industry
structure. With this framework established, the chapter examines methods
for selecting a technology strategy. Technology strategy must include
choices about what important technologies to invest in, whether to seek
technological leadership in them, and when and how to license technology.
The chapter then describes how a ﬁrm can forecast the path of technological
change as an industry evolves, crucial to the selection of technology
strategy. Finally, the steps in formulating technology strategy are
summarized.
Technology and Competition
Any ﬁrm involves a large number of technologies. Everything a ﬁrm
does involves technology of some sort, despite the fact that one or more
technologies may appear to dominate the product or the production process.
The signiﬁcance of a technology for competition is not a function of its
scientiﬁc merit or its prominence in the physical product. Any of the


technologies involved in a ﬁrm can have a signiﬁcant impact on
competition. A technology is important for competition if it signiﬁcantly
affects a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage or industry structure.
Technology and the Value Chain
The basic tool for understanding the role of technology in competitive
advantage is the value chain. A ﬁrm, as a collection of activities, is a
collection of technologies. Technology is embodied in every value activity
in a ﬁrm, and technological change can affect competition through its
impact on virtually any activity. Figure 5–1 illustrates the range of
technologies typically represented in a ﬁrm’s value chain.
Every value activity uses some technology to combine purchased inputs
and human resources to produce some output. This technology may be as
mundane as a simple set of procedures for personnel, and typically involves
several scientiﬁc disciplines or subtechnologies. The materials handling
technology used in logistics, for example, may involve such disciplines as
industrial engineering, electronics, and materials technology. The
technology of a value activity represents one combination of these
subtechnologies. Technologies are also embodied in the purchased inputs
used in each value activity, both in consumable inputs and in capital items.
The technology inherent in purchased inputs interacts with the other
subtechnologies to yield the level of performance of the activity.
Technology is embodied not only in primary activities but in support
activities as well. Computer-aided design is an example of a technology just
coming into use in product development that is replacing traditional ways of
developing new products. Various types of technologies also underlie the
performance of other support activities, including those not typically
viewed as technologically based. Procurement embodies procedures as well
as technologies for placing orders and interacting with suppliers. Recent
developments in information systems technology offer the possibility of
revolutionizing procurement by changing ordering procedures and
facilitating the achievement of supplier linkages. Human resource
management draws on motivation research and technologies for training.


Firm infrastructure involves a wide range of technologies ranging from
ofﬁce equipment to legal research and strategic planning.


Figure 5–1. Representative Technologies in a Firm’s Value Chain


Information systems technology is particularly pervasive in the value
chain, since every value activity creates and uses information. This is
evident from Figure 5–1, which shows information systems technology in
every generic category of value activity in the chain. Information systems
are used in scheduling, controlling, optimizing, measuring, and otherwise
accomplishing activities. Inbound logistics, for example, uses some kind of
information system to control material handling, schedule deliveries, and
manage raw material inventory. Similarly, an information system is involved
in order processing, managing suppliers, and scheduling the service force.
Information systems technology also has an important role in linkages
among activities of all types, because the coordination and optimization of
linkages (Chapter 2) requires information ﬂow among activities. The recent,
rapid technological change in information systems is having a profound
impact on competition and competitive advantages because of the pervasive
role of information in the value chain.
Another pervasive technology in the value chain is ofﬁce or
administrative technology, because clerical and other ofﬁce functions must
be performed as part of many value activities. While ofﬁce technology can
be subsumed under information systems technology, I have separated it
because of the propensity to overlook it. Change in the way ofﬁce functions
can be performed is one of the most important types of technological trends
occurring today for many ﬁrms, though few are devoting substantial
resources to it.
The technologies in different value activities can be related, and this
underlies a major source of linkages within the value chain. Product
technology is linked to the technology for servicing a product, for example,
while component technologies are related to overall product technology.
Thus a technology choice in one part of the value chain can have
implications for other parts of the chain. In extreme cases, changing
technology in one activity can require a major reconﬁguration of the value
chain. Moving to ceramic engine parts, for example, eliminates the need for
machining and other manufacturing steps in addition to having other
impacts on the value chain. Linkages with suppliers and channels also
frequently involve interdependence in the technologies used to perform
activities.


A good example of the interdependence of technology in value activities
is American Airline’s Sabre reservations system. American leases terminals
to travel agents, which allows automated reservations and ticketing. The
system has been a source of differentiation for American. At the same time,
however, the same system is used inside American in ticketing and issuing
boarding passes as well as in route scheduling. American also sells listings
on the system to other airlines.
A ﬁrm’s technologies are also clearly interdependent with its buyers’
technologies. The points of contact between a ﬁrm’s value chain and its
buyer’s chain, discussed in the previous chapter, deﬁne the areas of
potential interdependency of technology. A ﬁrm’s product technology
inﬂuences the product and process technology of the buyer and vice versa,
for example, while a ﬁrm’s order processing technology inﬂuences and is
inﬂuenced by the buyer’s procurement methods.
Technology, then, is pervasive in a ﬁrm and depends in part on both the
buyers’ channels and suppliers’ technology. As a result, the development of
technology encompasses areas well outside the boundaries traditionally
established for R&D, and inherently involves suppliers and buyers.1 Some
of the technologies embodied in the value chain are industry-speciﬁc, to
varying degrees, but many are not. Ofﬁce automation and transportation are
just two areas where vital technologies, in large part, are not industry-
speciﬁc. Hence technology development relevant to a ﬁrm often takes place
in other industries. All these characteristics of technology have implications
for the role of technology in competitive advantage.
Technology and Competitive Advantage
Technology affects competitive advantage if it has a signiﬁcant role in
determining relative cost position or differentiation. Since technology is
embodied in every value activity and is involved in achieving linkages
among activities, it can have a powerful effect on both cost and
differentiation. Technology will affect cost or differentiation if it inﬂuences
the cost drivers or drivers of uniqueness of value activities described in
Chapters 3 and 4. The technology that can be employed in a value activity is
often the result of other drivers, such as scale, timing, or interrelationships.


For example, scale allows high-speed automatic assembly equipment, while
early timing allowed some electric utilities to harness hydropower while
sites were available. In these instances technology is not the source of
competitive advantage, but rather an outcome of other advantages.
However, the technology employed in a value activity is frequently itself a
driver when it reﬂects a policy choice made independently of other drivers.
A ﬁrm that can discover a better technology for performing an activity than
its competitors thus gains competitive advantage.
In addition to affecting cost or differentiation in its own right, technology
affects competitive advantage through changing or inﬂuencing the other
drivers of cost or uniqueness. Technological development can raise or lower
scale economies, make interrelationships possible where they were not
before, create the opportunity for advantages in timing, and inﬂuence nearly
any of the other drivers of cost or uniqueness. Thus a ﬁrm can use
technological development to alter drivers in a way that favor it, or to be the
ﬁrst and perhaps only ﬁrm to exploit a particular driver.
Two good examples of the role of technology in altering relative cost
position are underway in the aluminum industry and illustrate these points.
The dramatic rise in energy costs has made power the largest single cost in
aluminum smelting, and transformed a number of ﬁrms into high-cost
producers because of the cost of their power. The great majority of Japanese
aluminum smelters fall into this category, for example. To deal with the
problem, Japanese ﬁrms have worked actively on carbothermic reduction, a
breakthrough technology that dramatically lowers power consumption by
converting bauxite and related ores directly into aluminum ingot without the
intermediate alumina step. Here a new technology is itself a policy cost
driver. Carbothermic reduction by reducing power consumption would also
diminish the importance of location and institutional factors as cost drivers
because location and government pricing policies for power strongly
inﬂuence electricity costs.
The other example of the role of technology in cost is occurring in
aluminum semifabrications, where a new process technology called
continuous casting is emerging as a potential replacement for hot mills. The
new process does not appear to result in lower cost at efﬁcient scale, but it is
less scale-sensitive. If the process proves successful, it could nullify the
scale advantage of large semifabricators and allow plants to be located


closer to buyers. This would reduce relatively high transport cost in regions
previously served by products shipped from distant facilities. Here the new
technology does not appear to be itself a cost driver, but is affecting other
drivers (scale and location). It will inﬂuence the cost position of ﬁrms
asymmetrically depending on their positions vis-à-vis those drivers.
The role of technology in differentiation is illustrated by Federal
Express, which reconﬁgured the value chain in small parcel delivery and
achieved faster and more reliable delivery. The new technologies employed
in Federal Express’s value chain were policy choices, but also had the effect
of increasing scale economies and creating a ﬁrst mover advantage. Thus as
Federal Express has gained a large market share, the cost of matching its
differentiation has become very high for competitors. This example also
demonstrates the point that a major technological development need not
involve scientiﬁc breakthroughs or even technologies that were not widely
available previously. Mundane changes in the way a ﬁrm performs activities
or combines available technologies often underlie competitive advantage.
Since a ﬁrm’s technology is often interdependent with its buyers’
technology, technological change by the buyer can affect competitive
advantage just as can technological change within the ﬁrm. This is
particularly true in differentiation strategies. For example, a distributor that
once differentiated itself by performing pricing and inventory control
functions for its retail buyers may lose that differentiation if retailers switch
to on-line point-of-sale systems. Similarly, changes in suppliers’ technology
can add to or subtract from a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage if they affect the
drivers of cost or uniqueness in a ﬁrm’s value chain.
TESTS OF A DESIRABLE TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
The link between technological change and competitive advantage
suggests a number of tests for a desirable direction of technological change.
Technological change by a ﬁrm will lead to sustainable competitive
advantage under the following circumstances:
The technological change itself lowers cost or enhances differentiation
and the ﬁrm’s technological lead is sustainable. A technological change
enhances competitive advantage if it leads to lower cost or differentiation


and can be protected from imitation. The factors that determine the
sustainability of a technological lead are described below.
The technological change shifts cost or uniqueness drivers in favor of a
ﬁrm. Changing the technology of a value activity, or changing the product
in ways that affect a value activity, can inﬂuence the drivers of cost or
uniqueness in that activity. Even if the technological change is imitated,
therefore, it will lead to a competitive advantage for a ﬁrm if it skews
drivers in the ﬁrm’s favor. For example, a new assembly process that is
more scale-sensitive than the previous process will beneﬁt a large-share ﬁrm
that pioneers it even if competitors eventually adopt the technology.
Pioneering the technological change translates into ﬁrst-mover
advantages besides those inherent in the technology itself. Even if an
innovator is imitated, pioneering may lead to a variety of potential ﬁrst-
mover advantages in cost or differentiation that remain after its
technological lead is gone. First-mover advantages and disadvantages are
identiﬁed below.
The technological change improves overall industry structure. A
technological change that improves overall industry structure is desirable
even if it is easily copied.
Technological change that fails these tests will not improve a ﬁrm’s
competitive position, though it may represent a substantial technological
accomplishment. Technological change will destroy competitive advantage
if it not only fails the tests but has the opposite effect contemplated in the
tests, such as skewing cost or uniqueness drivers in favor of competitors. A
ﬁrm may also ﬁnd itself in the situation where a technological change may
meet one test but worsen a ﬁrm’s position via another.
Technology and Industry Structure
Technology is also an important determinant of overall industry structure
if the technology employed in a value activity becomes widespread.
Technological change that is diffused can potentially affect each of the ﬁve


competitive forces, and improve or erode industry attractiveness. Thus even
if technology does not yield competitive advantage to any one ﬁrm, it may
affect the proﬁt potential of all ﬁrms. Conversely, technological change that
improves a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage may worsen structure as it is
imitated. The potential effect of technological change on industry structure
means that a ﬁrm cannot set technology strategy without considering the
structural impacts.
TECHNOLOGY AND ENTRY BARRIERS
Technological change is a powerful determinant of entry barriers. It can
raise or lower economies of scale in nearly any value activity. For example,
ﬂexible manufacturing systems often have the effect of reducing scale
economies. Technological change can also raise economies of scale in the
technological development function itself, by quickening the pace of new
production introduction or raising the investment required for a new model.
Technological change also is the basis of the learning curve. The learning
curve results from improvements in such things as layout, yields, and
machine speeds—all of which are types of technological change.
Technological change can lead to other absolute cost advantages such as
low-cost product designs. It can also alter the amount of capital required for
competing in an industry. The shift from batch to continuous process
technology for producing cornstarch and corn syrup has signiﬁcantly
increased the capital requirements in corn wet milling, for example.
Technological change also plays an important role in shaping the pattern
of product differentiation in an industry. In aerosol packaging, for example,
technological change has resulted in product standardization and has made
the product a near commodity, all but eliminating the ability of contract
packagers to differentiate themselves based on product characteristics.
Technological change can also raise or lower switching costs. Technological
choices by competitors determine the need for buyers to retrain personnel or
to reinvest in ancillary equipment when switching suppliers. Technological
change can also inﬂuence access to distribution by allowing ﬁrms to
circumvent existing channels (as telemarketing is doing) or, conversely, by
increasing industry dependence on channels (if more product demonstration
and after-sale service is required, for example).


TECHNOLOGY AND BUYER POWER
Technological change can shift the bargaining relationship between an
industry and its buyers. The role of technological change in differentiation
and switching costs is instrumental in determining buyer power.
Technological change can also inﬂuence the ease of backward integration
by the buyer, a key buyer bargaining lever. In the computer service industry,
for example, the rapid decline in the cost of computers, driven by
technological change, is having a major impact on the ability of ﬁrms such
as ADP to sell timesharing, since many buyers can now afford their own
machines.
TECHNOLOGY AND SUPPLIER POWER
Technological change can shift the bargaining relationship between an
industry and its suppliers. It can eliminate the need to purchase from a
powerful supplier group or, conversely, can force an industry to purchase
from a new, powerful supplier. In commercial rooﬁng, for example, the
introduction of rubber-based rooﬁng membranes has introduced powerful
new resin suppliers in place of less powerful asphalt suppliers.
Technological change can also allow a number of substitute inputs to be
used in a ﬁrm’s product, creating bargaining leverage against suppliers. For
example, the can industry has beneﬁted from ﬁerce competition between the
aluminum and steel companies to supply it, brought on by technological
change in aluminum cans. Technology investments by ﬁrms can also allow
the use of multiple suppliers by creating in-house knowledge of supplier
technologies. This can eliminate dependence on any one supplier.
TECHNOLOGY AND SUBSTITUTION
Perhaps the most commonly recognized effect of technology on industry
structure is its impact on substitution. Substitution is a function of the
relative value to price of competing products and the switching costs
associated with changing between them, as will be discussed extensively in
Chapter 8. Technological change creates entirely new products or product
uses that substitute for others, such as ﬁberglass for plastic or wood, word


processors for typewriters, and microwave ovens for conventional ovens. It
inﬂuences both the relative value/price and switching costs of substitutes.
The technological battle over relative value/price between industries
producing close substitutes is at the heart of the substitution process.
TECHNOLOGY AND RIVALRY
Technology can alter the nature and basis of rivalry among existing
competitors in several ways. It can dramatically alter the cost structure and
hence affect pricing decisions. For example, the shift to continuous process
technology in the corn wet milling industry mentioned above has also raised
ﬁxed cost, and contributed to greater industry rivalry. A similar increase in
ﬁxed cost as a percentage of total cost has accompanied the increasing
deadweight tonnage of oil tankers, made possible by improvements in
shipbuilding technology. The role of technology in product differentiation
and switching costs also is important to rivalry.
Another potential impact of technology on rivalry is through its effect on
exit barriers. In some distribution industries, for example, automation of
materials handling has raised exit barriers because the materials handling
equipment is specialized to the particular goods moving through
warehouses. Hence what were once general-purpose facilities have become
specialized and capital-intensive facilities.
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND INDUSTRY BOUNDARIES
Technological change plays an important role in altering industry
boundaries. The boundary of an industry is often imprecise, because
distinctions between an industry’s product and substitutes, incumbents and
potential entrants, and incumbents and suppliers or buyers are often
arbitrary. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that regardless of where
one chooses to draw industry boundaries, technological change can broaden
or shrink them.
Technological change widens industry boundaries in a number of ways.
It can reduce transportation or other logistical costs, thereby enlarging the
geographic scope of the market. This happened in the 1960s and 1970s with
the advent of large bulk cargo carriers in shipping. Technological change


that reduces the cost of responding to national market differences can help
globalize industries.2 It can also enhance product performance, thereby
bringing new customers (and competitors) into a market. Finally,
technological changes can increase the interrelationships among industries.
In industries such as ﬁnancial services, computers and telecommunications,
technological change is blurring industry boundaries and folding whole
industries together. In publishing, automated text processing and printing
technologies have made shared printing operations more feasible for several
different types of publications. Interrelationships are discussed in greater
detail in Chapter 9.
Technology can also narrow industry boundaries. Technological change
may allow a ﬁrm to tailor the value chain to a particular segment, as will be
discussed in Chapter 7. Thus segments can, in effect, become industries.
Portable cassette players, for example, have become a full-ﬂedged industry
independent of larger cassette players and cassette players used in dictating
due to technological advancements that improved their performance and
widened their usage.
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND INDUSTRY ATTRACTIVENESS
While it is sometimes believed that technological change always
improves industry structure, the previous discussion should make it clear
that it is just as likely to worsen industry structure. The effect of
technological change on industry attractiveness depends on the nature of its
impact on the ﬁve forces. If it raises entry barriers, eliminates powerful
suppliers, or insulates an industry from substitutes, then technological
change can improve industry proﬁtability. However, if it leads to more
buyer power or lowers entry barriers, it may destroy industry attractiveness.
The role of technological change in altering industry structure creates a
potential conundrum for a ﬁrm contemplating innovation. An innovation
that raises a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage may eventually undermine
industry structure, if and when the innovation is imitated by other
competitors. Firms must recognize the dual role of technological change in
shaping both competitive advantage and industry structure when selecting a
technology strategy and in making technology investments.


Technology Strategy
Technology strategy is a ﬁrm’s approach to the development and use of
technology. Although it encompasses the role of formal R&D organizations,
it must also be broader because of the pervasive impact of technology on
the value chain. Because of the power of technological change to inﬂuence
industry structure and competitive advantage, a ﬁrm’s technology strategy
becomes an essential ingredient in its overall competitive strategy.
Innovation is one of the principal ways of attacking well-entrenched
competitors, a subject I will return to in Chapter 15. However, technology
strategy is only one element of overall competitive strategy, and must be
consistent with and reinforced by choices in other value activities. A
technology strategy designed to achieve differentiation in product
performance will lose much of its impact, for example, if a technically
trained sales force is not available to explain the performance advantages to
the buyer and if the manufacturing process does not contain adequate
provisions for quality control.
Technology strategy must address three broad issues:
• what technologies to develop
• whether to seek technological leadership in those technologies
• the role of technology licensing
Choices in each area must be based on how technology strategy can best
enhance a ﬁrm’s sustainable competitive advantage.
The Choice of Technologies to Develop
At the core of a technology strategy is the type of competitive advantage
a ﬁrm is trying to achieve. The technologies that should be developed are
those that would most contribute to a ﬁrm’s generic strategy, balanced
against the probability of success in developing them. Technology strategy
is a potentially powerful vehicle with which a ﬁrm can pursue each of the
three generic strategies. Depending on which generic strategy is being
followed, however, the character of technology strategy will vary a great
deal, as shown in Table 5–1.


In many ﬁrms, R&D programs are driven more by scientiﬁc interests
than by the competitive advantage sought. It is clear from Table 5–1,
however, that the primary focus of a ﬁrm’s R&D programs should be
consonant with the generic strategy that is being pursued. The R&D
program of a cost leader, for example, should include a heavy dose of
projects designed to lower cost in all value activities that represent a
signiﬁcant fraction of cost, as well as projects to reduce the cost of product
design through value engineering. R&D by a cost leader on product
performance must be aimed at maintaining parity with competitors rather
than adding costly new features or the goals of R&D will be inconsistent
with the ﬁrm’s strategy.
Another important observation from Table 5–1 is that both product and
process technological change can have a role in supporting each of the
generic strategies. Firms often incorrectly assume that process technological
change is exclusively cost-oriented and product technological change is
intended solely to enhance differentiation. Chapter 3 has shown how
product technology can be critical in achieving low cost, while Chapter 4
has shown how changes in process technology may be the key to
differentiation (a favorite tactic of Japanese companies).
TABLE 5–1 Product and Process Technology and the Generic
Strategies
 
COST
LEADERSHIP
DIFFERENTIATION
COST
FOCUS
DIFFERENTIATION
FOCUS
 
 
ILLUSTRATIVE TECHNOLOGICAL
POLICIES
 
Product
Technological
Change
Product
development to
reduce product
cost by lowering
material content,
facilitating ease
of manufacture,
simplify
logistical
requirements,
etc.
Product
development to
enhance product
quality, features,
deliverability, or
switching costs
Product
development to
design in only
enough
performance for
the target
segment’s needs
Product design to
meet the needs
of a particular
segment better
than broadly-
targeted
competitors
Process
Learning curve
Process
Process
Process


Technological
Change
process
improvement to
reduce material
usage or lower
labor input
Process
development to
enhance
economies of
scale
development to
support high
tolerances,
greater quality
control, more
reliable
scheduling,
faster response
time to orders,
and other
dimensions that
raise buyer value
development to
tune the value
chain to a
segment’s needs
in order to lower
the cost of
serving the
segment
development to
tune the value
chain to segment
needs in order to
raise buyer value
It is also important that a ﬁrm’s technology strategy extend beyond
product and process R&D as they are traditionally deﬁned. Technology
pervades a ﬁrm’s value chain and relative cost and differentiation are a
function of the entire chain. Thus a systematic examination of all a ﬁrm’s
technologies will reveal areas in which to reduce cost or enhance
differentiation. The information system department may have more impact
on technological change in some ﬁrms today than the R&D department, for
example. Other important technologies such as transportation, materials
handling, communications, and ofﬁce automation also deserve more than ad
hoc or informal attention. Finally, development in all technological areas
must be coordinated to ensure consistency and exploit interdependencies
among them.
Crown Cork and Seal provides a good example of the link between
technology strategy and competitive advantage. Crown focuses on select
customer industries and provides cans together with highly responsive
service. Crown does little or no basic research and does not pioneer new
products. Rather, its R&D department is organized to solve speciﬁc
customer problems on a timely basis, and to imitate successful product
innovations rapidly. Crown’s R&D approach, then, closely supports its
focus strategy. Its technological policies are quite different from those of
American Can or Continental Group, which supply broad lines of
packaging in addition to cans. American and Continental invest heavily on
research in basic materials and new products.
The selection of speciﬁc technologies in the value chain on which to
concentrate development effort is governed by the link between


technological change and competitive advantage. A ﬁrm should concentrate
on those technologies that have the greatest sustainable impact on cost or
differentiation, either directly or through meeting the other tests described
earlier. These tests allow a ranking of technological changes that would
yield the greatest competitive beneﬁt. The cost of improving the technology
must be balanced against the beneﬁt, as well as the likelihood that the
improvement can be achieved.
Firms often confront a choice between attempting to improve an
established technology for performing a value activity or investing in a new
one. In aluminum smelting, for example, a ﬁrm might concentrate on
improving the Hall-Heroult process now in use, or it might attempt to
develop carbothermic reduction. Technologies seem to go through a life
cycle in which early major improvements give way to later incremental
ones. This argues that the beneﬁt/cost tradeoff in improving mature
technologies may be less (though perhaps more certain) than that in
improving newer technologies.
This can be a dangerous assumption, however, that is self-fulﬁlling. A
technology can be assumed to be mature only with great caution. Major
improvements in the efﬁciency of the Hall-Heroult process are occurring
today, for example, despite the fact that it was developed prior to 1900.
Similarly, the fuel efﬁciency of low-speed diesel engines has risen
signiﬁcantly since 1974. Diesel technology is also over 80 years old and
was widely viewed as mature compared to gas turbines, yet diesels have
actually increased their lead over turbines. In both these examples, the rapid
rise in energy prices stimulated active attention to fuel efﬁciency. Greater
attention to improving the technologies was coupled with improvements in
materials technology, instrumentation, and electronics that allowed better
process control, higher temperatures, and other beneﬁts.
As noted earlier, most products and value activities embody not one
technology but several technologies or subtechnologies. It is only a
particular combination of subtechnologies that can be assumed to be
mature, not individual subtechnologies themselves. Signiﬁcant changes in
any one of the subtechnologies going into a product or process may create
new possibilities for combining them that produce dramatic improvements,
such as those achieved in smelting and low-speed diesel engines. The
advent of microelectronics, a subtechnology that can be applied to many


other technologies, is having a profound effect on many industries through
unlocking possibilities for new technological combinations.
Thus in choosing among technologies to invest in, a ﬁrm must base its
decisions on a thorough understanding of each important technology in its
value chain and not on simple indicators such as age. Sometimes all that is
necessary to produce technological progress is effort and investment, as
both examples illustrate. In other cases, advances in subtechnologies may
allow improvement in the existing technology. Efforts at improving an older
technology can sometimes be futile, however. In such instances the best
course of action is to attempt to leapfrog it. The decision by a ﬁrm to
discard its own technology may be difﬁcult, particularly if it was developed
in-house, but such a choice may be essential to maintaining the ﬁrm’s
competitive position.
The choice of technologies to develop should not be limited to those few
where there are opportunities for major breakthroughs. Modest
improvements in several of the technologies in the value chain, including
those not related to the product or the production process, can add up to a
greater 
beneﬁt 
for 
competitive 
advantage. 
Moreover, 
cumulative
improvements in many activities can be more sustainable than a
breakthrough that is noticeable to competitors and becomes an easy target
for imitation. The success of Japanese ﬁrms in technology is rarely due to
breakthroughs, but to a large number of improvements throughout the value
chain.
Technological Leadership or Followership
The second broad issue a ﬁrm must address in technology strategy is
whether to seek technological leadership. The notion of technological
leadership is relatively clear—a ﬁrm seeks to be the ﬁrst to introduce
technological changes that support its generic strategy. Sometimes all ﬁrms
that are not leaders are viewed as technological followers, including ﬁrms
that disregard technological change altogether. Technological followership
should be a conscious and active strategy in which a ﬁrm explicitly chooses
not to be ﬁrst on innovations, and that is the sense in which it is examined
here.


While technological leadership is often thought of in terms of product or
process technology, the issue is much broader. Leadership can be
established in technologies employed in any value activity. The discussion
here is directed at the strategic choice between pioneering innovation in any
value activity and waiting for others to pioneer.
The decision to become a technological leader or follower can be a way
of achieving either low cost or differentiation, as illustrated in Table 5–2:
TABLE 5–2 Technological Leadership and Competitive Advantage
 
TECHNOLOGICAL LEADERSHIP
TECHNOLOGICAL FOLLOWERSHIP
Cost Advantage
Pioneer the lowest-cost product
design
Be the ﬁrst ﬁrm down the
learning curve
Create low cost ways of
performing value activities
Lower the cost of the product or
value activities by learning
from the leader’s experience
Avoid R&D costs through
imitation
Differentiation
Pioneer a unique product that
increases buyer value
Innovate in other activities to
increase buyer value
Adapt the product or delivery
system more closely to buyer
needs by learning from the
leader’s experience
Firms tend to view technological leadership primarily as a vehicle for
achieving differentiation, while acting as a follower is considered the
approach to achieving low cost. If a technological leader is the ﬁrst to adopt
a new lower-cost process, however, the leader can become the low-cost
producer. Or if a follower can learn from the leader’s mistakes and alter
product technology to meet the needs of buyers better, the follower can
achieve differentiation. There can also be more than one technological
leader in an industry because of the many technologies involved and the
different types of competitive advantage sought.
The choice of whether to be a technological leader or follower in an
important technology is based on three factors:3
• Sustainability of the technological lead. The degree to which a ﬁrm
can sustain its lead over competitors in a technology.


• First-mover advantages. The advantages a ﬁrm reaps from being the
ﬁrst to adopt a new technology.
• First-mover disadvantages. The disadvantages a ﬁrm faces by moving
ﬁrst rather than waiting for others.
All three factors interact to determine the best choice for a particular
ﬁrm. Signiﬁcant disadvantages of being a ﬁrst mover may eliminate the
desirability of taking the leadership role even if a ﬁrm can sustain its
technological lead. Conversely, ﬁrst-mover advantages may translate an
initial technological lead into a sustainable competitive advantage elsewhere
though the technological lead itself disappears. First-mover advantages and
disadvantages occur most often in the context of technological choices, but
their signiﬁcance for competitive strategy formulation extends beyond
technological strategy. They address the wider question of how timing
translates into competitive advantage or disadvantage and into entry and
mobility barriers.
SUSTAINABILITY OF THE TECHNOLOGICAL LEAD
Technological leadership is favored if the technological lead can be
sustained because (1) competitors cannot duplicate the technology, or (2)
the ﬁrm innovates as fast or faster than competitors can catch up. The
second condition is important because technology often diffuses, requiring a
technological leader to remain a moving target. Kodak, for example, has
maintained leadership in amateur photography in large part through a
succession of camera systems and ﬁlm chemistries, most recently including
the disc camera, rather than possessing a single technology competitors
could not match. If a technology lead cannot be sustained, technological
leadership can only be justiﬁed if the initial lead translates into ﬁrst-mover
advantages, because of the greater cost of leadership compared to
followership.
The sustainability of a technological lead is a function of four factors:
The Source of Technological Change. The sustainability of a
technological lead depends heavily on whether technology is being
developed inside the industry or is coming from outside it. An important


proportion of technological change comes from external sources such as
suppliers, buyers, or completely unrelated industries. In many process
industries, for example, the key source of technology is construction
engineering ﬁrms that design production processes and build plants.
Where important sources of technology are external to an industry,
sustaining a technological lead is generally more difﬁcult. External
technology sources decouple a ﬁrm’s access to technology from its
technological skills and R&D spending rate, because many companies can
get access to external developments. Hence external technological changes
act as an equalizer among competitors. Technological leaders in industries
with key external sources of technology must capture the best of those
sources through coalitions or exclusive arrangements in order to sustain
their lead, or have a superior ability to adapt externally developed
technology to the industry.
The Presence or Absence of a Sustainable Cost or Differentiation
Advantage in Technology Development Activity. A technological lead is
more likely to be sustainable if a ﬁrm has a cost or differentiation advantage
in performing technology development. The tools in Chapters 3 and 4 can
be used to analyze a ﬁrm’s relative cost and differentiation in the
development of technology. For example, scale economies or learning
effects in technological development give large-share or experienced ﬁrms
an R&D cost advantage. Where the costs of developing a model are largely
ﬁxed, a ﬁrm with a large share has proportionally lower R&D costs than a
smaller-share ﬁrm. It may thus be able to spend more money on R&D in
order to maintain its technological lead without a cost penalty. This seems
to have occurred in large turbine generators, where General Electric has
outspent Westinghouse in absolute terms and maintained a signiﬁcant
technological lead although its R&D as a percentage of sales is still lower
than Westinghouse’s. Rising costs of product development in an industry
also work in favor of large-share ﬁrms. As the cost of bringing out a new
herbicide has risen to over $30 million, for example, the advantages of the
industry leaders in agricultural chemicals are widening.
A ﬁrm’s relative cost or effectiveness in performing technology
development can also be strongly inﬂuenced by interrelationships among
related business units within the parent company. Interrelationships can


allow the transference of skills or sharing of costs of R&D activity. The
types of interrelationships involving R&D are described in Chapter 9.
Technological 
leaders 
often 
aggressively 
pursue 
technological
interrelationships, entering new businesses with related technologies. They
also create mechanisms for R&D transfer among business units, and tend to
invest at the corporate level in core technologies with a potential impact on
many business units.
Different parts of the innovation cycle—basic research, applied research,
development—tend to offer differing opportunities for sustainable cost
advantages in R&D spending. Basic product innovation is often less scale-
sensitive than the subsequent rapid introduction of new product types and
the incorporation of new features. This is one of the reasons Japanese ﬁrms
often overtake innovative U.S. ﬁrms that fail to maintain their lead in
subsequent product improvements. Many successful technological leaders
do not reap all of the beneﬁts of scale, learning, or interrelationships in
R&D in the form of higher proﬁts, but reinvest to maintain their
technological lead. They also exploit any scale or learning advantages in
R&D by rapid new model introduction. Honda, for example, has reinforced
its competitive advantage in motorcycles through a continual stream of new
models.
Relative Technological Skills. A ﬁrm with unique technological skills
vis-à-vis competitors is more likely to sustain its technological lead than a
ﬁrm with comparable R&D personnel, facilities, and management to
competitors. Technological skills will inﬂuence the output from a given rate
of spending on technology, regardless of scale, learning, or interrelationship
effects. Technological skills are a function of many factors—management,
company culture, organizational structure and systems, company reputation
with scientiﬁc personnel, and others. NEC Corporation, for example, is the
company most highly ranked by engineering graduates in Japan. This
contributes to its ability to attract the best graduates, reinforcing its strong
R&D capability. Successful technological leaders pay close attention to
their stock of R&D skills. They avoid cutting back R&D staff in industry
downturns or proﬁt squeezes. They also seek out relationships with the
leading scientiﬁc centers in appropriate ﬁelds, and attempt to develop an


image as the best place to work for the types of research personnel that
support their technology strategy.
Rate of Technology Diffusion. A ﬁnal important factor in determining the
sustainability of a technological lead is the rate of diffusion of the leader’s
technology. Superior technological skills or cost advantages in performing
R&D are nulliﬁed if competitors can easily copy what a ﬁrm develops.
Diffusion of technology occurs continually, though at different rates
depending on the industry. Some of the mechanisms for diffusion of a
leader’s technology are as follows:
•  direct observation by competitors of a leader’s products (reverse
engineering) and methods of operating
• technology transfer through equipment suppliers or other vendors
• technology transfer through industry observers such as consultants and
the trade press
• technology transfer through buyers who desire another qualiﬁed source
• personnel losses to competitors or spinoff ﬁrms
• public statements or papers delivered by a leader’s scientiﬁc personnel
The diffusion of technology is often greater for the basic product and
process innovations than it is for later improvements. Product and process
reﬁnements are more likely to be kept proprietary, particularly when based
on process improvements. Since Japanese ﬁrms have emphasized constant
process innovations, they often develop more sustainable advantages than
U.S. or European ﬁrms that pioneered the process.
The rate of technological diffusion is partly intrinsic to an industry and
partly under a ﬁrm’s control. Most of the technology of a mobile home
producer, for example, is readily observable by examining the product.
Disposable diaper technology diffuses more slowly because much of it
hinges on the way the product is manufactured on customized machines.
Some factors that slow down the rate of diffusion are as follows:
• patenting of the ﬁrm’s technology and related technologies
• secrecy


• in-house development of prototypes and production equipment
•  vertical integration into key parts that embody or give clues to the
technology
• personnel policies that retain employees
Successful technological leaders are aggressive in trying to slow down
diffusion. They patent extensively where patents can be obtained, and
enforce them by always challenging infringers. They view all contact with
outsiders, even buyers, as a threat to proprietary know-how. Plant tours are a
rarity, and even buyers are not told about key innovations. Technological
leaders are also often vertically integrated, building or modifying equipment
in-house to protect technology, and are discrete in public disclosures. It is
striking how many of the ﬁrms known to be secretive are also technological
leaders. These include DuPont, Kodak, Procter & Gamble, and Michelin.
FIRST-MOVER ADVANTAGES
Technological leadership is strategically desirable when ﬁrst-mover
advantages exist. These allow a leader to translate a technology gap into
other competitive advantages that persist even if the technology gap closes.
First-mover advantages rest on the role of timing in improving a ﬁrm’s
position vis-à-vis sustainable sources of cost advantage or differentiation. In
general terms, a ﬁrst mover gets the opportunity to deﬁne the competitive
rules in a variety of areas.
The most important types of potential ﬁrst-mover advantages include the
following, and can also accrue to moving ﬁrst into a geographic area or to
pioneering that does not involve technology per se:4
Reputation. A ﬁrm that moves ﬁrst may establish a reputation as the
pioneer or leader, a reputation that emulators will have difﬁculty
overcoming. Leadership places a ﬁrm, at least temporarily, in the position of
being unique which can produce long-term image beneﬁts not available to
others. A ﬁrst mover also may be ﬁrst to serve buyers and thus to establish
relationships where there may be loyalty. The signiﬁcance of any reputation
advantage from leadership will depend on the credibility of a ﬁrm and its
capacity to invest in marketing. A small company may not succeed in


enhancing its reputation by moving ﬁrst because it lacks the resources to
publicize its lead.
Preempting a Positioning. A ﬁrst mover may preempt an attractive
product or market positioning, forcing competitors to adopt less desirable
ones. Stouffer’s preempted the gourmet concept in frozen entrees, for
example. A ﬁrst mover gets the opportunity to shape the way a product is
deﬁned or marketed in a way that favors it. A ﬁrst mover can also put
capacity in place to preempt the ability of competitors to proﬁtably expand.
Switching Costs. A ﬁrst mover can lock in later sales if switching costs
are present. In hospital management contracts, for example, the pioneer that
signed up hospitals ﬁrst gained a signiﬁcant edge in contract renewals
because of the substantial costs to the hospital of changing management
ﬁrms. Switching would result in disruption caused by a new administrator, a
new computer system, and other changes.
Channel Selection. A ﬁrst mover may gain unique channel access for a
new product or product generation. It can pick the best brokers, distributors,
or retailers, while followers must either accept the second best, establish
new channels, or persuade the ﬁrst mover’s channels to shift or divide their
loyalties.
Proprietary Learning Curve. A ﬁrst mover gains a cost or differentiation
advantage if there is a proprietary learning curve in value activities that are
affected by the early move. The ﬁrst mover begins down the learning curve
ﬁrst in the affected activities, and may establish a durable cost or
differentiation advantage if it can keep its learning proprietary.
Favorable Access to Facilities, Inputs, or Other Scarce Resources. A ﬁrst
mover can often enjoy at least a temporary advantage in access to purchased
inputs or other resources, because it contracts for them before market forces
reﬂect the full impact of the change it is pioneering. A ﬁrm may get its pick
of sites for facilities, for example, or favorable deals with raw material
suppliers eager for new business. A good case in point is the airline
industry, where the early no-frills carriers have acquired cheap surplus


aircraft and/or low-cost terminal space, and hired out-of-work pilots.
Market forces will eventually bid up the prices of these inputs as the no-
frills strategy is imitated.
Other examples come from several extractive industries. New mines and
processing plants are being constructed in increasingly remote locations,
raising infrastructure costs. They are also being forced to bear higher
environmental costs. Early movers, then, have lower costs.
Deﬁnition of Standards. A ﬁrst mover can deﬁne the standards for
technology or for other activities, forcing later movers to adopt them. These
standards, in turn, make the ﬁrm’s position more sustainable. For example,
RCA deﬁned the standards in color TV which meant that competitors had to
go down the learning curve RCA had already started down rather than
create a new one.
Institutional Barriers. A ﬁrst mover may enjoy institutional barriers
against imitation. The ﬁrst mover may secure patents, or being ﬁrst into a
country may give it special status with government. Institutional factors
often facilitate a ﬁrst mover’s ability to deﬁne standards as well.
Early Proﬁts. In some industries, a ﬁrst mover may be in a position to
enjoy temporarily high proﬁts from its position. It may be able to contract
with buyers at high prices during early scarcity of a new item, for example,
or sell to buyers who value the new technology very highly.
Successful technological leaders actively pursue ﬁrst-mover advantages
rather than rely solely on their technological edge. They take every
opportunity to use their technological leadership to deﬁne the competitive
rules in ways that beneﬁt them. They invest in marketing to reinforce the
reputation beneﬁts of being the leader, and price aggressively to make early
sales to buyers with the highest switching costs. It is striking how many
ﬁrms that were ﬁrst movers have remained leaders for decades. In consumer
goods, for example, such leading brands as Crisco, Ivory, Life Savers,
Coca-Cola, Campbell’s, Wrigley, Kodak, Lipton, and Goodyear were
leaders by the 1920s.


First-mover advantages can be dissipated through aggressive spending
by later entrants unless the ﬁrst mover invests to capitalize on them. As
happened to Bowmar in electric calculators, small pioneers are often
overwhelmed by later entrants. Their lead is overcome not because ﬁrst-
mover advantages were not present, but because the resources were not
present to exploit them. IBM in personal computers is providing a more
recent example of a late mover succeeding against early movers based on
resources and interrelationships with other business units.
Where the ﬁrst mover does not have adequate resources, the ﬁrst early
mover with resources can often be the ﬁrm to gain the beneﬁts of ﬁrst-
mover advantages. In minicomputers, for example, Digital Equipment did
not introduce the ﬁrst machine but gained many ﬁrst-mover advantages
because it was the ﬁrst to develop the product aggressively. Digital invested
heavily to exploit its advantages through expanding its product line, going
down the learning curve, and increasing the size of its sales force. A similar
situation occurred in video cassette recorders, where Ampex pioneered the
product but Japanese ﬁrms invested heavily to improve the technology,
produce units cheaply, and translate their lead into ﬁrst-mover advantages.
FIRST-MOVER DISADVANTAGES
First movers often face disadvantages as well as advantages. First-mover
disadvantages stem from two broad sources, the costs of pioneering and the
risk that conditions will change.
Pioneering Costs. A ﬁrst mover often bears substantial pioneering costs,
including the following:5
• gaining regulatory approvals
• achieving code compliance
• educating buyers
• developing infrastructure in areas such as service facilities and training
• developing needed inputs such as raw material sources and new types
of machinery
• investing in the development of complementary products (see Chapter
12)


• high costs of early inputs because of scarcity of supply or small scale
of needs
Pioneering costs vary widely depending on the type of technological
innovation and can be reduced by sharing them with good competitors (see
Chapter 6). However, they are often unavoidable for the ﬁrst mover.
Demand Uncertainty. A ﬁrst mover bears the risk of uncertainty over
future demand. It must put capacity in place ﬁrst, while later movers can
base their decisions on more current information. Though committing
before competitors has some advantages, it also has some signiﬁcant risks.
RCA was the ﬁrst mover into color TV, for example, betting on an early
takeoff of the new technology. Later movers learned from RCA’s experience
that demand for color sets was some years away and avoided a period of
losses.
Changes in Buyer Needs. A ﬁrst mover is vulnerable if buyer needs
change and its technology is no longer valued. A ﬁrst mover’s reputation
advantage may also be eliminated if buyers’ needs change and the ﬁrst
mover is identiﬁed with the old generation of technology. Unless buyer
needs shift radically, substantially changing the technology required to
serve them, however, a ﬁrst mover can maintain its lead by modifying
technology over time.
Speciﬁcity of Investments to Early Generations or Factor Costs. A ﬁrst
mover may be at a disadvantage if early investments are speciﬁc to the
current technology and cannot be easily modiﬁed for later generations. In
semiconductors, for example, Philco moved early for leadership with a
large automated plant. It enjoyed a period of success, but the later
development of a different manufacturing process for semiconductor chips
made its earlier investment obsolete. Similarly, the early movers will be
disadvantaged if its product or process reﬂected factor costs or factor
quality that have changed.
Technological Discontinuities. Technological discontinuities work
against the ﬁrst mover by making obsolete its investments in the established


technology. Technological discontinuities are major shifts in technology
that a ﬁrst mover may be ill prepared to respond to given its investment in
the old technology. Discontinuity favors the fast follower who does not bear
the high cost of pioneering. Where technology evolves along a relatively
continuous path, however, a ﬁrst mover’s head start is an advantage. It can
transfer learning from the old technology to the new and stay ahead on the
learning curve.
Low-cost Imitation. A ﬁrst mover exposes itself to followers who may be
able to imitate the innovation at lower cost than the cost of innovating.
Followers often have to bear some costs of imitation and adaptation,
however, which work to the beneﬁt of the ﬁrst mover.
Licensing of Technology
The third broad issue in technology strategy is technology licensing, a
form of coalition with other ﬁrms.6 Firms with a unique technology are
often asked for licenses, or are forced to license by government regulations.
Licensing is also a way to gain access to technology. Where technology is
an important source of competitive advantage, decisions on licensing are
vital. Yet many ﬁrms have squandered technology-based competitive
advantages through inappropriate licensing decisions.
WHEN SHOULD A FIRM LICENSE?
If technology is a source of competitive advantage, a ﬁrm must treat
licensing other ﬁrms as a risky step that should be taken only under special
conditions. Licensing fees are rarely large enough to offset a loss of
competitive advantage. However, awarding licenses may be strategically
desirable under a number of circumstances.
Inability to Exploit the Technology. Awarding licenses is appropriate if a
ﬁrm cannot exploit the technology itself. This may be because a ﬁrm lacks
resources or skills to establish a sustainable position, is harvesting the
business unit involved, or competitors are too entrenched to yield market
position. The ﬁrst motivation for licensing is at work today in


biotechnology and electronics, where creative startup ﬁrms lack the
capability to commercialize innovations. Even where the ﬁrm has
substantial resources, it may be unable to gain a substantial share on the
basis of its new technology because competitors are too committed or
because of government demands for local ownership. The former seems to
be one reason why Standard Brands widely licensed its technology for high
fructose corn syrup, a sugar substitute.
Where the ﬁrm cannot exploit the market itself, failure to license will
create the motivation for competitors to invent around its technology.
Eventually one or more competitors may succeed, and the ﬁrm will be left
with a small market position. By licensing, however, competitors gain a
cheaper and less risky alternative to investing in their own technology.
Thus, instead of being imitated, the ﬁrm licensing its technology may be
able to set the standard and collect licensing royalties in addition to proﬁts
from its own market position.
Tapping Unavailable Markets. Licensing may allow a ﬁrm to gain some
revenue from markets otherwise unavailable to it. This includes other
industries where the technology is valuable but where the ﬁrm has little
possibility of entering, or other geographic markets a ﬁrm cannot or does
not want to enter.
Rapidly Standardizing the Technology. Licensing may accelerate the
process by which the industry standardizes on a ﬁrm’s technology. If several
ﬁrms are pushing the technology, licensing not only will legitimize it but
also may accelerate its development. The pioneers of the VHS and Beta
formats in video cassette recorders licensed them widely to promote
standardization, for example, because standardization was so critical to
increasing the availability of software.
Poor Industry Structure. Licensing can be desirable where industry
structure is unattractive. In such instances, a ﬁrm may be better off
collecting royalties than investing in a market position that will not yield
high returns. The more bargaining power a ﬁrm has in extracting high
licensing fees, the more attractive it is to license and retain only a modest
position in the industry for itself.


Creating Good Competitors. Licensing may be a vehicle for creating
good competitors, which in turn can play a variety of important roles such
as stimulating demand, blocking entry, and sharing the costs of pioneering.
Magnavox widely licensed its video game patents, for example, reasoning
correctly that it could expand the market faster through encouraging
competitors to introduce a wide range of products. Entry barriers were also
low enough that Magnavox was unlikely to be able to develop a sustainable
position. Chapter 6 describes the potential beneﬁts of good competitors in
detail, along with how a good competitor can be identiﬁed.
Quid Pro Quo. A ﬁrm may award a license in return for a license of
another ﬁrm’s technology, as ATT and IBM are prone to do. A ﬁrm must
ensure that the trade is a fair one, however.
CHOOSING A LICENSEE
Firms should award licenses only to noncompetitors or to good
competitors. Since noncompetitors can rapidly become competitors, a ﬁrm
must minimize the risk of this through the terms of the license or convince
itself that a noncompetitor will remain so. To ensure that a potential
licensee is a noncompetitor, a ﬁrm must consider not only the existing
markets or segments it serves, but also markets it might want to enter in the
future. Licensing buyers to make some of their needs internally can
sometimes be desirable to shrink the available market for competitors or
potential competitors.
Where a ﬁrm licenses a competitor, it should be a good competitor and
not just anyone. The same is true when a ﬁrm is compelled to license by
governments. When licensing noncompetitors, a ﬁrm ideally should license
noncompetitors that would be good competitors if they later decided to
enter the industry. Similarly, licenses should contain renewal clauses, when
possible, in order to avoid a perpetual commitment to turn over technology
in the event that a licensee becomes a competitor.
PITFALLS IN LICENSING


Firms often hurt rather than help their competitive position by awarding
licenses. The two most common pitfalls in licensing are to create
competitors unnecessarily in the process, and to give away a ﬁrm’s
competitive advantage for a small royalty fee. Licensing often is an easy
way of increasing short-term proﬁts, but it can result in a long-term erosion
in proﬁts as a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage dissipates.
Firms often fail to perceive who their potential competitors are, and thus
award licenses that come back to haunt them. They may license foreign
ﬁrms that later enter their home markets. Similarly, many ﬁrms have
licensed ﬁrms in other industries only to have the licensees ultimately enter
their own industry. Often the process by which a license agreement sours
can be quite subtle. A ﬁrm licenses another amid talk of a long-term
alliance that will strengthen both. Over time, though, the licensee learns
everything possible, not only about the licensor’s technology but about its
other value activities. The licensee then decides it can attack the licensor
successfully and becomes a serious competitor. Asian ﬁrms, which have
licensed widely, have sometimes used licenses in this way.
Technological Evolution
Since technological change has such a powerful role in competition,
forecasting the path of technological evolution is extremely important to
allow a ﬁrm to anticipate technological changes and thereby improve its
position. Most research on how technology evolves in an industry has
grown out of the product life cycle concept. According to the life cycle
model, technological change early in the life cycle is focused on product
innovations, while the manufacturing process remains ﬂexible. As an
industry matures, product designs begin to change more slowly and mass
production techniques are introduced. Process innovation takes over from
product innovation as the primary form of technological activity, with the
aim of reducing the cost of an increasingly standardized product. Finally, all
innovation slows down in later maturity and declines as investments in the
various technologies in the industry reach the point of diminishing returns.
The product life cycle model has been reﬁned by the work of Abernathy
and Utterback.7 Initially, in their framework, product design is ﬂuid and


substantial product variety is present. Product innovation is the dominant
mode of innovation, and aims primarily at improving product performance
instead of lowering cost. Successive product innovations ultimately yield a
“dominant design” where the optimal product conﬁguration is reached. As
product design stabilizes, however, increasingly automated production
methods are employed, and process innovation takes over as the dominant
innovative mode to lower costs. Ultimately, innovation of both types begins
to slow down. Recently, the concept of “dematurity” has been added to the
Abernathy8 framework to recognize the possibility that major technological
changes can throw an industry back into a ﬂuid state.
While these hypotheses about the evolution of technology in an industry
are an accurate portrayal of the process in some industries, the pattern does
not apply in every industry. In industries with undifferentiated products
(e.g., minerals, many chemicals), the sequence of product innovations
culminating in a dominant design does not take place at all or takes place
very quickly. In other industries (e.g., military and commercial aircraft,
large turbine generators), automated mass production is never achieved and
most innovation is product-oriented. Technology evolves differently in
every industry, just as other industry characteristics do.9 The pattern of
technological evolution is the result of a number of characteristics of an
industry, and must be understood in the context of overall industry
structural evolution. Innovation is both a response to incentives created by
the overall industry structure and a shaper of that structure.
Technological evolution in an industry results from the interaction of a
number of forces:
• Scale change. As ﬁrm and industry scale increase, new product and
process technologies may become feasible.
•  Learning. Firms learn about product design and how to perform
various value activities over time with resulting changes in the
technology employed.
•  Uncertainty reduction and imitation. There are natural pressures for
standardization as ﬁrms learn more about what buyers want and imitate
each other.


•  Technology diffusion. Technology is diffused through a variety of
mechanisms described earlier.
•  Diminishing returns to technological innovation in value activities.
Technologies may reach limits beyond which further improvement is
difﬁcult.
The product life cycle pattern of technological evolution would result if
these forces interacted in the following way. Through successive product
innovation and imitation, the uncertainty about appropriate product
characteristics is reduced and a dominant design emerges. Growing scale
makes mass production feasible, reinforced by the growing product
standardization. Technological diffusion eliminates product differences and
compels process innovation by ﬁrms in order to remain cost competitive.
Ultimately, diminishing returns to process innovation set in, reducing
innovative activity altogether.
Whether the life cycle pattern of technological innovation or some other
pattern will occur in a particular industry will depend on some particular
industry characteristics:
Intrinsic Ability to Physically Differentiate. A product that can be
physically differentiated, such as an automobile or machine tool, allows
many possible designs and features. A less differentiable product will
standardize quickly and other forms of technological activity will be
dominant.
Segmentation of Buyer Needs. Where buyer needs differ substantially,
competitors may introduce more and more specialized designs over time to
serve different segments.
Scale and Learning Sensitivity. The extent to which the industry
technologies are scale- or learning-sensitive relative to industry size will
inﬂuence the pressure for standardization. High scale economies will create
pressure over time for standardization despite segmented buyer needs, while
low scale economies will promote the ﬂowering of product varieties.


Technological Linkage Among Value Activities. The technologies in the
product and in value activities are often linked. Changing one
subtechnology in the product often requires changing others, for example,
while changing the production process alters the needs in inbound and
outbound logistics. Technological linkages among value activities will
imply that changes in one activity will beget or be affected by technology
changes in others, affecting the pattern of technological change.
Substitution Logic. The pressure from substitutes (Chapter 8) is an
important determinant of the pattern of technological evolution. Whether
substitutes are threatening based on cost or differentiation will lead to a
corresponding emphasis in technological change. For example, the initial
challenge for disposable diapers was to bring their cost into proximity with
those of cloth diapers and diaper services. A great deal of early innovation
was in manufacturing methods.
Technological Limits. Some technologies offer much richer possibilities
for cost or performance improvement than others. In products like
commercial aircraft and semiconductors, for example, diminishing returns
from efforts at product innovation come relatively slowly. The technological
limits in the various technologies and subtechnologies in the value chain
will thus affect the path of technological change.
Sources of Technology. A ﬁnal industry characteristic that shapes the
pattern of technological change is the source of the technologies employed
in the industry. The path of technological change is usually more
predictable when industry-speciﬁc technologies are dominant, and the
impact of technologies emanating from outside the industry is small.
Continuous Versus Discontinuous Technological Evolution
The pattern of technological evolution differs widely among industries
based on whether technological change is incremental or subject to
discontinuity. Where there is incremental technological change, the process
is more likely to be determined by actions of industry participants or


spinoffs from these participants. External sources of technology are likely
to be existing suppliers to an industry.
Where there is technological discontinuity, the sources of technology are
much more likely to be outside the industry. Entirely new competitors or
new suppliers to the industry are more likely to have an important role.
Technological discontinuity also tends to decouple the pattern of
technological innovation from the state of industry maturity, because
outside sources of technology are less responsive to industry circumstances
than the R&D departments of industry participants.
Technological discontinuity creates the maximum opportunity for shifts
in relative competitive position. It tends to nullify many ﬁrst-mover
advantages and mobility barriers built on the old technology. Discontinuity
also may require wholesale changes in the value chain rather than changes
in one activity. Hence a period of technological discontinuity makes market
positions more ﬂuid, and is a time during which market shares can ﬂuctuate
greatly.
Forecasting Technological Evolution
A ﬁrm can use this framework to forecast the likely path of technological
evolution in its industry. In commercial aircraft, for example, the product is
highly differentiable. However, there are large scale economies in product
design which limit the number of product varieties that are developed. The
ﬂexibility of production means that the production process is no barrier to
continuous and long-lasting efforts at product innovation. Thus the aircraft
industry is one where we would expect continuous product R&D. The
ﬂexibility of the production process would also allow us to expect a
continuous search for new materials and components that would be much
less likely in an industry with heavy automation.
With some insight into the likely pattern of technological evolution, a
ﬁrm may be able to anticipate changes and move early to reap competitive
advantage. However, there will always be uncertainty wherever technology
is involved. Uncertainty over future technological evolution is a major
reason why a ﬁrm may want to employ industry scenarios in considering its
choice of strategies. Industry scenarios are discussed in detail in Chapter 13.


Formulating Technological Strategy
The concepts in this chapter suggest a number of analytical steps in
formulating technological strategy in order to turn technology into a
competitive weapon rather than a scientiﬁc curiosity.
1. Identify all the distinct technologies and subtechnologies in the value
chain. Every value activity involves one or more technologies. The starting
point in formulating technological strategy is to identify all the technologies
and subtechnologies, no matter how mundane, that are employed either by
the ﬁrm or its competitors. In addition, a ﬁrm must gain a similar if not as
deep understanding of the technologies in its suppliers’ and buyers’ value
chains, which often are interdependent with its own. Firms often focus on
product technology or on technology in the basic manufacturing operation.
They ignore technologies in other value activities, and pay little attention to
the technology for developing technology.
2. Identify potentially relevant technologies in other industries or under
scientiﬁc development. Often technologies come from outside an industry
and such technologies can be a source of discontinuous change and
competitive disruption in an industry. Each value activity must be examined
to see if outside technologies are present that might be applicable.
Information systems, new materials, and electronics should always be
investigated thoroughly. All three are having a revolutionary impact in
creating new technologies or allowing new technological combinations of
old technologies.
3. Determine the likely path of change of key technologies. A ﬁrm must
assess the likely direction of technological change in each value activity and
in buyer and supplier value chains, including technologies whose sources
are unrelated to the industry. No technology should be assumed to be
mature. Subtechnologies of it may be changing or maturity may be only a
sign of little effort at technological innovation.
4.  Determine which technologies and potential technological changes
are most signiﬁcant for competitive advantage and industry structure. Not
all the technologies in the value chain will have signiﬁcance for
competition. The signiﬁcant technological changes are those that meet the
four tests described in this chapter:


• Create a sustainable competitive advantage themselves
• Shift cost or uniqueness drivers in favor of a ﬁrm
• Lead to ﬁrst-mover advantages
• Improve overall industry structure
A ﬁrm must isolate these technologies, and understand how they will affect
cost, differentiation, or industry structure. Supplier and buyer technologies
are often among the most important in this respect. Critical technologies
will be those with a major effect on cost or differentiation, and where a
technological lead is sustainable.
5. Assess a ﬁrm’s relative capabilities in important technologies and the
cost of making improvements. A ﬁrm must know its relative strengths in key
technologies, as well as make a realistic assessment of its ability to keep up
with technological change. Considerations of pride should not obscure such
an assessment or a ﬁrm will squander resources is an area in which it has
little hope of contributing to its competitive advantage.
6. Select a technology strategy, encompassing all important technologies,
that reinforces the ﬁrm’s overall competitive strategy. Technology strategy
must reinforce the competitive advantage a ﬁrm is seeking to achieve and
sustain. The most important technologies for competitive advantage are
those where a ﬁrm can sustain its lead, where drivers of cost or
differentiation are skewed in its favor, or where the technology will translate
into ﬁrst-mover advantages. As described earlier, ﬁrms can do a lot to
reinforce advantages gained through technology through investments in
other areas.
Included in a ﬁrm’s technological strategy should be the following:
•  A ranking of R&D projects that reﬂects their signiﬁcance for
competitive advantage. No project should be approved without a
rationale describing its effect on cost and/or differentiation.
•  Choices about technological leadership or followership in important
technologies.
•  Policies toward licensing that enhance overall competitive position
rather than reﬂect short-term proﬁt pressures.


• Means of obtaining needed technology externally, if necessary, through
licenses or otherwise.
7. Reinforce business unit technology strategies at the corporate level.
While technology is ultimately linked to individual business units, a
diversiﬁed ﬁrm can play two key roles to strengthen its overall
technological position. The ﬁrst is to assist in monitoring technologies for
possible business unit impacts. A corporate group can usefully invest in
identifying and analyzing all streams of technology that might have wide
impact, and then feed that information to business units. A corporate role in
monitoring such technologies as information systems, ofﬁce automation,
factory automation, materials, and biotechnology is often highly desirable.
The second key corporate role in technological strategy is in ﬁnding,
exploiting, and creating technological interrelationships among business
units. A business unit can gain competitive advantage if it can exploit
technological interrelationships with others, as Chapter 9 describes in some
detail.
The following speciﬁc actions at the corporate, sector, or group level can
strengthen a ﬁrm’s overall technological position:
• Identify core technologies for the corporation that impact many units.
• Ensure that active and coordinated research efforts are underway, and
that technology migrates among business units.
• Fund corporate research in important technologies to create a critical
mass of knowledge and people.
• Use acquisitions or joint ventures to introduce new technological skills
to the corporation, or to invigorate existing skills.


6
Competitor Selection
Competitors are viewed by most ﬁrms as a threat. Attention is centered on
how a ﬁrm can gain share against them and how their entry can be
prevented in the ﬁrst place. Competitors, goes this line of thought, are the
enemy and must be eliminated. More market share is also usually seen as
being better than less, a viewpoint given reinforcement by adherents of the
experience curve.
While competitors can surely be threats, the right competitors can
strengthen rather than weaken a ﬁrm’s competitive position in many
industries. “Good” competitors can serve a variety of strategic purposes that
increase a ﬁrm’s sustainable competitive advantage and improve the
structure of its industry. Accordingly, it is often desirable for a ﬁrm to have
one or more “good” competitors, and even to deliberately forgo market
share rather than to attempt to increase it. More market share can frequently
be worse than less. At the same time, a ﬁrm should concentrate its efforts on
attacking “bad” competitors while maintaining relative position vis-à-vis
good ones. These principles apply to market leaders and followers alike.
This chapter will describe how a ﬁrm can understand and inﬂuence its
array of competitors to increase its competitive advantage and improve
industry structure. It will help a ﬁrm identify which are the right
competitors to attack, and avoid battling competitors who are beneﬁting its
own position and industry structure. I begin by identifying the potential
beneﬁts of having competitors. Next I describe how a ﬁrm can recognize a
“good” competitor and distinguish it from a bad one. Having laid this
groundwork, I show how a ﬁrm can inﬂuence whom it competes with, and
