# Chapter 6: Competitor Selection

how it can avoid the risk of eroding industry structure in the process of
competing. I then identify the considerations that bear on the choice of an
optimal conﬁguration of competitors in an industry from a ﬁrm’s viewpoint,
and how it can take actions that preserve industry stability. Finally, the
chapter highlights some pitfalls in dealing with competitors that follow
from the principles of competitor selection.
Competitors are not only beneﬁcial to competition, but can be more
beneﬁcial to a ﬁrm than is usually recognized. A ﬁrm can never be
complacent towards its competitors or stop seeking ways to gain
competitive advantage. Sustainable competitive advantage is the only
reliable way to achieve superior performance. At the same time, however, a
ﬁrm must know which competitors to attack, and how the array of
competitors it faces will inﬂuence industry structure. Each competitor will
carry with it different implications for competitive strategy.
The Strategic Beneﬁts of Competitors
The presence of the right competitors can yield a variety of strategic
beneﬁts that fall into four general categories: increasing competitive
advantage, 
improving 
current 
industry 
structure, 
aiding 
market
development, and deterring entry. The particular beneﬁts achieved will
differ by industry and the strategy a ﬁrm is pursuing.
Increasing Competitive Advantage
The existence of competitors can allow a ﬁrm to increase its competitive
advantage. The mechanisms are described below, along with the industry
characteristics that make them particularly valuable.
Absorb Demand Fluctuations. Competitors can absorb ﬂuctuations in
demand brought on by cyclicality, seasonality, or other causes, allowing a
ﬁrm to utilize its capacity more fully over time. Having competitors is thus
a way to control the capacity utilization cost driver described in Chapter 3.
Market shares of industry leaders commonly rise during downturns and fall
during upturns, for example, a manifestation of this phenomenon.
Competitors gain share when the leader’s capacity is short during an upturn


because the leader cannot or chooses not to meet all the demand. In a
downturn, the leader gains share because it is the preferred source and now
has capacity available. Letting competitors absorb the ﬂuctuations is often
preferable to maintaining the necessary capacity to meet demand over the
cycle. However, a ﬁrm must ensure enough overall capacity in the industry
to serve key buyers and not attract entrants, and that it has enough excess
capacity to control industry prices if the product is a commodity.
Enhance the Ability to Differentiate. Competitors can enhance a ﬁrm’s
ability to differentiate itself by serving as a standard of comparison.
Without a competitor, buyers may have more difﬁculty perceiving the value
created by a ﬁrm, and may, therefore, be more price- or service-sensitive.
As a result, buyers may bargain harder on price, service, or product quality.
A competitor’s product becomes a benchmark for measuring relative
performance, however, which allows a ﬁrm to demonstrate its superiority
more persuasively or lower the cost of differentiation. Competitors, then,
can be signals of value for a ﬁrm’s product (Chapter 4). In consumer
industries, for example, the existence of generic brands may actually allow
a branded product to sustain higher margins in some circumstances. The
beneﬁt of a competitor as a benchmark, however, presupposes that the buyer
can perceive product and other differences, and that a ﬁrm is really
differentiated so that the presence of a benchmark does not expose an
unsustainable price premium.
A related situation in which having a competitor enhances differentiation
is where a ﬁrm is too superior to most of its rivals. It may be difﬁcult to
command a large premium over standard-quality producers without a
competitor somewhere in between, even if the value created by the ﬁrm
fully justiﬁes the premium. For example, IBM reportedly had difﬁculty
securing high prices in its management information system software
development business until the Big Eight accounting ﬁrms entered the
industry and charged high prices. The Big Eight had credibility, and their
prices made it easier for buyers to accept the premiums IBM was asking
over independent software houses.
The beneﬁts of a standard of comparison are most important in industries
where accepted standards for product quality and service are not apparent,
where a wide range of cost/quality tradeoffs are possible, and where buyers


would be prone to price sensitivity in the absence of perceived
differentiation. In such industries, pressure from buyers to continually
improve products and services in the absence of a benchmark is likely to
place downward pressure on a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability.
Serve Unattractive Segments. A ﬁrm’s competitors can be happy to serve
industry segments that it ﬁnds unattractive, but that it would otherwise be
forced to serve in order to get access to desirable segments or for defensive
reasons. Unattractive segments are those which are costly for the ﬁrm to
serve, where buyers have bargaining power and price sensitivity, where the
ﬁrm’s position is not sustainable, or where participation undermines a ﬁrm’s
position in more attractive segments. The concepts in Chapter 7 can be used
to identify strategically-relevant industry segments and their attractiveness.
A common example of the value of competitors is where particular items
in the product line are difﬁcult for a ﬁrm to differentiate and do not earn
acceptable returns. If buyers must have them, they will seek a supplier for
the items that may gain an edge in selling the whole line. A good
competitor supplying these items is less threatening than the buyer ﬁnding
an entirely new source. The essential factor that makes a good competitor
valuable in this situation is that demand for items in the line is linked.
In a related situation, a particular buyer group may be price-sensitive and
possess bargaining power. Without a good competitor, however, the ﬁrm
may have to serve the unattractive buyers for defensive reasons to cut off a
logical entry avenue for a bad competitor (see Chapter 14). Major mass
merchandisers such as Sears, for example, are more powerful and price-
sensitive than smaller chains because they are larger and compete with cost
rather than differentiation strategies. If a ﬁrm serves the large mass
merchandisers, it will earn a lower return than it does in serving the smaller
chains and its overall proﬁtability will be lower unless the incremental
volume from the unattractive buyers is sufﬁcient to improve its overall cost
position. However, the large chains provide an inviting target for threatening
new entrants unless served effectively by a good competitor.
A typical situation in industries where there is government procurement
will illustrate how serving one segment can undermine performance in
others. The sealed bids required in selling to government agencies are
frequently open to public inspection. Thus the bid prices become known to


less price-sensitive industrial buyers, potentially compromising a ﬁrm’s
ability to charge them premium prices. A ﬁrm may be better off with a good
competitor serving such a segment. Allowing a competitor to serve a
segment can also be beneﬁcial in situations where a ﬁrm has a weak product
offering in the segment that would undermine its credibility in other
segments.
A competitor can also be beneﬁcial to a ﬁrm if it competes in segments
with a buyer group that is particularly costly for a ﬁrm to service. If a ﬁrm
is unable for legal reasons to price-discriminate1 sufﬁciently among buyers
to reﬂect differences in servicing cost (e.g., because of the Robinson-
Patman Act), or if possibilities for reselling among buyers prevent
differential pricing, then a ﬁrm’s proﬁts are increased if a competitor who
can serve them more cheaply or has lower proﬁt standards serves the high-
cost customers.
A segment must truly be unattractive structurally to justify the beneﬁts of
a competitor, however. Sometimes seemingly unattractive segments are not
really unattractive, but rather are being priced or served incorrectly. Rather
than have competitors, then, a ﬁrm can proﬁt from serving the segments
itself. The risks of incorrect pricing are discussed in Chapter 3.
Provide a Cost Umbrella. A high-cost competitor can sometimes provide
a cost umbrella that boosts the proﬁtability of a low-cost ﬁrm. It is a
common view that industry leaders provide a price umbrella for industry
followers, and this is indeed the case in some industries.2 What is less often
recognized, however, is that market price is often set by the cost position of
the high-cost competitor in stable and particularly in growing industries. If a
high-cost competitor prices at or near its costs, the low-cost competitor can
earn a substantial margin if it matches that price. Without the high-cost
competitor, however, the price sensitivity of buyers may be greater because
there is a larger price premium that attracts buyers’ attention to price. The
cost umbrella from a high-cost competitor is particularly valuable where
buyers (including retailers) desire a second or third source and will
therefore give the high-cost competitor a portion of their business.
The risk of letting a high-cost competitor set the price is that this price
will attract entry. In order for the strategy to succeed, then, there must be
some entry barriers. It is also important that the high-cost competitor gain


enough business to remain viable or its demise may attract the entry of a
bad competitor.
Improve Bargaining Position with Labor or Regulators. Having
competitors can greatly facilitate bargaining with labor and government
regulators, where negotiations are partly or wholly industrywide. A leader is
vulnerable to being pressured for concessions in union negotiations, or into
meeting stringent standards for product quality, pollution control, and so
on.3 The presence of a competitor can have a moderating effect on such
demands if the competitor is less proﬁtable, less well capitalized, or more
precariously positioned.
Lower Antitrust Risk. The presence of viable competitors may be
necessary to reduce the risk of antitrust scrutiny and prosecution, in both
government and private suits. Eastman-Kodak and IBM are notable
examples of companies that have faced repeated antitrust prosecution that
has consumed a great deal of management time and perhaps distracted
attention from running the business.4 Even if the chances of government
antitrust prosecution are low, having too large a market share can expose a
ﬁrm to private litigation every time it takes a signiﬁcant action such as a
new product introduction, technology license, or price change. The risk of
litigation often leads high-share ﬁrms to be consciously or unconsciously
cautious in making moves, to the detriment of their competitive advantage.
The presence of a viable competitor would improve the situation.
Increase Motivation. A role of competitors that is hard to overestimate is
that of motivator. A viable competitor can be an important motivating force
for reducing cost, improving products, and keeping up with technological
change. The competitor becomes a common adversary that brings people
together to achieve a common goal. Having a viable competitor has
important psychological beneﬁts inside an organization. Xerox, for
example, is showing signs of beneﬁting from the emergence of serious
competitors in copiers. Its manufacturing cost position appears to be
improving after years where cost was unimportant to success, and its pace
of new product development has quickened. The histories of ﬁrms with
monopoly or near-monopoly positions, on the other hand, frequently


provide examples of situations where a dominant ﬁrm was complacent and
ultimately blinded to changes to which it failed to respond.
Improving Current Industry Structure
Having competitors can also beneﬁt overall industry structure in a
variety of ways:
Increase Industry Demand. The presence of competitors can increase
overall industry demand and, in the process, a ﬁrm’s sales. If primary
demand for a product is a function of total industry advertising, for
example, a ﬁrm’s sales can beneﬁt from competitors’ advertising. Followers
often spend disproportionately on advertising because they are too small to
reap economies of scale. A regular stream of product introductions by a
ﬁrm and competitors may also broaden industry appeal and raise awareness
of the industry, boosting demand. Finally, the entrance of competitors can
sometimes lend credibility to a product, as the entrance of IBM did with
personal computers.
Competitors can also boost industry demand where an industry’s product
line includes complementary products, as with cameras and ﬁlm, razors and
blades, and laboratory instruments and consumable supplies. A ﬁrm with a
proprietary position in one product can beneﬁt if one or more competitors
sell the complementary product. For example, Kodak has licensed camera
technology to allow numerous competitors to sell cameras, thereby
stimulating the sales of proprietary Kodak ﬁlm. This strategy is based on the
ability of competitors to enhance primary demand for a complementary
good through their collective marketing efforts. The strategy is also a good
one where it is difﬁcult to earn an adequate return on the complementary
product and thus the ﬁrm wants to meet only a portion of the demand
itself.5
Provide a Second or Third Source. In many industries, particularly those
involving important raw materials or other important inputs, buyers want a
second or third source in order to mitigate the risk of supply disruptions
and/or to hedge against the bargaining power of suppliers. This sort of
buyer behavior occurs in turbine generators, metal cans, sugar, and


chemicals, for example. The presence of a good competitor as the second or
third source takes the pressure off a ﬁrm. It can prevent buyers from inviting
more threatening competitors into such industries as well as delay or reduce
the risk that buyers will backward integrate themselves.
Kyocera, the U.S. subsidiary of Kyoto Ceramics, has experienced the
problem of not having credible competitors in supplying the semiconductor
industry. Its share of ceramic housings for semiconductor chips is so
dominant that U.S. semiconductor companies have been actively searching
for new sources, and have actually invested resources to help new suppliers
get into the business. With a more credible competitor, Kyocera would have
been less vulnerable to such destabilizing behavior by its buyers and
perhaps under less scrutiny from them on pricing.
While the examples cited above have been drawn from industrial
products, the same issues apply in consumer goods. Retailers often desire
more than one brand to provide a counterweight to any one manufacturer’s
power. Having a good competitor can lower the chances that retailers will
actively help other competitors enter the industry through favorable shelf
positioning, heavy promotion, and other support.
Reinforce Desirable Elements of Industry Structure. A good competitor
can reinfore desirable aspects of industry structure or promote structural
change that improves the attractiveness of the industry. For example, a
competitor that stresses product quality, durability, and service can help
reduce buyer price sensitivity and mitigate price rivalry in the industry. Or a
competitor that heavily advertises may hasten the evolution of the industry
into one with a few strong brands and high entry barriers. Conversely, a bad
competitor can undermine the structure of an industry in the pursuit of its
own competitive advantage. In baby foods, for example, Beech-Nut
historically reinforced positive aspects of the industry through its high
levels of advertising, frequent product introductions, and stable prices
before its acquisition by Squibb in the mid-1970s. Heinz, on the other hand,
has undermined industry structure with a low cost/low price strategy in a
futile effort to overtake Gerber. Squibb’s acquisition of Beech-Nut turned
Beech-Nut into a bad competitor as well by altering its goals and strategy.
Aiding Market Development


Competitors can help develop the market in emerging industries or in
industries where product or process technology is evolving:
Share the Costs of Market Development. Competitors can share the costs
of market development for new products or technologies. Market
development often involves costs of inducing buyer trial, battling substitutes
(see Chapter 8), legal compliance, and promoting the development of
infrastructure such as independent repair facilities.6 In addition, R&D
spending is often necessary to reﬁne the basic technology, to overcome
switching costs faced by any prospective buyer, and to develop procedures
for installation and service that are widely useful. Competitors can lower a
ﬁrm’s cost of market development, particularly if competitors spend
disproportionately on it relative to their sales and if their market
development efforts are in areas that represent industrywide problems.
Reduce Buyers’ Risk. Competitors may be necessary in a new market (or
a new technology) in order to provide an alternate source for buyers, even if
buyers would not normally require another source later on. Buyers are often
reluctant to purchase a new product if only one or two ﬁrms produce it,
particularly where the cost of switching is high or the buyer would be hurt if
a supplier failed to provide adequate service or went out of business.
Help to Standardize or Legitimize a Technology. Having competitors that
employ the same technology as a ﬁrm can accelerate the process by which
the technology is legitimized or becomes the standard. Buyers are often
reluctant to accept a technology as the standard when only one ﬁrm is
backing it, and may hold back from initial purchases to wait for
technological change to progress further. When a credible competitor is also
pushing the technology (and sharing in the cost of marketing it), buyers’
reluctance to adopt it can be much reduced. The move of the pioneers of
VHS and Beta format video cassette recorders to license other leading ﬁrms
to use their technology is a good example. A competitor with the same
technology may also facilitate the process of gaining approvals by
government or other standard-setting organizations for the technology.


Promote the Image of the Industry. The right competitors can enhance
the image of an industry. Established companies with reputations in other
businesses can lend credibility to an industry by signaling that the industry
is legitimate and that promises by ﬁrms will be met.
The beneﬁts of having competitors during market development are often
transient ones, applying most strongly to the emerging or growth phases of
an industry’s development. Having several competitors may thus be most
strategically beneﬁcial early in an industry’s development, with the ideal
number of competitors declining thereafter.
Deterring Entry
Competitors play a crucial role in deterring other entrants, or enhancing
the sustainability of a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage. The right competitors
can contribute to defensive strategy (Chapter 14) in a variety of ways:
Increase the Likelihood and Intensity of Retaliation. Competitors can
increase the likelihood and severity of retaliation perceived by potential
entrants. Competitors can also act as a ﬁrst line of defense against new
entrants, battling them with tactics such as price cutting that would be
prohibitively expensive for a ﬁrm with a large market share because its
revenues across the board would be reduced. Further, an entrant may be less
prone to enter if it faces a number of credible competitors than if it sees a
dominant ﬁrm that is potentially vulnerable to focus strategies. Dominant
ﬁrms often have mixed motives in serving particular segments that expose
them to focused entrants.7
A competitor does not deter other entrants, however, if it is perceived as
too weak. Instead, a weak competitor provides a new entrant with an
inviting beachhead in the industry though the entrant would not dare to
attack the leader directly.
Symbolize the Difﬁculty of Successful Entry. A competitor can bear
witness to the difﬁculty of successfully competing against a ﬁrm, and
demonstrate the unspectacular proﬁtability of a follower position. The
limited increase in market share and poor proﬁtability of Procter &


Gamble’s Folgers, for example, is a good lesson in the costs of gaining
share in the coffee industry against General Foods’ Maxwell House.
Without a competitor, a potential entrant may underestimate the height of
entry barriers and the competitive strength of the leader.
Block Logical Entry Avenues. Competitors can occupy positions that
represent logical entry paths into an industry, blocking them from potential
entrants. In the lift truck industry, for example, small lift trucks sold to
smaller buyers are a logical entry path. Small lift trucks require less service,
and smaller buyers face fewer switching costs in changing suppliers
because they often have only one lift truck and face no issues of ﬂeet
commonality. Thus the barriers to entry into this segment are lower than
into other segments. In this example, however, the moderate proﬁtability of
the segment caused leading U.S. manufacturers to neglect it. Unfortunately
for U.S. lift truck manufacturers, there was no credible U.S. competitor to
block entry into the segment, and Japanese manufacturers successfully used
the segment as a way to enter the U.S. market. Even though an industry
leader might serve such a segment itself, it may be more proﬁtable for the
leader to cede the segment to a good competitor if the segment is
structurally less attractive than the core business (see Chapter 7).
Competitors can also ﬁll product niches that would themselves be too
small for the leader, or in relation to which the leader faces mixed motives.
Having competitors ﬁlling these niches increases the difﬁculty of entry
because a potential entrant is forced to enter with a “me too” product,
instead of having a protected niche in which to create a base for expansion.8
The desire of buyers for a second or third source also opens up logical entry
avenues for competitors. Having a good competitor to fulﬁll this role can
deter more threatening entrants.
Crowd Distribution Channels. Having a competitor gives distributors
and/or retailers multiple brands, and may make it more difﬁcult for a new
entrant to gain access to distribution. Where there are only one or two ﬁrms
in an industry, on the other hand, the channels may welcome new
competitors to mitigate the bargaining power of the leaders or to supply
private label merchandise. The presence of competitors can thus force a new


entrant to bear much higher costs of gaining channel access because the
channels already have a full complement of brands.
It may also be desirable for a leader to supply private label goods as a
defensive move if no good competitor is present to serve the private label
market. Despite this, many leaders tend to avoid private label business
because they see it as undercutting the position of their branded goods, as
RCA and Zenith reasoned in TV sets. This can be too narrow a viewpoint
when the risks of future entry are considered; in TV sets, Sears actively
encouraged Japanese entry into the U.S. color set market because of its
inability to source a quality private label set from RCA, Zenith, or other
capable U.S. manufacturers.
What Makes a “Good” Competitor?
Competitors are not all equally attractive or unattractive. A good
competitor is one that can perform the beneﬁcial functions described above
without representing too severe a long-term threat. A good competitor is
one that challenges the ﬁrm not to be complacent but is a competitor with
which the ﬁrm can achieve a stable and proﬁtable industry equilibrium
without protracted warfare. Bad competitors, by and large, have the
opposite characteristics.
No competitor ever meets all of the tests of a good competitor.
Competitors usually have some characteristics of a good competitor and
some characteristics of a bad competitor. Some managers, as a result, will
assert that there is no such thing as a good competitor. This view ignores the
essential point that some competitors are a lot better than others, and can
have very different effects on a ﬁrm’s competitive position. In practice, a
ﬁrm must understand where each of its competitors falls on the spectrum
from good to bad and behave accordingly.
Tests of a Good Competitor
A good competitor has a number of characteristics. Since its goals,
strategy, and capabilities are not static, however, the assessment of whether
a competitor is good or bad can change.


Credible and Viable. A good competitor has sufﬁcient resources and
capabilities to be a motivator to the ﬁrm to lower cost or improve
differentiation, as well as to be credible with and acceptable to buyers. The
competitor cannot serve as a standard of comparison or aid in market
development unless it has the required resources to be viable in the long
term and unless buyers view it as at least a minimally acceptable alternative.
The credibility and viability of a good competitor are particularly important
to its ability to deter new entry. A competitor must have resources sufﬁcient
to make its retaliation a credible threat to new entrants and it must represent
an acceptable alternative to buyers if they are to forgo looking for new
sources. Finally, a competitor must be strong enough to keep the ﬁrm from
becoming complacent.
Clear, Self-Perceived Weaknesses. Though credible and viable, a good
competitor has clear weaknesses relative to a ﬁrm which are recognized.
Ideally, the good competitor believes that its weaknesses will be difﬁcult to
change. The competitor need not be weaker everywhere, but has some clear
weaknesses that will lead it to conclude that it is futile to attempt to gain
relative position against a ﬁrm in the segments the ﬁrm is interested in.
Understands the Rules. A good competitor understands and plays by the
rules of competition in an industry, and can recognize and read market
signals. It aids in market development and promotes the existing technology
rather than attempting strategies that involve technological or competitive
discontinuities in order to gain position.
Realistic Assumptions. A good competitor has realistic assumptions
about the industry and its own relative position. It does not overestimate
industry growth potential and therefore overbuild capacity, or underinvest in
capacity and in so doing provide an opening for newcomers. A good
competitor also does not overrate its capabilities to the point of triggering a
battle by attempting to gain share, or shy from retaliating against entrants
because it underestimates its strengths.
Knowledge of Costs. A good competitor knows what its costs are, and
sets prices accordingly. It does not unwittingly cross-subsidize product lines


or underestimate overhead. As in the areas described above, a “dumb”
competitor is not a good competitor in the long run.
A Strategy that Improves Industry Structure. A good competitor has a
strategy that preserves and reinforces the desirable elements of industry
structure. For example, its strategy might elevate entry barriers into the
industry, emphasize quality and differentiation instead of price cutting, or
mitigate buyer price sensitivity through the nature of its selling approach.
An Inherently Limiting Strategic Concept. A good competitor’s strategic
concept inherently limits it to a portion or segment of the industry that is
not of interest to the ﬁrm, but that makes strategic sense for the competitor.
For example, a competitor following a focus strategy based on premium
quality might be a good competitor if it does not want to expand its share.
Moderate Exit Barriers. A good competitor has exit barriers that are
signiﬁcant enough to make its presence in the industry a viable deterrent to
entrants, but yet not so high as to completely lock it into the industry. High
exit barriers create the risk that the competitor will disrupt the industry
rather than exit if it encounters strategic difﬁculty.
Reconcilable Goals. A good competitor has goals that can be reconciled
with the ﬁrm’s goals. The good competitor is satisﬁed with a market
position for itself which allows the ﬁrm to simultaneously earn high returns.
This often reﬂects one or more of the following characteristics of a good
competitor:
HAS MODERATE STRATEGIC STAKES IN THE INDUSTRY. A good competitor
does not attach high stakes to achieving dominance or unusually high
growth in the industry. It views the industry as one where continued
participation is desirable and where acceptable proﬁts can be earned, but not
one where improving relative position has great strategic or emotional
importance. A bad competitor, on the other hand, views an industry as
pivotal to its broader corporate goals. For example, a foreign competitor
entering what it perceives to be a strategic market is usually a bad


competitor. Its stakes are too high, and it may also not understand the rules
of the game.
HAS A COMPARABLE RETURN-ON-INVESTMENT TARGET. A good competitor
seeks to earn an attractive return on investment and does not place greater
priority on gaining tax beneﬁts, employing family members, providing jobs,
earning foreign exchange (e.g., some government-owned competitors),
providing an outlet for upstream products, or other goals that translate into
unacceptable proﬁts in the industry. A competitor with compatible proﬁt
objectives is less likely to undercut prices or make heavy investments to
attack a ﬁrm’s position. Differences in goals make McDonnell-Douglas a
much better competitor to Boeing in aircraft than the state-owned Airbus
Industries, for example.
ACCEPTS ITS CURRENT PROFITABILITY. A good competitor, while seeking to
earn attractive proﬁts, is typically satisﬁed with its current returns and
knows that improving them is not feasible. Ideally the competitor is
satisﬁed with proﬁtability that is somewhat lower than the ﬁrm’s in
segments that they jointly serve. In such a situation the competitor is not
prone to upset the industry equilibrium in order to improve its relative
proﬁtability, and its modest returns may serve to discourage entry by new
competitors.
DESIRES CASH GENERATION. A good competitor is interested enough in
generating cash for its stockholders or corporate parent that it will not upset
industry equilibrium with major new capacity or a major product line
overhaul. However, a good competitor does not harvest its position in the
industry because this will threaten its credibility and viability.
HAS A SHORT TIME HORIZON. A good competitor does not have so long a
time horizon that it will ﬁght a protracted battle to attack a ﬁrm’s position.
IS RISK-AVERSE. A good competitor is concerned about risk and will be
satisﬁed with its position rather than take large risks to change it.
Smaller divisions of diversiﬁed ﬁrms can often be good competitors if
they are not viewed as essential to long-term corporate strategy. They are


often given tough proﬁtability targets and expected to generate cash ﬂow.
Divisions that are slotted for growth may be bad competitors, however.
Squibb’s acquisition of Beech-Nut’s baby food business was predicated on
the perception that Beech-Nut had signiﬁcant growth potential. This led
Beech-Nut to take some actions that proved unsuccessful but that
undermined the industry.
Even a competitor with considerable strengths can be a good competitor
if it has the right goals and strategy. Its goals and strategy create a situation
where a ﬁrm and the competitor can coexist. A clear and self-perceived
weakness is thus not a prerequisite for a good competitor. Conversely,
however, a competitor with a very long time horizon, little short-run need
for cash ﬂow, or a willingness to take substantial risks is usually a bad
competitor from the point of view of achieving a stable industry
equilibrium, whether or not it has any real strengths.
Sometimes a competitor can be a good competitor to a ﬁrm but the ﬁrm
is not a good competitor to it. One competitor plays by the rules, but the
other attacks it anyway. Industries are most stable when ﬁrms are mutually
good competitors—the segment one competitor focuses on is proﬁtable for
it but not of interest to the other, for example. Mutually good competitors
play to their respective strengths and succeed at doing so given their
respective internal standards.
“Good” Market Leaders
These tests of a good competitor also shed light on what makes a good
market leader from the perspective of followers. If a ﬁrm is not in a position
to be among the leaders in the industries it serves, its success may well be
highly dependent on picking industries with good leaders. The single most
important quality of a good leader from a follower’s perspective is that the
leader has goals and a strategy that provide an umbrella under which the
follower can live proﬁtably. For example, a leader with high return-on-
investment goals, concern for the “health of the industry,” a strategy built
upon differentiation, and a disinclination to serve certain industry segments
due to mixed motives will offer opportunities for followers to earn attractive
returns in a relatively stable industry environment. Conversely, a leader that


fails to understand the beneﬁts of viable followers, that is satisﬁed with low
returns, or whose strategy works in other ways to erode industry structure is
unlikely to provide an attractive environment for followers. For example, a
leader pursuing a strategy based on going down the learning curve rapidly
through low prices in an industry where buyers are powerful and price-
sensitive will often destroy the industry for followers (and perhaps for
itself).
Diagnosing Good Competitors
Diagnosing whether a rival is a good competitor requires a complete
competitor analysis. A competitor’s goals, assumptions, strategy, and
capabilities all play a part in determining whether it is a good or bad
competitor for a particular ﬁrm.9 Since no competitor ever meets all the
tests of a good competitor completely, it is necessary to decide whether a
competitor’s desirable characteristics outweigh those that undermine the
industry or a ﬁrm’s position.
A number of examples may serve to illustrate the process of weighing
and balancing a competitor’s characteristics to reach a net assessment of
whether it is good, bad, or somewhere in between. In the computer industry,
Cray Research seems to be a good competitor for IBM, while Fujitsu is a
bad competitor. Cray is a viable rival that plays by accepted rules in a
focused segment of the industry, and does not appear to misjudge its ability
to take on IBM. Fujitsu, on the other hand, has high stakes in succeeding
against IBM, low standards for proﬁtability in markets it is attempting to
penetrate, and a strategy that may worsen industry structure by undermining
differentiation.
In the copier industry, Kodak is a relatively good competitor for Xerox.
Kodak is concentrating on the high-volume end of the market and
emphasizing quality and service. Though it has taken some proﬁtable
market share away from Xerox, Kodak has high rate-of-return standards and
is playing by the same rules as Xerox. Thus it has pushed Xerox to improve
its quality. Moreover, Kodak does not appear to view copiers as a linchpin
of an ofﬁce automation strategy that would justify accepting low proﬁts, but
as a proﬁtable business area in its own right.


In fertilizer and chemicals, conversely, oil companies have proven to be
bad competitors. They have had excess cash to invest, and have looked for
big markets in which they could gain large market shares so as to have a
noticeable impact on their ﬁnancial statements. Instead of emphasizing
R&D and customer service, most oil companies have competed on price
and accelerated the commoditization of the industries they entered. They
have also had poor forecasting ability, and tended to build huge new plants
during the peaks of the business cycle rather than acquiring facilities during
troughs. This has meant that they have created or exacerbated problems of
excess capacity.
The competitive situation in CT scanners illustrates a case where a
follower seems to understand the beneﬁts of a good market leader. The
Israeli company Elscint has gained a number two or three market position.
GE is the leader in the industry, and Elscint has publicly disclaimed a desire
to overtake GE. Elscint views GE as a good market leader because it
maintains high prices, differentiates based on service and reputation, and
has invested heavily to educate and develop the market. Another historically
good market leader is Coca-Cola. Coke avoided price competition and
vigorous retaliation against followers’ moves, opting for a statesman’s role
instead. Pepsi Cola, Dr Pepper, and Seven-Up enjoyed many years of stable
proﬁts as followers. Perhaps as a result of Pepsi’s misjudgment in
attempting to take too much share from Coke combined with the
ascendance of new top management, however, Coke is showing signs of
becoming much more aggressive. Pepsi’s apparent triggering of Coke’s
change of behavior illustrates a pitfall in dealing with good competitors that
I will discuss further below.
If competitors are bad enough, even a ﬁrm with a signiﬁcant competitive
advantage may ﬁnd it unattractive to compete in an industry. In mushrooms,
for example, Ralston-Purina had some potential advantages but faced many
family ﬁrms with low return-on-investment standards as well as imports
from Taiwan and the People’s Republic of China. Ralston ﬁnally exited the
industry.
Inﬂuencing the Pattern of Competitors


The beneﬁts of good competitors suggest that it may be desirable for a
ﬁrm to attack some current competitors and not others, and to encourage the
entry of new competitors provided they meet the tests of a good competitor.
Since it is usually desirable to have more competitors early in an industry’s
development than during maturity, it may also make sense to encourage the
early entry of competitors that will not be able to succeed in the long run.
Nothing in these statements implies that a ﬁrm should be complacent
toward competitors, or that a ﬁrm should not aggressively seek to increase
competitive advantage. Rather, the principles of competitor selection imply
that a ﬁrm must adopt a more sophisticated perspective towards its
competitors than is commonly done.
Who a ﬁrm competes with is determined by a wide range of factors,
many of which are largely outside a ﬁrm’s control. Which competitors
choose to enter an industry is, to a considerable extent, a matter of the luck
of the draw, as will be discussed in Chapter 14 in more detail. Whether or
not a particular ﬁrm perceives an industry to be attractive at a particular
time and has the resources available to enter is partly a matter of chance.
Once a few competitors have entered, however, others may no longer
perceive the industry as an opportunity, particularly if the early entrants
were credible ﬁrms. If a ﬁrm can somehow inﬂuence who enters early, then,
the entire pattern of entry into the industry may be changed.
Competitor selection seeks not only to inﬂuence the pattern of entry, but
to inﬂuence which competitors gain the market share necessary to be viable
and which segments they compete in.10 The following tactics to select
competitors are available in many industries:
Technology Licensing. A ﬁrm can license its technology early to good
competitors under favorable terms (see Chapter 5). If it picks the right
competitors, further entry may be effectively deterred. Given the desire of
buyers for a second or third source in semiconductors, for example,
licensing is relatively common in that industry and careful choice of
licenses can have a beneﬁcial effect. In an interesting recent move, Intel has
licensed IBM and Commodore to make the 8088 microprocessor. Here the
licenses are having the effect of making buyers competitors in a sense, but
blocking other more threatening competitors in the process.


Selective Retaliation. A ﬁrm can retaliate vigorously against bad
competitors, leaving good competitors to enter or gain share unopposed.
The ﬁrm’s choice of products to introduce or geographic markets to enter
will often impact one competitor more than another, for example.
Selective Entry Deterrence. A ﬁrm can refrain from investing in creating
entry barriers to those segments where the presence of a good competitor
can improve the ﬁrm’s position. The risk is that the wrong competitor
chooses to occupy the undefended segments, as part of a more ambitious
sequenced entry strategy.11
Coalitions to Draw in New Entrants. A ﬁrm can contract with a good
potential competitor to become a source of supply for some item in the
product line, to be sold through a ﬁrm’s distribution channels. This
competitor may then logically expand to serve other segments undesirable
to the ﬁrm. Other forms of coalitions that can encourage good competitors
include sourcing agreements for components, and private label
arrangements where a competitor supplies goods sold under a ﬁrm’s name.
Both can have the effect of lowering barriers to entry for a good competitor.
Damaging Good Competitors in Battling Bad Ones
It is often difﬁcult to battle bad competitors without the battle spilling
over to harm good competitors. An increase in advertising, new product
introduction, or change in warranty policy designed to thwart a bad
competitor, for example, can reduce a good competitor’s market share or
even threaten its viability. Weakening the good competitor in turn may
erode the attractiveness of the industry or invite new entry.
It is important, therefore, to tailor offensive or defensive moves against
bad competitors to minimize their impact on good competitors. Sometimes
this is impossible, because of the segments a bad competitor is threatening
or the seriousness of the threat. However, the challenge is to maintain the
delicate balance between improving a ﬁrm’s position and vigorously
responding to threats, on the one hand, and preserving good competitors, on
the other. It is important that good competitors not perceive that they are the
target of attacks or they may change their goals in desperation. Also, a ﬁrm


must inhibit good competitors from becoming bad ones by continued rivalry
to keep them from revising their objectives.
Changing Bad Competitors into Good Ones
Sometimes bad competitors can be transformed into good ones. Ideally,
market signaling to correct a competitor’s faulty assumptions is all that is
necessary. Alcoa has been attempting to inﬂuence overly optimistic demand
forecasts of its competitors in the aluminum industry, for example. In other
cases, time will convert a bad competitor into a good one. The futility of the
competitor’s strategy will become apparent to it, and it will alter its goals or
strategy in ways that make it a better competitor.
A ﬁrm must often be prepared to ﬁght battles in order to convert bad
competitors to good ones, however. A battle may be necessary to
demonstrate its relative weakness to a competitor, or to convince it that the
ﬁrm will not tolerate erosion of position. While battles can be expensive,
they are often cheaper than the cost of a protracted siege. With bad
competitors, a protracted siege is often a fact of life in an industry.
Some bad competitors will never become good competitors. With them,
a ﬁrm must accept the fact that continued challenges to its position will be
forthcoming. The full range of offensive and defensive tactics described
throughout this book will be necessary to sustain competitive advantage and
avoid undermining industry structure.
The Optimal Market Conﬁguration
The principles of competitor selection imply that holding a 100 percent
market share is rarely, if ever, optimal.12 It is sometimes more sensible for
ﬁrms to yield position and allow good competitors to occupy it than to
maintain or increase share. While this is contrary to managers’ beliefs in
some ﬁrms and almost heretical in others, it may be the best way to improve
competitive advantage and industry structure in the long run. The right
question a ﬁrm should ask is: What conﬁguration of market shares and
competitors is optimal? Having described the way in which a ﬁrm can
identify and inﬂuence good competitors, I will now consider the


conﬁguration of competitors that is likely to best serve a ﬁrm’s long-run
strategic position.
The determinants of the ideal market share for a ﬁrm in general terms are
numerous and complex. It is possible, however, to lay down some general
principles for assessing the share a ﬁrm should hold and the ideal pattern of
competitors. I ﬁrst describe the factors that determine the ideal
conﬁguration, and then consider how a ﬁrm should move toward the ideal
conﬁguration given the existing competitor conﬁguration.
The Optimal Competitor Conﬁguration
A ﬁrm’s optimal share of the part of the industry it is targeting should be
high enough not to tempt a competitor to attack it. A ﬁrm must also have
sufﬁcient market share superiority (combined with its other competitive
advantages not related to share) to maintain an equilibrium in the industry.
The gap between leader and follower shares required to preserve stability
will vary from industry to industry as I will describe below.
A number of structural characteristics inﬂuence a leader’s optimal share:
Factors Implying a High Optimal
Market Share for Leaders13
• Signiﬁcant economies of scale14
• A steep learning curve that is
proprietary
• Few industry segments
• Buyers willing to purchase from a
single source
• No distribution channels stocking
multiple brands
• Competitors who can share value
activities with related business
units, implying that small
competitor share positions are an
Factors Suggesting a Lower Optimal
Share for Leaders
• Few economies of scale
• A modest learning curve
• There are unattractive segments
• Buyers demand a second or third
source
• Channels have bargaining power
and desire multiple suppliers
• Competitors are single-business
ﬁrms who cannot share activities
• Followers are necessary as credible
entry deterrents against more
threatening ﬁrms


effective bases from which to
attack a leader (see Chapter 10)
• Other high entry barriers
• A follower needs a meaningful
share to be viable
• The industry has a history of
antitrust problems or vulnerability
to them.15
The distribution of market shares among ﬁrms in an industry that leads
to the greatest industry stability is critically dependent on industry structure
and whether competitors are good or bad competitors. The most important
industry structural variables determining the ideal pattern of shares are the
degree of differentiation or switching costs present in the industry and
whether or not the industry is segmented. Where there are few segments and
little differentiation or low switching costs, signiﬁcant market share
differences are usually necessary for a stable industry. With segmentation or
high levels of differentiation, conversely, ﬁrms can coexist proﬁtably
despite similar shares because they are less prone to see the need or
opportunity to attack each other.
The nature of competitors is equally important. Where competitors are
bad competitors, large share differences among ﬁrms are necessary to
preserve stability because bad competitors tend to take destabilizing actions
if they perceive any opportunity to succeed. Where competitors are good
competitors, conversely, little share differential may be necessary to
discourage attacks.
These considerations combine to yield the implications shown in Figure
6–1.16
The pattern of generic strategies in an industry is also vital. Firms with
different generic strategies can coexist much more easily than ﬁrms that all
converge on the same generic strategy. Thus a ﬁrm must look beyond
market shares alone in assessing the conﬁguration of competitors in its
industry.


Figure 6–1. Competitor Conﬁguration and Industry Stability
It may be beneﬁcial for the share not controlled by leaders to be split
among followers rather than held by one. This means that followers will be
pitted against each other instead of eyeing the position of the leader.
Followers who are pursuing different focus strategies are even better than
followers who are competing head on. It is also essential that followers be
truly viable and offer a credible deterrent to new entrants, or fragmentation
of the follower group can backﬁre and invite new entry.
Maintaining Competitor Viability
A ﬁrm must pay close attention to the health of its good competitors.
Good competitors cannot play their role unless they are viable, and even a
good competitor may undermine a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage or industry
structure if driven to desperation. Desperate competitors have a tendency to
violate beneﬁcial industry conventions or engage in other practices that
undermine industry structure and damage industry image. They also have a
tendency to look for salvation through being acquired, and may in the
process introduce a threatening new player into the industry. Finally, the
managements of desperate competitors are frequently changed. A new
management can convert a good competitor into bad one.
The market position necessary for a competitor to be viable varies from
industry to industry depending on entry/mobility barriers; it is less than 5
percent in soft drinks, but probably more than 10 percent in frozen entrees.


A ﬁrm must know the market position necessary to keep its good
competitors viable, and how this may be changing as a result of structural
evolution. It must also allow good competitors enough successes to lead
them to perpetuate their strategies, rather than change them in the face of
repeated problems.
Moving Toward the Ideal Competitor Conﬁguration
The considerations described above suggest how competitors should
ideally be distributed. To decide whether to move toward the ideal, however,
a ﬁrm must calculate the cost of gaining position or, conversely, the risk of
incrementally yielding it. Yielding share can be destabilizing by tempting
competitors to take even more, or by sending unfortunate signals to
potential entrants.
A ﬁrm may need to gain share not only to increase its own sales but also,
as we have seen, to improve industry structure through a more stable
competitor conﬁguration. The cost of gaining share will be a function of
who will lose share in the process. The losing competitors’ goals,
capabilities, and barriers to shrinkage will be especially critical. A
competitor’s goals, commitment to the business, and the importance it
attaches to share are important to assess. Its capabilities will determine the
cost of wooing away buyers from the competitor.
Barriers to shrinkage are barriers to reducing position in (though not
completely exiting) an industry. These are closely analogous to exit barriers,
and will be high where ﬁxed costs are high because of the high penalty for
reducing volume in existing facilities. Where competitors have high stakes
in an industry, goals stressing market share, or high barriers to shrinkage, it
may well be more costly to gain share than it is worth. In such industries,
upward movement toward the ideal share should be slow and take
advantage of opportunities posed by unfolding industry events.
The risk of yielding share to improve competitive advantage or industry
structure will be a function of the difference in relative strength between the
ﬁrm and competitors. If the gap is large, then a loss of share is unlikely to
tempt competitors (or potential entrants) to upset the industry equilibrium
by attempting to take even more share. The risk of yielding share is also a


function of the inherent credibility of the ﬁrm in retaliating—a ﬁrm with a
tough image faces less risk than one with a statesman’s image. Finally, the
risk of yielding share also depends on the ability of a ﬁrm to yield share in a
way that will appear logical to other ﬁrms (including potential entrants)
rather than be taken as a sign of weakness.
Maintaining Industry Stability
Maintaining the stability of an industry requires continual attention and
effort by a ﬁrm, even if its competitors are good competitors. This is
because competitors’ goals or circumstances may change. Having enjoyed
for some years a relatively proﬁtable number two position, for example, a
competitor may decide that more would be better. Or a change in its
corporate parent or a shift in top management may lead a competitor to
change its goals or assumptions. For example, the acquisition of Beaird-
Poulan by Emerson Electric dramatically raised the ambitions of this
regional chain saw manufacturer. Changes in industry structure may also
create pressures on a competitor to gain share in the short or long run in
order to remain viable. Driven to the wall, even a good competitor can
touch off a process that destroys an industry.
These considerations suggest that a ﬁrm must continually work to
manage its competitors’ expectations and assumptions. This may require
periodic competitive moves, aggressive market signaling, and investing in
mobility barriers. The aim is to make sure competitors do not make faulty
estimates of their strengths or a ﬁrm’s commitment to the industry. Procter
& Gamble is a good example of a ﬁrm that manages expectations through
regular product changes and marketing investment. A ﬁrm that rests on its
laurels vis-à-vis its competitors is starting a time bomb ticking that may
transform a stable and proﬁtable industry into one in which there is a costly
battle for market share.
Pitfalls in Competitor Selection
The principles of competitor selection are not always followed. The
following pitfalls seem to be among the most common:


Failure to Distinguish Good and Bad Competitors. Many companies do
not recognize which of their competitors are good competitors and which
are not. This leads them to pursue across-the-board moves, or worse yet, to
attack good competitors while leaving the bad ones alone. In the process,
industry structure is often severely damaged. Typical is the case of a
specialty rubber manufacturer that viewed another major specialty rubber
manufacturer as its mortal enemy and behaved accordingly. The view was
not surprising, because this competitor’s market share was similar to the
ﬁrm’s and made it a natural focal point for attention. In fact, this competitor
was a nearly ideal competitor that was desperately trying to avoid a battle.
The real enemies of the specialty rubber ﬁrm were the specialty divisions of
the tire companies, who were using specialty markets as a dumping ground
for excess capacity. By damaging its good competitor, the specialty rubber
ﬁrm was helping the tire companies get established in the industry and
eroding industry attractiveness.
It is very common for ﬁrms to view the competitor that is closest to them
in market share or has the most similar strategy as the greatest enemy. This
is the competitor that is repeatedly attacked, while other competitors are
ignored. In fact, such a competitor is often a good competitor who offers
very little threat.
Driving Competitors to Desperation. Companies often fail to think
through the consequences of too much success against competitors. Driving
competitors to desperation runs the risk of serious consequences that I have
described earlier. In soft contact lenses, for example, Bausch and Lomb may
have sown the seeds of some of its own problems. It moved very
aggressively against other soft lens manufacturers in the late 1970s, slashing
prices and behaving like a true believer in the experience curve. What
happened was that Bausch and Lomb indeed gained share, but one by one
its desperate competitors sold out. Their acquirors included Revlon,
Johnson & Johnson, and Schering-Plough, all much larger than Bausch and
Lomb and viewing contact lenses as an avenue for growth. With infusions
of capital to its competitors, Bausch and Lomb now has a serious ﬁght to
contend with. It may have converted good competitors into bad ones.


Having Too Big a Share. Beyond a point, growing invites problems that
are best avoided by ceding share to good competitors. Moreover, a large
market share may actually lead to lower rates of return. Often the best
course of action for a high share ﬁrm is to look for growth elsewhere rather
than to push for more share in an industry. Similarly, high share ﬁrms may
be better off ﬁnding ways to increase overall industry size or proﬁtability,
rather than try to gain share. They will enjoy the biggest piece of an
expanding pie, and avoid the risks of destabilizing the industry. It is all too
tempting, however, for a ﬁrm to push for incremental gains in relative
position in an industry where it feels strongest.
Attacking a Good Leader. Followers sometimes commit the fatal error of
attacking a good leader. The leader is then forced to retaliate, and what has
been a proﬁtable position for the follower turns into a marginal one.
Western Company launched a market share attack on Halliburton in oil well
completion and stimulation services, for example, despite the fact that
Halliburton competed on differentiation and Western had been very
proﬁtable. Halliburton’s reaction, no doubt a grudging one, has severely
reduced Western’s proﬁts. Halliburton, if anything, has gotten stronger.
Entering an Industry with Too Many Bad Competitors. Entering an
industry with too many bad competitors can doom a ﬁrm to a protracted
siege, even if the ﬁrm has a competitive advantage. The cost of converting
many bad competitors into good ones may be very great, and nullify the
fruits of entry. Faced with an industry with many bad competitors, a ﬁrm
may be better off ﬁnding another industry.
Competitors are both a blessing and a curse. Seeing them only as a curse
runs the risk of eroding not only a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage but also the
structure of the industry as a whole. A ﬁrm must compete aggressively but
not indiscriminately.


II
Competitive Scope Within an Industry
