# Chapter 7: Industry Segmentation and Competitive Advantage

Industry segmentation is necessary to address the central question of
competitive scope within an industry, or what segments of an industry a
ﬁrm should serve and how it should serve them. It is also the basis for the
choice of focus strategies,1 since it exposes segments that are poorly served
by broadly-targeted competitors in which focus can be both sustainable and
proﬁtable. Broadly-targeted competitors must also understand industry
segmentation, because it reveals areas where they are vulnerable to focusers
and may suggest unattractive segments that are best left to competitors.
Attention to segmentation from a strategic perspective is increasingly
important because new developments in technology are altering some of the
old rules of segmentation, with implications for both focusers and broadly-
targeted ﬁrms.
This chapter describes the way an industry can be segmented for
strategic purposes, as well as some of the implications for creating and
sustaining competitive advantage. I begin by describing the underlying
factors that create industry segments and the observable indicators that can
be used to deﬁne them in practice. These principles provide the basis for
constructing and interpreting an industry segmentation matrix and for
evaluating alternative ways of segmenting an industry. Having deﬁned how
to segment an industry, I develop some important strategic implications that
arise from segmentation. The conditions that make a segment structurally
attractive are identiﬁed, as are the factors that lead to strategic
interrelationships between segments. I then describe how a ﬁrm can choose
the segments on which to base a focus strategy, and test its sustainability
against competitors. The chapter concludes by showing how industry
segmentation relates to industry deﬁnition.
Bases for Industry Segmentation
An industry is a market in which similar or closely related products are
sold to buyers, as shown schematically in Figure 7–1.2 In some industries a
single product variety is sold to all buyers. More typically, however, there
are many existing or potential items in an industry’s product line,
distinguished by such characteristics as size, performance, and functions.
Ancillary services (repair, installation, applications engineering) are also in


fact distinct products that can be and often are provided separately from
physical products.3
In some industries there is a single buyer (e.g., in some defense and
space industries). More typically, though, there are many existing or
potential buyers. These buyers are usually not all alike, but vary according
to demographics, the characteristics of the industry in which they compete,
location, and in other ways. Firms provide the link between products and
buyers. Firms produce, sell, and deliver products through value chains
(Chapters 2–4) in competition with each other. In some industries, there are
independent distribution channels between ﬁrms and buyers involved in all
or part of industry sales.
The boundaries of an industry are frequently in ﬂux. Product lines are
rarely static. Firms can create new product varieties that perform new
functions, combine functions in new ways, or split off particular functions
into separate products. Similarly, new buyers can become part of an
industry, existing buyers can drop out, or buyers may alter their purchasing
behavior. The current array of products and buyers reﬂects the products that
ﬁrms have chosen to introduce and the buyers that have chosen to buy them,
and not the products and buyers that an industry could potentially
encompass.
Figure 7–1. An Industry as an Array of Products and Buyers
Structural Bases for Segmentation
The reason that industries must be segmented for competitive strategy
formulation is that the products, buyers, or both within an industry are
dissimilar in ways that affect their intrinsic attractiveness or the way in


which a ﬁrm gains competitive advantage in supplying them. Differences in
structural attractiveness and in requirements for competitive advantage
among an industry’s products and buyers create industry segments.4
Segments grow out of both differences in buyer behavior as well as
differences in the economics of supplying different products or buyers.
Product and buyer differences that do not affect structure or competitive
advantage (e.g., differences in the color of an otherwise identical product
variety) may be important for production or marketing, but responding to
them is not essential to competitive strategy.
Structural Differences and Segmentation. Differences in products or
buyers create industry segments if they alter one or more of the ﬁve
competitive forces. Chapter 1 showed how the ﬁve competitive forces
determine overall industry attractiveness. Structural analysis can also be
applied to industry segments; the same ﬁve forces are at work. Economies
of scale or supplier power, for example, can vary among product varieties
even if they are sold to the same buyer. A given buyer may also possess
differing propensities to substitute for different product varieties. Similarly,
the power of buyers or the threat of substitution for the same product variety
can differ from buyer to buyer. Figure 7–2 represents schematically how the
ﬁve forces can vary by segment.5
Figure 7–2. Differences in the Five Forces Among Segments
The television set industry provides an example of how the ﬁve forces
can differ by product variety independently of who the buyer is. TV sets can


be segmented by conﬁguration (portables, table models, consoles and
combination units). Small screen portables have become largely a
commodity, while console TVs offer more opportunities for differentiation
through styling, furniture, ﬁnish, and features. Moreover, console set
production employs a different production process and different suppliers
than the production of portables, and is less sensitive to economies of scale.
These differences affect mobility barriers, supplier power, buyer power, and
rivalry pressures. Similar differences which affect the ﬁve forces exist for
other TV product varieties.
Large turbine generators illustrate how differences among buyers may
also often have structural implications, independent of the product variety
they purchase. Investor-owned electric utilities can be distinguished from
municipally-owned utilities from a structural viewpoint. Investor-owned
utilities tend to be more technologically sophisticated and purchase through
a negotiation process, while municipal utilities are less sophisticated and
purchase through public bidding. This creates differences in price
sensitivity and in the ability of a ﬁrm to create mobility barriers in selling to
the two types of utilities such as brand identity, switching costs, and
proprietary product differences.
Both product varieties and buyers in an industry can potentially differ in
all ﬁve of the competitive forces. In TV sets, for example, the distinction
between console and portable sets has implications for mobility barriers,
supplier power, and rivalry. In the turbine generator industry, investor-
owned utilities and municipal utilities differ in their bargaining power, the
rivalry among ﬁrms in serving them, and the opportunity to erect mobility
barriers. Even supplier power can vary for the same product variety
depending on the end buyer’s identity. In bicycles, for example, a bicycle
enthusiast is much more aware of the brand name of key components such
as hubs and derailleurs. This gives parts suppliers greater bargaining power
in selling to ﬁrms targeting enthusiasts. They have far less power in selling
to ﬁrms that sell bicycles to casual bicycle purchasers.
Value Chain Differences and Segmentation. Differences in products and
buyers also create segments if they affect the requirements for competitive
advantage. The value chain can be used to diagnose this. Differences in
product varieties or buyers lead to segments if:


• they affect the drivers of cost or uniqueness in the ﬁrm’s value chain
• they change the required conﬁguration of the ﬁrm’s value chain
• they imply differences in the buyer’s value chain
An example of a product difference that affects the value chain is the
difference between standard and premium bicycles. Standard bikes are built
with an automated manufacturing process, while premium bikes are
frequently handcrafted. Many other value activities differ for the two as
well, and the drivers of cost and uniqueness of value activities differ
accordingly. Thus the sources of competitive advantage for standard and
premium bikes are quite different, making them different segments. Another
good example of how different product varieties can affect the value chain
is draft beer compared to canned beer. While the beer is the same, many
other value activities are not.
An example of how differences in buyers can affect the ﬁrm’s value
chain is building insulation. Since many costs in the insulation industry are
driven by regional scale and by the location of buyers in relation to plants,
buyers located in different geographic regions constitute important
segments. This example shows not only how buyers can differ in purchasing
behavior, but also how the behavior of cost in serving buyers can be quite
different, even with the identical product.
Value chains also differ among buyers. The way a hotel chain uses a TV
set is different from how a household uses it, with strong implications for
use criteria and signals of value (Chapter 4). Differences in use criteria and
signals of value among buyers deﬁne segments, because they affect the
requirement for competitive advantage. It is also important to recognize that
the way different product varieties ﬁt into the same buyer’s value chain can
differ—for example, a new part versus a replacement part. Product
differences that affect the buyer’s use and signaling criteria deﬁne segments.
The Array of Industry Segments. In theory, every individual buyer or
product variety in an industry could be a segment, because the ﬁve forces or
the value chain were somehow different for each. In TV sets, for example,
every screen size or feature might potentially constitute a different segment.
Similarly, in turbine generators, every utility has a somewhat different value
chain. In practice, however, product varieties and buyers should be grouped


into categories that reﬂect their important differences. Deciding how to
group products and buyers to capture the most important differences is a
key to good segmentation and a subject to which I will return later.
An industry segment is always a combination of a product variety (or
varieties) and some group of buyers who purchase it. In some cases, buyers
do not have important structural differences and segments are deﬁned by
product varieties, and vice versa. Usually, however, structural differences in
both product varieties and buyers are present in industries, leading to
segments consisting of a subset of products sold to a subset of buyers. Note
that product varieties are often associated with particular types of buyers
that purchase them, as was true in both the TV set and turbine generator
industries.
Industry segments must also be deﬁned independently of the scope of
activities chosen by existing competitors. Segments stem from structural
differences within an industry that competitors may or may not have
perceived. A segment may be important even though no competitor is yet
focusing on it. Industry segmentation should include potential product
varieties and buyer groups as well as those that already exist. The tendency
in segmentation is to focus on observed differences in product varieties and
buyers. Yet there are typically product varieties that are feasible but not yet
produced, and potential buyer groups that are not currently being served.
Unobserved or potential segments can be the most important to identify
because they offer opportunities for preemptive moves that create
competitive advantage.
Segmentation Variables
To segment an industry, each discrete product variety (and potential
variety) in an industry should be identiﬁed and examined for structural or
value chain differences from others. Product varieties can be used directly
as segmentation variables. Buyer segments can be identiﬁed in a similar
fashion, by examining all the buyers in the industry and probing for
structural or value chain differences among them. Since buyers vary in a
multiplicity of ways, experience has shown that a good starting point in
identifying buyer segments is to look for buyer differences along three


broad and observable dimensions: buyer type, buyer geographic location,
and distribution channel employed. Buyer type encompasses such things as
the buyer’s size, industry, strategy, or demographics.
While these three dimensions of buyers are often related, each has an
independent effect. Location can signiﬁcantly affect purchasing behavior
and the value chain required to serve a buyer even if all other buyer
characteristics are equal. Similarly, in many industries the same buyer is
reached through different channels, though the channel employed is often
related to buyer type (and also to product variety). For example, buyers of
electronic components purchase small, rush orders of chips from
distributors and purchase larger orders directly from manufacturers.
To segment an industry, then, four observable classes of segmentation
variables are used either individually or in combination to capture
differences among producers and buyers. In any given industry, any or all of
these variables can deﬁne strategically relevant segments:
•  Product variety. The discrete product varieties that are, or could be,
produced.
• Buyer type. The types of end buyers that purchase, or could purchase,
the industry’s products.
•  Channel (immediate buyer). The alternative distribution channels
employed or potentially employed to reach end buyers.
• Geographic buyer location. The geographic location of buyers, deﬁned
by locality, region, country, or group of countries.6
Identifying segmentation variables is perhaps the most creative part of
segmenting an industry, because it involves conceiving of dimensions along
which products and buyers differ that carry important structural or value
chain implications. This requires a clear understanding of industry structure
as well as the ﬁrm’s and the buyer’s value chain.
PRODUCT SEGMENTS
To identify product segments, all the physically distinct product types
produced or potentially produced by an industry should be isolated,
including ancillary services that could feasibly be offered separately from
the product. Replacement parts are also a distinct product variety. Groups or


bundles of products that can be sold together as a single package should
also be identiﬁed as a product variety, in addition to the items currently sold
separately.7 In the hospital management industry, for example, some ﬁrms
sell a complete management package at a single price, while others sell
individual services such as physician recruiting. The package should be
viewed as a separate product variety for purposes of segmentation.
Similarly, in industries where the product requires service, there are often
three product varieties—the product sold separately, service sold separately,
and the product and service sold together. In many industries, the list of
product varieties that results from going through such a process is quite
long.
Product varieties in an industry can differ in many ways that translate
into structural or value chain differences and hence segments. Some of the
most typical product differences that are good proxies for structural or value
chain differences that deﬁne segments are as follows, along with some
illustrative examples of why they reﬂect segments:
Physical size. Size is often a proxy for technological complexity or how
a product is used, both of which affect the possibilities for differentiation.
For example, different sized forklifts are typically used for different
applications. Size may also imply differences in the value chain required to
produce different varieties. Different sized varieties must often be
manufactured on different machines, and require different components. For
example, a miniature camera requires a different manufacturing process and
higher precision components than a standard camera.
Price level. The price level of product varieties is often associated with
buyer price sensitivity. Price also serves as a good proxy in some industries
for the design and nature of manufacturing or selling value activities.
Features. Product varieties with different features may be associated with
different levels of technological sophistication, different production
processes, and different suppliers.
Technology or design. Differences in technology (e.g., analog versus
digital watches) or design (front opening versus side opening valves) among


product varieties can involve different levels of technological complexity,
different production processes, and other factors.
Inputs employed. Sometimes product varieties differ signiﬁcantly in their
use of raw materials or other inputs (e.g., plastic versus metal parts). Such
differences often have implications for the manufacturing process or
supplier bargaining power.
Packaging. Varieties may differ in the way they are packaged and
subsequently delivered, such as in bulk versus bagged sugar or draft versus
canned beer. This translates into value chain differences in both the ﬁrm and
buyers.
Performance. Performance differences such as pressure rating, fuel
economy, and accuracy are related to the technology and design of product
varieties, 
and 
often 
reﬂect 
differences 
in 
R&D, 
manufacturing
sophistication, and testing.
New versus aftermarket or replacement. Replacement products often go
through entirely different downstream value chains than identical new
products, and may be different in other ways such as buyer price sensitivity,
switching costs, and required delivery time.
Product versus ancillary services or equipment. The distinction between
a product and ancillary products or services is often a key indicator of price
sensitivity, differentiability, switching costs, and the value chain required to
provide them.
Bundled versus unbundled. Selling various products as a package
(bundle) versus selling individual items (unbundle) can have implications
for mobility barriers, the ability to differentiate, and the value chain
required (see Chapter 12).
The product differences that are most meaningful for industry
segmentation are those that reﬂect the most important structural differences.
There are often a number of different product descriptors that are related.
Price level, technology, and performance may all be correlated, for


example, and reﬂect the same basic differences among products. If each
descriptor is measuring the same difference, the measure that most closely
measures or proxies the structural or value chain differences should be
chosen.
More than one product dimension may deﬁne relevant segments, and all
product differences that affect structure should be identiﬁed. The best
method for segmenting an industry in which there are multiple
segmentation variables will be discussed below. It is also important in
product segmentation to include product varieties that are feasible though
not currently being produced, such as service sold independently of the
product or a product variety with a new mix of features. Good examples are
cordless telephones and the “no name” food items now sold in grocery
stores.
BUYER SEGMENTS
To identify buyer segments, all the different types of end buyers to which
an industry sells must be examined for important structural or value chain
differences. In most industries, there are several ways in which buyers can
be classiﬁed. In consumer goods, for example, some key factors include
age, income, household size, and decision maker. In industrial, commercial,
or institutional products, buyer size, technological sophistication, and nature
of use for the product are among the factors that distinguish buyers.
There is an active debate among marketers about the best means of
segmenting buyers.8 In fact, no one variable can ever capture all the buyer
differences that might determine segments, particularly since differences
that affect the cost of serving buyers (and the value chain for doing so) are
often just as important for segmentation as differences in their purchasing
behavior. Buyer segmentation should reﬂect the underlying structural and
value chain differences among buyers rather than any single classiﬁcation
scheme, because the goal of segmentation is to expose all these differences.
Industrial and Commercial Buyers
Common factors which serve as proxies for structural or value chain
differences that distinguish buyer segments among industrial and


commercial buyers are as follows, along with some illustrative examples of
how they reﬂect segments:
BUYER INDUSTRY. The buyer’s industry is often a proxy for how a product
is used in the buyer’s value chain and what fraction of total purchases it
represents. For example, candy bar manufacturers buy and use chocolate
much differently than dairy product ﬁrms, who use less chocolate and have
less need for product quality. Differences such as these can affect factors
such as buyer price sensitivity, susceptibility to substitution, and the cost of
supplying the buyer.
BUYER’S STRATEGY (E.G., DIFFERENTIATION VERSUS COST LEADERSHIP). A
buyer’s competitive strategy is often an important indicator of how a
product is used and of price sensitivity, among other things. Strategy shapes
the buyer’s value chain and the role a product plays in it. For example, a
differentiated high-margin food processor is more concerned with
ingredient quality and consistency than a private label food manufacturer
that competes on cost.
TECHNOLOGICAL SOPHISTICATION. A buyer’s technological sophistication
can be an important indicator of its susceptibility to differentiation and
resulting price sensitivity. Major oil companies tend to be more
sophisticated buyers of oil ﬁeld services and equipment than independents,
for example.
OEM VERSUS USER. Original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) that
incorporate a product into their product and sell it to other ﬁrms often have
differing levels of price sensitivity and sophistication than ﬁrms that use the
product themselves.
VERTICAL INTEGRATION. Whether a buyer is partially integrated into the
product or into ancillary or related products (e.g., in-house service) can
greatly affect the buyer’s bargaining power and a ﬁrm’s ability to
differentiate itself.
DECISION-MAKING UNIT OR PURCHASING PROCESS. The particular individuals
involved in the decision-making process can have a major impact on the


sophistication of the purchase decision, the desired product attributes, and
price sensitivity. Many industrial products are purchased in complex
processes involving many individuals (see Chapter 4), and the procedures
often vary markedly even among buyers in the same industry. Some users of
electronic components purchase through trained and dedicated purchasing
agents, for example, and are much more price-sensitive than other
component buyers that employ engineers in purchasing or use purchasing
agents also responsible for purchasing other items.
SIZE. A buyer’s size can indicate its bargaining power, how it uses a
product, the purchasing procedures employed, and the value chain with
which it is best supplied. Sometimes order size is the relevant measure of
size, while in other industries it may be total annual purchases. In still other
cases company size may be the best determinant of bargaining power and
purchasing procedures.
OWNERSHIP. The ownership structure of a buyer ﬁrm may have a major
impact on its motivations. Private companies may value different product
characteristics than public companies, for example, while a division of a
diversiﬁed ﬁrm may be guided by purchasing practices determined by the
parent.
FINANCIAL STRENGTH. A buyer’s proﬁtability and ﬁnancial resources can
determine such things as its price sensitivity, need for credit, and frequency
of purchase.
ORDER PATTERN. Buyers can differ in their ordering pattern in ways that
affect buyer bargaining power or the value chain required to supply them.
Buyers that place regular and predictable orders, for example, may be much
less costly to serve than those whose orders come at erratic intervals. Some
buyers also typically have more seasonal or cyclical purchasing patterns
than others, affecting a ﬁrm’s pattern of capacity utilization.
Consumer Goods Buyers
Typical proxies of buyer differences that deﬁne segments among
consumer goods buyers are as follows, along with illustrative examples of


how they reﬂect segments:
DEMOGRAPHICS. Buyer demographics can be a proxy for the desired
product attributes, price sensitivity, and other use and signaling criteria. For
example, single persons have different needs and purchasing patterns for
frozen entrees than families with children. Many aspects of demographics
can be important, including family size, income, health, religion, sex,
nationality, occupation, age, presence of working females, social class, etc.
In banking, for example, wealth, annual income, and the education level of
household members all determine what banking services are purchased and
how price sensitive the buyer is.
PSYCHOGRAPHICS OR LIFESTYLE. Hard-to-measure factors such as lifestyle
or self-image can be important discriminators of purchasing behavior
among consumers. Jetsetters may value a product differently than equally
wealthy conservatives, for example.9
LANGUAGE. Language also may deﬁne segments. In the record industry,
for example, the Spanish speaking market worldwide is a relevant segment.
DECISION-MAKING UNIT OR PURCHASING PROCESS. The decision-making
process within the household can be important to desired product attributes
and price sensitivity. One spouse may be more interested in performance
features of a car, for example, while the other opts for comfort and
reliability.
PURCHASE OCCASION. Purchase occasion refers to such things as whether a
product is purchased as a gift or for the buyer’s own use, and whether the
product is to be part of a special event or used routinely. A buyer’s use and
signaling criteria are often very different depending on the occasion, even if
the buyer is the same person and the product is similar. Purchasers of pens
for gifts, for example, will favor recognized brands names such as Cross
that may carry less weight in purchasing for personal use.
Several buyer dimensions may be important in deﬁning buyer segments.
In oil ﬁeld equipment, for example, buyer size, technological sophistication,
and ownership are all relevant variables. In frozen entrees, household size,


age of family members, whether both parents are working, and income are
all relevant variables. Potential buyers of a product not currently purchasing
may also constitute segments. Buyer segmentation variables may also be
related and the task is to select the variables that best reﬂect structural and
value chain differences.
CHANNEL SEGMENTS
To identify segments based on channels, all existing and feasible
channels through which a product can or does reach buyers should be
identiﬁed. The channel employed usually has implications for how a ﬁrm
conﬁgures its value chain and the vertical linkages (Chapter 2) that are
present. The channel can also reﬂect factors which are important cost
drivers such as order size, shipment size, and lead time. Large orders of
electronic components are sold direct, for example, while small orders are
sold through distributors (often to the same buyers). Channels can also
differ greatly in bargaining power. Mass merchandisers such as Sears and
K-Mart have a great deal more power than independent department stores.
Typical differences in channels that deﬁne segments include:
Direct versus distributors. Selling direct removes the need to gain access
to channels and may imply a very different value chain than selling through
distributors.
Direct mail versus retail (or wholesale). Direct mail eliminates the
potential bargaining power of the intermediate channel. It also usually
carries implications for value activities such as the logistical system.
Distributors versus brokers. Brokers typically do not hold inventory and
may handle a different product line than distributors.
Types of distributors or retailers. Products may be sold through retailers
or distributors of very different types, which carry different assortments and
have different strategies and purchasing processes.
Exclusive versus nonexclusive outlets. Exclusivity may affect a channel’s
bargaining power and also the activities performed by the channel versus


those performed by the ﬁrm.
There are often several types of channels in an industry. In copiers, for
example, machines are sold direct as well as through copier distributors,
ofﬁce products distributors, and retailers. Channel segmentation must also
include any potential channel that might be feasible. For example, L’eggs
resegmented the hosiery market by discovering a new channel, the direct
sale of hosiery to supermarkets.
GEOGRAPHIC SEGMENTS
Geographic location can affect both buyer needs and the costs of serving
buyers. Geographic location may be important directly as a cost driver and
may also affect the value chain required to reach the buyer. Geographic
location also frequently serves as a proxy for desired product attributes due
to differences in weather, customs, government regulation, and the like. For
example, commercial roofs in the southern United States require less
insulation than in the North, while the rooﬁng membrane is more likely to
be ballasted with gravel in the North than in the South because a roof
designed to take a snow load can handle the extra weight.
Typical geographic segments are based on variables such as the
following:
Localities, regions or countries. Geographic areas may have differences
in such areas as transportation systems and regulations. Geographic buyer
location also plays a key role in deﬁning scale economies. Depending on
the geographic scope of scale economies (Chapter 3), different sized
geographic areas may be the relevant segments. In the residential rooﬁng
shingle industry, regions are the appropriate segments because high
logistical costs limit the effective radius of a plant. In food distribution,
metropolitan areas are the appropriate segments because of dense customer
location and use of trucks for local delivery.
Weather zones. Climatic conditions often have a strong impact on
product needs or on the value chain required to serve an area.


Country stage of development or other country groupings. Buyers
located in developing countries may have very different needs than those in
developed countries. In addition, packaging, logistical systems, marketing
systems, and many other aspects of the value chain may differ signiﬁcantly.
Similarly, other groupings of countries may expose similarities that deﬁne
segments.
The relevant measure of geographic location for segmentation purposes
will differ from industry to industry. In most cases, the relevant location to
use in segmentation is the location where a product is actually consumed or
used. However, sometimes the location to which a product is shipped (e.g.,
the warehouse) is more relevant. In other cases, the location of the buyer’s
headquarters or primary dwelling emerges as the most important
geographic segmentation variable, even though the buyer uses the product
somewhere else.
There can also be more than one meaningful geographic segmentation.
For example, regions may be meaningful segments for determining cost
position in industries where the costs of key value activities are driven by
regional scale, whereas countries may be meaningful segments for
determining desired product attributes and the ability to differentiate.
Finding New Segments
Some segmentation variables are readily apparent as a result of industry
convention or competitor behavior. There are often established norms for
dividing buyers or grouping geographic areas, based on historical data
collected by trade associations or government agencies. In the oil industry,
for example, the distinction between majors and independents is an
accepted segmentation. Traditional categorization schemes for product
varieties in an industry are also typical. Competitors may also deﬁne
apparent segments through their choice of focus strategies.
However, segmentation must go beyond conventional wisdom and
accepted classiﬁcation schemes. Correct industry segmentation should
reﬂect important differences for structure or the value chain among
products, buyers, channels, or geography, whether or not they are


recognized and used currently. The greatest opportunity for creating
competitive advantage often comes from new ways of segmenting, because
a ﬁrm can meet true buyer needs better than competitors or improve its
relative cost position.
In searching for potential new product segments, the following questions
can be usefully considered:
•  Are there other technologies or designs to perform the required
functions in the buyer’s value chain?
• Could additional functions be performed by an enhanced product?
•  By reducing the number of functions the product performs (and
possibly lowering the price), could the needs of some buyers be better
served?
• Are there different bundles (either narrower or broader) of products and
services that could be feasibly sold as a package?
Off-price retailers are an example of a new segmentation based on
reducing the number of functions the product performs. Firms such as
Loehmann’s eliminate costly services such as credit and returns while
selling through spartan outlets without extensive dressing rooms or sales
help. This stripped down value chain, without many traditional value
activities, has created an entirely new segment. A similar process is
occurring in the hotel/motel industry, where budget chains such as La
Quinta are selling rooms without other services such as restaurants and
bars, and other chains are combining services in new ways.
The possibility of employing new channels also frequently exists. Firms
can sell direct where the norm has been to use agents or distributors or
employ new types of distributors or retailers. Timex did this in watches, and
Avon did it in cosmetics. Any feasible channel is a potential segment.
In identifying new geographic and buyer segments, creativity is often
required in two areas. The ﬁrst is ﬁnding important new ways that
geography or buyers can be divided to reﬂect structural or value chain
differences. As discussed earlier, Stouffer’s discovered important
differences in purchase criteria for frozen entrees by isolating single
households and households with two working parents. The second area for
creativity in geographic or buyer segmentation is in identifying potential


new buyer types or geographic areas not presently being served by the
industry. Sometimes reaching a new buyer type or geographic area will
require product modiﬁcations, while in other cases it just requires that a
ﬁrm gain a better understanding of its buyers’ needs and potential new
applications for its product. For example, Arm & Hammer baking soda
found a large market in deodorizing refrigerators, and Johnson & Johnson
Baby Shampoo proved popular with adults. No product change was
required for reaching either new buyer group.
The Industry Segmentation Matrix
Having identiﬁed the relevant segmentation variables with structural or
value chain implications, the next task is to combine them into an overall
segmentation of the industry. The task is usually difﬁcult because there are
many relevant segmentation variables—in some industries there can be
dozens. The challenge is to distill these variables into the most meaningful
segments for developing competitive strategy.
The ﬁrst step in the distillation process is to apply a signiﬁcance test to
each segmentation variable. Only those variables with a truly signiﬁcant
impact on the sources of competitive advantage or industry structure should
be isolated for strategic analysis. Other less important, though still
meaningful, segmentation variables that are identiﬁed can be used for ﬁne
tuning in marketing or operations management.
The basic tool for translating the remaining variables into a segmentation
is the industry segmentation matrix. A simple segmentation matrix based on
two segmentation variables is shown in Figure 7–3, illustrating the oil ﬁeld
equipment industry in which the size of the buyer oil company and the stage
of development of the country in which the buyer is headquartered have
been identiﬁed as the two segmentation variables.
The ﬁrst practical problem in constructing a segmentation matrix is
choosing the number of categories of each segmentation variable to select.
In Figure 7–3 I have chosen three discrete categories of buyer size and two
categories of a country’s stage of development. In reality, buyer size is a
continuous variable and country development goes through many stages.
The way in which each segmentation variable is broken into discrete


categories should reﬂect the categories that capture the most signiﬁcant
structural or value chain differences, balanced against the practical need to
limit the number of segments to a manageable number. Deciding on the best
discrete categories for strategic purposes almost always requires judgment
and is an iterative process.
The cells in Figure 7–3 are the individual segments in the industry. It
may well be that some of the cells are presently unoccupied. In addition, if
there were no small independent oil companies based in developing
countries and not likely ever to be any, this segment would be a null cell.
For purposes of illustration, Figure 7–3 shows null cells involving both
large and small independents. Segments can often be eliminated from
consideration if they are null cells. However, it is important to remember
that null cells should be infeasible combinations of the segmentation
variables and not merely cells in which no ﬁrm is currently operating.
Feasible cells where no ﬁrm is operating represent a potential opportunity
and it is important that such segments be highlighted, not eliminated, in
segmentation.
Figure 7–3. A Simple Industry Segmentation Matrix for an Oil Field Equipment Industry
Figure 7–3 portrays a case where there are two relevant segmentation
variables. In practice, there may be many variables grouped under the four
broad categories of product, buyer type, channel, and geography. Looked at
closely, most industries are quite heterogeneous. With many signiﬁcant
segmentation variables, the number of segmentation matrices that could be
plotted multiplies rapidly. The problem, then, is to convert the segmentation
variables into a small number of segmentation matrices that will be most
illuminating for the strategy formulation process.


Relationships Among Segmentation Variables
To move from a number of segmentation variables to the most
meaningful segmentation matrices, the ﬁrst step is to probe the relationships
among the segmentation variables. The number of important segmentation
variables can be reduced by collapsing segmentation variables together that
are correlated, or which effectively measure the same thing. For example,
geographic location may be associated with a particular buyer type (e.g.,
automobile companies are located in the Midwest), or buyer type may be
closely related to channel (small rooﬁng contractors are all served through
distributors). Constructing a segmentation matrix with correlated
segmentation variables will produce a matrix in which many cells are null.
Segmentation variables that are highly correlated can be combined,
because one variable is a surrogate for the effect of the other. In less
extreme cases, the correlation among segmentation variables is partial, but
allows a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of possible segments because
many cells in the matrix are null. It is important to identify all the
relationships among the segmentation variables and use this to combine
variables together and identify null cells.
It is also important to understand why variables are related, because this
will often have important ramiﬁcations. If one variable is not a good
surrogate for another but rather a reﬂection of current ﬁrm behavior or
happenstance, combining variables is a mistake. It will obscure unoccupied
segments that may represent an unexploited opportunity. For example, if
small rooﬁng contractors were served through distributors not for economic
reasons but for historical reasons, then eliminating direct sale to small
contractors as a segment would be a mistake. Telemarketing or remote order
entry by salespersons with portable computer terminals might make the
segment feasible though it had not been previously.
Combining Segmentation Matrices
The signiﬁcant and independent segmentation variables that remain after
the process described above represent the potential axes for industry
segmentation matrices. Where there are more than two segmentation


variables, the industry segmentation matrix will no longer ﬁt on a two-
dimensional page. One way of proceeding is to construct a number of
different segmentation matrices for each pair of variables. Each of these
matrices can then be analyzed for its strategic implications. This approach is
not fully satisfactory, however, because meaningful segments may be the
result of combining more than two segmentation variables and may be
overlooked.
To deal with more than two segmentation variables, it is usually useful to
create combined segmentation matrices. The process is illustrated in Figure
7–4. In oil ﬁeld equipment there are at least two other relevant buyer
segmentation variables besides buyer type and geographic buyer location:
the technological sophistication of the oil company and its ownership. In
Figure 7–4, I have plotted the four variables in pairs and then combined the
two segmentations together after eliminating null cells.
The process of combining matrices not only reduces the number of
segments by eliminating some null cells, but also exposes correlations
among variables that may have been missed. In Figure 7–4, I have noted the
null cells representing infeasible combinations. Combining matrices is
usually best done by combining all segmentation variables within a
category ﬁrst. In Figure 7–4, for example, I have combined all the buyer
segmentation variables together.
After combining segmentation variables of the same broad category, one
proceeds to combine variables in different categories. In doing so, it is
usually best to create a segmentation matrix in which one axis reﬂects the
combined product segmentation variables and the other axis combines all
the buyer-related variables (buyer type, channel, geography). Where the
number of segmentation variables is manageable, it is possible using this
procedure to construct one two-dimensional industry segmentation matrix.
This matrix may be quite large, but has the advantage of displaying the
entire industry in a way that facilitates strategic analysis. Figure 7–5 shows
such a matrix for oil ﬁeld equipment, after adding to the segmentation two
product segmentation variables—premium versus standard quality products,
and products with ratings for deep versus shallow drilling.


Figure 7–4. Combined Segmentation Matrix for an Oil Field Equipment Industry


Figure 7–5. Illustrative Industry Segmentation Matrix for an Oil Field Equipment Industry


Sometimes the number of relevant segmentation variables and resulting
segments is so great as to make a single matrix unwieldy. The presence of a
very large overall segmentation matrix should prompt the reexamination of
the segmentation variables and the discrete categories of each to ensure that
the differences are truly signiﬁcant. Where this is the case, it may be
desirable to use two or three segmentation matrices in subsequent analysis
to avoid missing important strategic implications.
The industry segmentation matrix should contain potential segments and
not just segments that are currently occupied. Potential segments may imply
entirely new segmentation variables (e.g., channel is added because there is
the possibility that some direct sales may be possible in the future instead of
handling all sales through distributors) or new discrete categories of existing
variables (e.g., a new performance rating for an alloy).
A segmentation matrix is an analytical tool, not an end in itself. The
analyst should start with the longest list of segmentation variables to avoid
overlooking possibilities. Only over the course of the analysis are variables
combined or eliminated and the working segmentation matrix reﬁned. The
whole process usually involves trying a number of different segmentation
schemes in which the product and buyer differences that are most important
for industry structure are gradually exposed.
A segmentation matrix should be tested by examining the strategies of
competitors. If the scope of competitors’ activities is plotted on the matrix,
new segments or segmentation variables may be exposed. Conversely,
competitors’ activities may draw attention to segments that must inevitably
be served together. I will have more to say about this below when
interrelationships among segments are discussed. Figure 7–6 summarizes
the steps required in industry segmentation.


Figure 7–6. The Industry Segmentation Process
Industry Segmentation and Competitive Strategy
Industry segments differ in their attractiveness and the sources of
competitive advantage for competing in them. The key strategic questions
that arise out of segmentation are:
• where in the industry a ﬁrm should compete (segment scope)
• how its strategy should reﬂect this segmentation


A ﬁrm can adopt a broadly-targeted strategy that addresses many
segments, or exclusively address a small number of segments in a focus
strategy. A broadly-targeted ﬁrm must also be aware of the vulnerabilities it
faces because segments have structural differences, just as a focused ﬁrm
must recognize and deal with the threat of broadly-targeted ﬁrms competing
in its segment or segments together with others. Segmentation is also
dynamic and must change to reﬂect structural changes.
The Attractiveness of a Segment
The ﬁrst issue in deciding where to compete in an industry is the
attractiveness of the various segments. The attractiveness of a segment is a
function of its structural attractiveness, its size and growth, and the match
between a ﬁrm’s capabilities and the segment’s needs.
STRUCTURAL ATTRACTIVENESS
The structural attractiveness of a segment is a function of the strength of
the ﬁve competitive forces at the segment level. The analysis of the ﬁve
forces at the segment level is somewhat different than at the industry level.
In a segment, potential entrants include ﬁrms serving other segments, as
well as ﬁrms not presently in the industry. Substitutes for the product
variety in a segment are often other product varieties in the industry, as well
as products produced by other industries. Rivalry in a segment involves both
ﬁrms focusing exclusively on the segment and ﬁrms that serve other
segments well. Buyer and supplier power tend to be more segment-speciﬁc,
but may well be inﬂuenced by buyer purchases in other segments or
supplier sales to other segments. Thus the structural analysis of a segment is
usually inﬂuenced heavily by conditions in other segments, more so than
the structural analysis of an industry is affected by other industries.
The segments in an industry will often differ widely in structural
attractiveness. In large turbine generators, for example, the segment
consisting of large-capacity generators sold to large, privately-owned
utilities is structurally attractive. Large-capacity generators are very
sophisticated technologically and the scale and learning curve barriers to
developing and producing them are high. Large units also offer many more


opportunities for differentiation than smaller units. Greater thermal
efﬁciency of large units creates lower costs of use for buyers, reducing
buyer price sensitivity. Large utilities also tend to be more technologically
sophisticated buyers and appreciate more features, enhancing competitors’
ability to differentiate themselves. Large utilities also command the
ﬁnancial resources to be less price sensitive. Finally, the selling process to
private utilities involves secret negotiations rather than public bidding in
which the lowest qualiﬁed bid must be selected.
Analyzing the attractiveness of each segment is an important ﬁrst step in
deciding where to compete. As a test of the analysis, it is often quite
illuminating to compute a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability in the various segments in
which it competes and to compare this to both the structural analysis and
any industry proﬁtability data by segment that are available. Focused
competitors may provide data on the proﬁtability of the segments they
occupy, for example. Differences in proﬁtability by segment can be truly
striking. Existing segment proﬁtability is not necessarily an indication of
potential proﬁtability, however, because a ﬁrm may not be optimizing its
strategy for each segment or, for that matter, for any segment.
SEGMENT SIZE AND GROWTH
Segments will frequently differ in their absolute size and growth rate.
Size and growth will be important in their own right to the choice of where
to compete. Size and growth also have an impact on structural
attractiveness. The expected growth rate of each segment is important to
rivalry and to the threat of entry, while size may affect the attractiveness of
a segment to large competitors. Sometimes ﬁrms can sustain a position in
smaller segments because large ﬁrms are not interested in them.
Determining the size and expected growth of segments is typically not
easy. Data are hardly ever collected in ways that exactly match meaningful
segment boundaries, especially segments determined by demand and cost
considerations rather than industry convention. Hence a ﬁrm may need to
invest in special data collection or market research to produce estimates of
size and growth by segment.
FIRM POSITION VIS-À-VIS A SEGMENT


A ﬁrm’s resources and skills, reﬂected in its value chain, will usually be
better suited to some segments than others, inﬂuencing the attractiveness of
a segment for a particular ﬁrm. Each segment will have somewhat different
requirements for competitive advantage that are highlighted in constructing
the segmentation matrix. The tools described in Chapters 3 and 4 can be
used to determine a ﬁrm’s relative position for competing in various
segments and the possibilities for changing it.
Segment Interrelationships
Segments are often related in ways that have an important effect on the
segments in which a ﬁrm wants to compete. Segments are related where
activities in the value chain can be shared in competing in them—I call such
opportunities 
segment 
interrelationships. 
There 
are 
often 
many
opportunities to share value activities among segments. For example, the
same sales force can sell to different buyer types, or the same
manufacturing facilities can produce different product varieties.
Figures 7–7 and 7–8 illustrate a typical situation where interrelated value
chains serve two segments. Strongly related segments are those where the
shared value activities represent a signiﬁcant fraction of total cost or have
an important impact on differentiation. Segment interrelationships are
analogous to interrelationships among business units competing in related
industries. Segment interrelationships are within an industry, however,
while interrelationships among business units are between industries.10
Similarly, segment interrelationships are analogous to interrelationships
involved in competing in different geographic areas.
The analysis of interrelationships is treated in detail in Chapter 9, where
I focus on interrelationships among business units. The same concepts
apply here, and I will summarize them brieﬂy. Interrelationships among
segments are strategically important where the beneﬁts of sharing value
activities exceed the cost of sharing. Sharing value activities leads to the
greatest beneﬁt if the cost of a value activity is subject to signiﬁcant
economies of scale or learning, or sharing allows a ﬁrm to improve the
pattern of capacity utilization of the value activity. Economies of scale or
learning in a value activity imply that sharing across segments may yield a


cost advantage relative to single-segment competitors. Sharing activities
among segments is also beneﬁcial where it increases differentiation in the
value activity or lowers the cost of differentiation. Sharing a value activity
is most important to differentiation where the value activity has a signiﬁcant
impact on differentiation and sharing allows a signiﬁcant improvement in
uniqueness or a signiﬁcant reduction in the cost of providing it. The ﬁrm
with a shared service organization across segments, for example, will gain
an advantage over the single segment competitor if service is vital to
differentiation and sharing lowers the cost of hiring better service personnel.
Sharing a brand name across segments is also often a source of
differentiation.


Figure 7–7. Interrelated Value Chains for Different Segments
The beneﬁts of interrelationships among segments are offset by costs of
coordination, compromise, and inﬂexibility in jointly serving segments with
shared activities. Coordination costs simply reﬂect the greater complexity of
operating in multiple segments with shared value activities. Compromise
costs occur when the value chain designed to serve one segment is not
optimal in serving another segment, and serving both undermines a ﬁrm’s
ability to serve either. For example, the brand name, advertising, and image
appropriate to a premium product may be inconsistent with the needs of a


low-end product variety or vice versa. Here a ﬁrm has to create and
advertise two separate brand names if it wants to operate in both segments.
K. Hattori, for example, uses the Seiko name for higher-priced watches, and
the Pulsar name for medium-priced watches. Even then, retailers often tell
customers that a Pulsar is really a Seiko.


Figure 7–8. Segment Interrelationships Displayed on the Value Chain


A less extreme form of compromise cost is where the optimal value
chain for serving one segment is somewhat different from the optimal value
chain for serving another, but the same chain will serve both at some
penalty in cost or differentiation. For example, a sales force selling to two
buyer segments may not be as effective as a sales force specializing in one,
or a manufacturing process with the ﬂexibility to produce two product
varieties may not be as efﬁcient as one that is designed to produce one.
Segment spillover is a form of compromise that occurs when a ﬁrm tries
to serve multiple segments. Buyers in one segment may demand the same
terms as buyers in another. For example, the prices charged in one buyer
segment may spill over to other segments because buyers demand equal
treatment, a problem a single segment competitor does not have. Because
the bases for segmentation include differences in the optimal value chain,
the need to compromise in jointly serving segments is quite prevalent.
The need to compromise in jointly serving segments can partially or
completely nullify the ability of a ﬁrm to gain competitive advantage from
sharing value activities among segments. The ﬁrm is thus forced to trade the
cost of creating parallel value activities to serve different segments (e.g., a
separate production process or a different brand name) against the cost of
compromise. In extreme cases, the compromise required to serve multiple
segments goes beyond nullifying the advantages of sharing value activities
and creates disadvantages. Because of major inconsistencies in such areas
as brand image or production process, for example, competing in one
segment can make it very difﬁcult to operate in another segment even with a
completely separate value chain.
The ﬁnal cost of sharing activities among segments is the cost of
inﬂexibility. Sharing value activities limits the ﬂexibility of modifying
strategies in the different segments, and may create exit barriers in leaving a
segment. The cost of inﬂexibility, as well as the other costs of sharing, are
discussed extensively in Chapter 9.
The net competitive advantage of competing in multiple segments versus
focusing on one or a few is a function of the balance between the
advantages of sharing value activities and the costs. In most industries the
pattern of segment interrelationships is not symmetric. Some pairs of
segments have stronger interrelationships than others. A ﬁrm may also be
able to share some value activities across one group of segments and


another group of value activities across another, perhaps overlapping, group
of segments.
As a result of the pattern of segment interrelationships, ﬁrms often
cluster in the group of segments they serve. In copiers, for example, Xerox,
Kodak, and IBM have traditionally competed in high-volume copiers, while
Ricoh, Savin, Canon, Minolta, and several others have served the low-
volume convenience copiers. High-volume copiers are characterized by low
unit manufacturing volumes, direct sales forces, and different technological
issues than low-volume machines, which are mass-produced and sold
through distributors. Only through having what amounts to a separate
company (Fuji Xerox) has Xerox spanned the whole product range, while
Canon has had to broaden its line upward painstakingly through major
investments in the new value activities needed to compete in the high end.
This example illustrates the point that the greater the cost of sharing
activities among segments, the more the broadly-targeted ﬁrm is required to
create essentially separate value chains if it is to be successful. Yet separate
value chains negate the beneﬁts of broad targeting.
A good way to test a ﬁrm’s understanding of interrelationships among
segments is to plot competitors on the segmentation matrix (see Figure 7–
9). If all competitors in one segment also compete in another, chances are
good that strong interrelationships are present. By looking at the pattern of
competitors, 
one 
can 
often 
gain 
insight 
into 
the 
pattern 
of
interrelationships.11 However, competitors may well have failed to
recognize or exploit all segment interrelationships.


Figure 7–9. Competitor Positions on the Segmentation Matrix
Interrelationships among segments may suggest further collapsing of the
industry segmentation matrix. Segments with very strong interrelationships
can be combined if a ﬁrm cannot logically serve one without serving the
other. Once a ﬁrm has entered one such segment the barriers to entering the
adjacent segment are low. By examining interrelationships, therefore, an
industry segmentation matrix may be simpliﬁed for strategic purposes.
Segment Interrelationships and Broadly-Targeted Strategies
Interrelationships among segments provide the strategic logic for
broadly-targeted strategies that encompass multiple segments if they lead to
a net competitive advantage. Strong interrelationships among segments
deﬁne the cluster of segments a ﬁrm should serve. Strong interrelationships
will also deﬁne the logical paths of mobility of ﬁrms in the industry from
one segment to another. A ﬁrm competing in one segment will be most
likely to enter other segments where there are strong interrelationships.
The 
broadly-targeted 
competitor 
bets 
that 
the 
gains 
from
interrelationships among segments outweigh the costs of sharing, and
designs its strategy to strengthen the interrelationships and minimize the
coordination and compromise costs. Developments in manufacturing
technology are working today to lower the cost of compromise in serving
different product segments because of enhanced ﬂexibility to produce
different varieties in the same facility. These or other developments that
increase the ﬂexibility of value activities without a cost or differentiation
penalty will work toward the beneﬁt of broadly-targeted competitors.
A broadly-targeted competitor should usually not serve all industry
segments, however, because the beneﬁts of sharing value activities are
nearly always outweighed in some segments by the cost of compromise.
Serving all segments is also often not desirable because all segments are not
structurally attractive. A broadly-targeted ﬁrm may have to serve some
unattractive segments, however, because they contribute to the overall cost
or differentiation of shared value activities, or to defending its position in
structurally attractive segments. As will be discussed further in Chapter 14,
occupying some unattractive segments may prevent a competitor from


establishing beachheads in those segments from which it can build on
interrelationships into the ﬁrm’s segments. The gap left by U.S. automobile
ﬁrms in less proﬁtable small cars, for example, seems to have provided the
Japanese automakers with the opportunity to enter the U.S. market.
The Choice of Focus
Focus strategies rest on differences among segments, either differences in
the ﬁrm’s optimal value chain or differences in the buyer value chain that
lead to differing purchase criteria. The existence of costs of coordination,
compromise, or inﬂexibility in serving multiple segments is the strategic
underpinning of sustainable focus strategies. By optimizing its value chain
for only one or a few segments, the focuser achieves cost leadership or
differentiation in its segment or segments compared to more broadly-
targeted ﬁrms that must compromise. Focus strategies involve the entire
value chain and not just marketing activities, as in market segmentation.
Focus strategies can encompass more than one segment and encompass
several segments with strong interrelationships. However, the ability of a
ﬁrm to optimize for any segment is generally diminished by broadening the
target. Note that a ﬁrm can focus within an industry at the same time as it
achieves interrelationships with business units competing in other industries
that do not force it to compromise in serving the target segments. The
choice of competitive scope involves simultaneously understanding
interrelationships at both levels (see Chapter 15).
Firms can choose different groups of segments on which to focus, which
may or may not overlap. Figure 7–10 illustrates a case where a number of
ﬁrms are supplying information products to ﬁnancial services ﬁrms.
Company A has adopted a product-based focus strategy of supplying one
product variety (data bases) to all buyers. Company B, on the other hand,
has adopted a buyer-based focus strategy in which it sells the full array of
products to insurance companies. Company C has yet another focus strategy
which concentrates exclusively on providing consulting advice to ﬁnance
companies. Its buyers either acquire the data elsewhere or generate it
themselves. Company C’s focus strategy does not overlap with the segments
served by companies A and B.12


As noted above, focus strategies involving several segments rest on the
presence of strong interrelationships among the segments that outweigh the
suboptimization of serving more than one. For example, company A has
maximized interrelationships based on shared R&D and production of only
data bases, which offset the fact that each buyer type would ideally prefer a
somewhat different type of data base and perhaps a different delivery
system. Company B, on the other hand, has chosen a buyer-based focus
strategy that gains competitive advantage through optimizing its delivery
and selling system for insurance companies. Company C has opted for the
potential differentiation beneﬁts of offering only consulting to ﬁnance
companies and the internal beneﬁts of product specialization, while
forgoing potential scale economies of a broader focus. Thus each company
has built a focus strategy based on different interrelationships and different
competitive advantages, and each bears different costs of compromise.
Figure 7–10. Alternative Focus Strategies in a Financial Information Industry
Interesting competitive issues arise in segments where focus strategies
with different segment interrelationships overlap. In Figure 7–10 this occurs
in the upper left-hand segment in the matrix. In that segment, the different
focus strategies create competitive advantages and disadvantages of
different types for the two ﬁrms competing in the segment. Company A
brings extensive low-cost data bases and an acute understanding of data


base design, while Company B brings an in-depth understanding of
insurance companies and cost advantages from offering a full line. Just as
interrelationships can lead to competitive advantages, they can also make a
ﬁrm inﬂexible in competing in a segment. For example, company A could
not easily modify its data base management system to better respond to the
needs of insurance company buyers because of the effect this would have on
its activities with banking and ﬁnance companies. The relative position of
companies A and B in an overlapping segment is a function of net
competitive advantage of interrelationships with other segments.
Constraints in responding that arise from interrelationships can lead to a
competitive interaction in which ﬁrms try to shift competition in a segment
in the direction that best exploits their own segment interrelationships or
advantages, while forcing competitors to compromise theirs.
The Feasibility of New Segments to Focus On
The feasibility of a focus strategy in a segment depends on the size of a
segment and whether it will support the cost of a tailored value chain. Even
if a tailored value chain would be more responsive to the needs of a
particular new segment, the costs of the tailored chain may not be
recoupable. Thus many potential segments should not be served with focus
strategies.
There are four ways that new segments emerge as viable for focus
strategies. The ﬁrst is that tailoring gets less costly. Falling economies of
scale may allow a focus strategy, for example. The second reason focus on a
new segment becomes viable is that the segment grows enough to overcome
the ﬁxed cost of serving it. A third reason is that ﬁrms exploit
interrelationships with other industries to overcome scale thresholds in
serving the segment. Finally, a segment may become viable if a ﬁrm
pursues it globally, using volume in many countries to overcome scale
economies. Here the ﬁrm is pursuing geographic interrelationships.
Firms can preempt new focus strategies by perceiving new segmentation
schemes or by identifying opportunities to make new segments viable.
Recent reductions in scale economies have occurred in some technologies,
including computerized manufacturing and design. These, coupled with


enhanced ability to exploit interrelationships among business units (Chapter
9) and compete globally, will be continually creating opportunities for new
focus strategies in the 1980s.
The Sustainability of a Focus Strategy
I have discussed how a ﬁrm can choose a segment or small group of
segments on which to focus, based on the attractiveness of those segments
and the interrelationships among them. A ﬁnal issue in choosing a focus
strategy is the sustainability of the focus strategy against competitors. The
sustainability of a focus strategy is determined by three factors:
•  Sustainability against broadly-targeted competitors. The size and
sustainability of the competitive advantage created through focus vis-
à-vis more broadly-targeted competitors.
• Sustainability against imitators. The mobility barriers to imitating the
focus strategy or being outfocused by a competitor with an even
narrower target.
• Sustainability against segment substitution. The risk that buyers will be
drawn away to other segments the focuser does not serve.
SUSTAINABILITY AGAINST BROADLY-TARGETED COMPETITORS
Broadly-targeted competitors may either already compete in a focuser’s
segment or be potential entrants to the segment as an extension of their
existing base in other segments. The focuser’s competitive advantage over a
more broadly-targeted competitor is a function of:
•  the degree of compromise a broadly-targeted competitor faces in
serving the focuser’s segments and other segments at the same time
•  the competitive advantage of sharing value activities with other
segments in which the broadly-targeted competitor operates
The more different the focuser’s value chain is from the value chain
required to serve other segments, the more sustainable is the focus strategy.
In the airconditioning industry in the United States and Europe, for


example, the distribution channels that serve the residential and commercial
market are separate from those that serve the industrial market. In Latin
America, Asia, and the Middle East, however, the same channels tend to
stock the whole line. A focus strategy has been much more successful and
sustainable in the United States and Europe than in other parts of the world,
because focusers can tailor the value chain to the channel that specializes in
their target segment. The focus strategy is more sustainable as buyer needs
in the target segment are more different and unusual vis-à-vis other
segments.
The problems of Royal Crown in the soft drink industry illustrate these
principles. Royal Crown focuses on colas, unlike Coke and Pepsi, which
supply a broader line of soft drink ﬂavors. Supplying only colas does not
involve a signiﬁcantly different value chain than supplying a broad line.
Buyer needs and purchasing behavior are not much different for colas than
for other ﬂavors except for the ﬂavor preference. Conversely, supplying a
broad line allows signiﬁcant beneﬁts of sharing activities in production,
distribution, and marketing. Hence Royal Crown’s focus strategy leads to no
competitive advantage against its broadly-targeted competitors, only
disadvantages. On the other hand, Mercedes gains strong advantages
through focus in automobiles by using a tailored value chain compared to
its broad-line competitors.
Mead’s strategic evolution in the paper container industry illustrates how
the factors underlying the sustainability of a focus strategy can change. In
response to intense cost competition in high volume containers in the late
1970’s, Mead chose a focus strategy targeted at low volume, high value-
added segments. In the early 1980’s, however, new continuous-run paper
corrugators were developed that operated faster but at the same time
required much less setup time. This made it increasingly possible for broad
line competitors to service small orders economically. Mead was forced to
modify its focus strategy and serve a broader range of segments while
investing in the new equipment. In this case, the value chain required to
serve Mead’s target segments became less different from that required to
efﬁciently serve the high volume segments.
The sustainability of a focus strategy will erode if a segment’s
differences from others fall over time, if technological change reduces the
cost of compromise in serving multiple segments or increases the ability to


reap interrelationships (see Chapter 9), or if a tailored value chain for the
segment becomes too expensive relative to a more standardized chain.
Hence there is an important dynamic element in choosing the segments on
which to focus, reﬂecting an ongoing tradeoff between the advantages of
focus on a particular segment and the gains of sharing through competing in
multiple segments.
SUSTAINABILITY AGAINST IMITATORS
The second type of risk facing a focuser is that another ﬁrm will choose
to replicate the focus strategy, either a ﬁrm new to the industry or one
dissatisﬁed with its existing strategy. The sustainability of a focus strategy
against imitators is based on the sustainability of the competitive advantage
a focuser possesses, analyzed using the concepts in Chapters 3 and 4. The
mobility barriers to imitating a focus strategy are the scale economies,
differentiation, channel loyalty, and/or other barriers unique to the focus
strategy. The height of the barriers against imitation of a focus strategy thus
depends on the structure of the particular segment. Imitating Kodak’s high-
end focus in copiers, for example, requires that a ﬁrm overcome barriers
due to proprietary technology as well as economies of scale in establishing
an in-house sales and service network.
The size of a segment can affect the threat of imitation of a focus
strategy. In a small segment, even modest scale economies may be
signiﬁcant relative to segment size if they cannot be offset by
interrelationships, and competitors may not be interested in entering.
Conversely, in a growing industry there is the continual possibility not only
that a focus strategy will be imitated but also that a focuser will be
“outfocused” as ever-narrower segments become viable. In the rapidly
growing information industry, for example, outfocusing is pervasive as
ﬁrms develop ever more specialized data bases for narrower target buyer
groups.
SUSTAINABILITY AGAINST SEGMENT SUBSTITUTION
The ﬁnal determinant of the sustainability of a focus strategy is the risk
of segment substitution. A focus strategy concentrating on a segment is


vulnerable to the disappearance of that segment. This may be the result of
changes in the environment, technology, or competitor behavior. The risk of
segment substitution is analyzed in the same way as substitution in general
(see Chapter 8). Segment substitution can be inﬂuenced by competitors just
as industry-level substitution can—if anything, even more so. Competitors
often attempt to shift demand away from a focuser’s segments through
techniques such as marketing, technological innovation, or even lobbying
for government standards that worsen conditions in the segment. Where a
focuser faces competitors serving much larger segments, there is a risk that
their advertising spending and other marketing may shape buyer attitudes
and lead buyers away from the focuser’s segment.
Pitfalls and Opportunities for Focusers and Broadly-Targeted Competitors
Several important lessons emerge from this analysis both for focusers
and for broadly-targeted competitors:
Successful focus strategies must involve compromise costs for
competitors. Focusing on a segment or group of segments is not sufﬁcient to
achieve competitive advantage in and of itself. The chosen segments must
involve buyers with different needs, or require a value chain that differs
from that which serves other segments. It is differences between the
focuser’s segment and other segments that lead to suboptimization by
broadly-targeted competitors, and provide the source of a sustainable
competitive advantage for the focuser.
Identifying a new way of segmenting an industry can be a major
opportunity. A properly constructed industry segmentation matrix will often
expose segments that are not reﬂected in the behavior of existing
competitors. By identifying a new way of segmenting the industry, a ﬁrm
can often design a focus strategy around a product variety, buyer group,
channel, or geographic subdivision that has not previously been recognized
as a segment but that has structural or value chain differences. New
segments can be narrower or broader than segments currently recognized.
Its differences imply that the new segment needs a distinctive strategy and


value chain, and that competitors serving it together with other segments
will be suboptimizing.
The ﬁrm that recognizes a meaningful new segmentation ﬁrst can often
gain a sustainable competitive advantage preemptively. Federal Express, for
example, saw the small parcel requiring overnight delivery as a segment
that no ﬁrm had focused on before. Federal Express designed a strategy
around this segment involving a reconﬁgured value chain, and gained
enormous advantages over competitors who were serving it as part of
broader strategies. Similarly, Century 21 was ﬁrst to recognize a broader
nationwide segment in real estate brokerage.
Broad targeting does not necessarily lead to competitive advantage
where there are industry segments. A broadly-targeted competitor must gain
sustainable competitive advantage from competing in multiple segments if
it is to enjoy above-average returns. These competitive advantages usually
come from the interrelationships among segments. A cost leadership
strategy rests on achieving a low-cost position through the scale and other
advantages of competing in many segments. A differentiation strategy is
based on achieving uniqueness in meeting use or signaling criteria that are
widely valued by many segments. Without some tangible competitive
advantage from breadth, the structural differences among segments will
usually guarantee that a broadly-targeted competitor will be “stuck in the
middle.”
Broadly-targeted ﬁrms often serve too many segments. A ﬁrm aiming at
an overly broad strategic target runs the risk of suboptimization, increasing
its vulnerability to focusers. Reducing the number of segments served may
decrease vulnerability, as well as increase proﬁtability through eliminating
unattractive segments. A broadly-targeted ﬁrm should consider dropping
out of segments where:
• it gains little advantages from interrelationships with other segments
• it is forced to modify its entire strategy in order to serve the segment
• the segment is structurally unattractive
• sales and growth potential in the segment is limited


•  defensive considerations do not require presence in the segment to
block competitors
The relevant segments and breadth of target must be continually
examined. The strategically meaningful segments in an industry will evolve
over time due to shifts in buyer behavior, the emergence of new buyer
groups, and technology that alters segment interrelationships. Thus the
choice competitive scope within an industry must be continually
reexamined. A ﬁrm cannot automatically accept a historically important
segmentation as meaningful, despite the fact that old segmentations have a
tendency to fade slowly from managers’ minds. Viewing the choice of
segments served as a permanent decision will inevitably bring strategic
disaster.
New technology is changing old assumptions about segmentation. New
technology, particularly microelectronics and information systems, is
creating opportunities for both new focus and new broadly-targeted
strategies. Flexibility in manufacturing, logistics, and other value activities
is making it possible for broadly-targeted ﬁrms to tailor activities to
segments while maintaining a single value chain. This is reducing
opportunities for sustainable focus in some industries. At the same time, the
same technological revolution is making strategies tailored to new segments
viable. Computer-aided design, for example, is lowering the design cost of
new product varieties. Firms must pay particular attention to how the new
technologies might shake up the traditional logic of focus or broad targeting
in their industries.
Industry Segmentation and Industry Deﬁnition
Drawing industry boundaries is always a matter of degree. Structural and
value chain differences among product varieties and buyers work towards a
narrower industry deﬁnition. Industry segmentation is thus a tool to probe
for narrower industry deﬁnitions by exposing structural heterogeneity
within an industry. Interrelationships among segments and business units
(Chapter 9) create possibilities for broader industry deﬁnitions.


A useful working industry deﬁnition should encompass all segments for
which segment interrelationships are very strong. Segments where
interrelationships with other segments are weak may sometimes be separate
industries from a strategic viewpoint. Related industries linked by strong
interrelationships may in strategic terms be a single industry.
Where one actually chooses to draw industry boundaries is not so
essential as long as both segmentation and strategic interrelationships are
examined as part of structural analysis. Such an analysis will expose all the
key determinants of competitive advantage that derive from competitive
scope.


8
Substitution
All industries face the threat of substitution. Substitution is the process by
which one product or service supplants another in performing a particular
function or functions for a buyer. The analysis of substitution applies
equally to products and processes, because the same principles govern a
buyer’s choice to do something in a new way anywhere in its value chain.
Substitution is one of the ﬁve competitive forces determining the
proﬁtability of an industry, because the threat of substitution places a
ceiling on industry prices. At the same time, substitution plays a prominent
role in determining industry and a ﬁrm’s demand. Penetration against
substitutes is a major reason why industries and ﬁrms grow, and the
emergence of substitutes is a major reason why they decline. Substitution is
also inextricably tied to a ﬁrm’s competitive scope within an industry,
because it widens or narrows the range of segments in an industry.
How can a ﬁrm best defend against a substitute? What is the best
strategy for promoting substitution if the ﬁrm is on the offensive? These are
important questions in competitive strategy in many industries. This chapter
will present a framework for analyzing substitution and answering those
questions. I will ﬁrst consider how to identify substitutes, an essential but
often subtle step in substitution analysis. Next I will describe the economics
of substitution, which deﬁne the threat of a substitute and provide the
underpinnings of any strategic moves intended to inﬂuence it. I will then
outline how the threat of substitution changes over time. With this as a
background, the factors that inﬂuence the path of substitution will be
identiﬁed. Substitution proceeds in some characteristic ways over time,
