# Chapter 8: Substitution

which are important to recognize both in assessing the extent of the threat
and in forecasting the penetration of a substitute. Finally, I will describe the
strategic implications of the framework for both offensive and defensive
strategy towards substitutes. The discussion is framed in terms of
substitution at the industry level (e.g., carbon ﬁber substituting for titanium
and aluminum), but the same basic principles apply to the substitution of
one product form for another.
Identifying Substitutes
The ﬁrst step in substitution analysis is to identify the substitutes an
industry faces. This seemingly straightforward task is often not easy in
practice. Identifying substitutes requires searching for products or services
that perform the same generic function or functions as an industry’s
product, rather than products that have the same form. A truck differs
greatly from a train, but they both perform the same generic function for the
buyer—point-to-point freight transportation.1
The function a product performs depends on its role in the buyer’s value
chain. A product is used by the buyer in performing some activity or
activities—a truck or a train is used in inbound or outbound logistics, for
example, while skis are used as part of a buyer’s recreation in winter. As
discussed in Chapter 4, a product often affects not only the buyer value
activity in which it is used but also many other activities. A component used
in a product passes through inbound logistics, is held in inventory before it
is used, and must be serviced in the ﬁeld after sale, for example. Similarly,
baby diapers are not only worn by the baby but also must be put on by the
parent, laundered if they are reuseable, and purchased and stored. All the
impacts of a product on the buyer are relevant in deﬁning substitutes and
their relative performance. Finally, the value activity in which a product is
used may be connected to other activities through linkages. The precision of
a part can inﬂuence the need for product adjustment and for after-sale
servicing, for example. Linkages affecting a product can also inﬂuence
substitution, because they often create possibilities for discovering new
ways to combine activities.


In the simplest form of substitution, one product substitutes for another
in performing the same function in the same buyer value activity. This is the
case of a ceramic engine part substituting for a metal engine part. Though
the substitution is direct, linkages can still exist. A ceramic part may require
different handling, for example. Even in simple substitutions, it is also
important to deﬁne the function of a product in the activity generically
rather than literally—what the product does rather than how it does it. The
generic function of a product is often very broad, particularly in consumer
goods. A manufacturer of metal downhill skis faces substitution not only
from epoxy or ﬁberglass skis but also from cross-country skis, other winter
sports equipment, other leisure products that can be used in winter, and
from the buyer taking more leisure time in the summer rather than winter.
The generic function of metal skis, most broadly deﬁned, is recreation. The
more generically the function of an industry’s product is expressed, the
greater the number of potential substitutes there usually are.
In the more complex forms of substitution, a substitute performs a
different range of functions than an industry’s product and/or affects buyer
activities in a different way. In the case of a truck substituting for a train, for
example, loading, unloading, packaging, and shipment size may all be
different though both perform the same transportation function. A substitute
may also perform a wider or narrower range of functions than an industry’s
product. For example, a word processor is not only a substitute for the
functions of a typewriter but also for other functions such as calculating and
small-quantity copying; a heat pump performs both heating and cooling,
while a conventional boiler system can be used only for heating; a
disposable diaper removes the need for laundering. Conversely, a wafﬂe
maker performs fewer functions than a toaster oven, and a specialty retailer
sells only one line of goods that are a subset of the product assortment of a
department store. In identifying substitutes, then, it is necessary to include
products that can perform functions in addition to those of an industry’s
product, as well as products that can perform any signiﬁcant function
among those the industry’s product can perform.
Because a substitute can perform a wider or narrower range of functions,
chains of substitution for a product can go in very different directions. For
example, the functions of a racetrack include both gambling and
entertainment. Substitutes for the gambling function include casinos, off-


track betting, and bookies, while substitutes for the entertainment function
are even more numerous and include movies, books, sporting events, and so
on. The more functions a product performs in the buyer’s value chain, the
greater the number of chains of substitutes.
While one usually thinks of substitutes only in terms of different
products, in many industries there are at least four other options that must
be considered as substitutes in a broad sense. One option is that the buyer
does not purchase anything at all to perform the function, the most extreme
form of a substitute with a narrower range of functions. In water meters, for
example, the primary substitute is not to meter water usage at all. Similarly,
the leading U.S. salt producer, Morton-Norwich, is being threatened by
concern over the health effects of sodium that has reduced consumption.
A second potential substitute is to lower the usage rate of the product
required to perform the function. In aluminum, for example, new beverage
cans require thinner walls and hence less aluminum. Similarly, in offshore
drilling rigs, new directional drilling techniques and down-hole
measurement of the drilling process promise to reduce the amount of rig
time required to drill.
A third substitute that is often overlooked is used, recycled, or
reconditioned products. In aluminum, for example, perhaps the most
threatening substitute facing primary aluminum producers is secondary
(recycled) aluminum. Secondary consumption has grown rapidly in both the
United States and Japan. Used products are important substitutes for new
products in many industries producing durable goods, such as automobiles
and recreational vehicles. Reconditioned products are an important
substitute in aircraft engine components, where remachined and recoated
engine parts are a threat to new spare parts.
A ﬁnal potential substitute is for the buyer to perform the function
internally, or backward integration. For example, the key substitute for
many distribution industries is for the buyer to purchase directly from the
manufacturer and perform the distribution function internally. Or in
property and casualty insurance, a buyer can self-insure or establish a
captive insurance subsidiary.
The relevant substitutes will differ by industry segment (Chapter 7).
Different buyers use a product in different ways and hence value its
functions differently. At a racetrack, for example, some buyers will come to


enjoy the spectacle and an evening with friends, while others will spend
most of their time at the betting windows or consulting tip sheets. Thus the
relevant substitutes will differ by buyer or buyer segment. Similarly,
different product varieties are used differently and hence may face different
substitutes. Thus the pattern of substitutes changes by industry segment,
and a ﬁrm’s most threatening substitutes will be a function of what
segments it actually serves.
Several substitutions can occur simultaneously. In the video game
industry, for example, programmable video games with replaceable
software cartridges are substituting for dedicated games that cannot be
changed, at the same time that personal computers (on which game
programs can be run) are substituting for programmable games. Multiple
substitutions often involve the broadening or narrowing of product
functions, as this example illustrates.
Multiple substitutions interact in shaping the overall substitution rate in
an industry and may lead to counterintuitive consequences. Aspartame is a
new artiﬁcial low calorie sweetener, for example, that is substituting for
saccharin. Both aspartame and saccharin are substituting for sugar. The
success of aspartame is expected by some observers to increase rather than
decrease the demand for saccharin for a time, by expanding the overall
market for artiﬁcial sweeteners faster than it substitutes for saccharin. Here
the later substitute beneﬁts an earlier substitute. The process can also work
in reverse. The success or failure of the ﬁrst substitute can make it harder
(or easier) for the next one.
Even if an industry faces no direct substitutes, it may still be affected by
substitution if there is the threat of substitution downstream if the buyer’s
product faces substitutes. For example, diesel engines and gasoline engines
are contending substitutes for use in medium-sized trucks, diesel engines
having long replaced gasoline engines in heavy trucks. If diesel engines win
out, the demand for gasoline engine parts will fall, even though the parts
themselves face no substitutes directly. Downstream substitution can also
occur when the buyer’s product depends on the sale of a complementary
product that is threatened. If microwave ovens replace conventional ovens,
for example, not only will the manufacturers of parts for conventional ovens
be adversely affected but so will the manufacturers of cookware used in


conventional ovens. In downstream substitution, the buyer no longer needs
to perform the function of the ﬁrm’s product.
Downstream substitution can both lower industry demand, and can alter
buyer behavior. A threat of downstream substitution will often be
transmitted to suppliers in the form of greater price sensitivity. It may also
lead buyers to look for help from their suppliers in meeting the threat
through innovations in suppliers’ products or other actions that raise the
buyer’s differentiation or lower the buyer’s cost.
The number of substitutes for an industry’s product will vary widely
from industry to industry. Potential substitutes will differ in how they
replace a product and in the level of threat they represent. It is important in
substitution analysis to begin with the longest list of potential substitutes,
because ﬁrms are much more prone to be blindsided by a substitute than to
take a particular substitute too seriously.
The Economics of Substitution
One product substitutes for another if it offers buyers an inducement to
switch that exceeds the cost or overcomes the resistance to doing so. A
substitute offers an inducement to switch if the substitute provides the buyer
with more value relative to its price than the product currently being used.
There is always some cost of switching to a substitute because of the
disruption and potential reconﬁguration of buyer activities that must result,
however. The threat of a substitute will vary depending on the size of the
inducement relative to the required switching costs.
In addition to relative value to price and switching cost, the pattern of
substitution is inﬂuenced by what I term the buyer’s propensity to switch.
Faced with equivalent economic inducements for substitution, different
buyers will often evaluate substitution differently.
The threat of substitution, then, is a function of three factors:
•  the relative value/price of a substitute compared to an industry’s
product
• the cost of switching to the substitute
• the buyer’s propensity to switch


This simple statement of the economics of substitution masks the often
subtle analysis required to understand it. The inducement a substitute offers
to switch is properly measured over the entire period the buyer will use it,
and discounted to the present. The cost of switching to a substitute is
typically incurred immediately or even before the substitute provides any
beneﬁts at all. Both relative value/price (RVP) and the costs of switching
are functions of a wide variety of factors, and are subject to change over
time. Both can also involve considerable uncertainty. Understanding both
requires a clear understanding of how a product affects the buyer’s value
chain, as well as the structure of the industry producing the substitute.
Understanding the buyer’s propensity to switch requires a further
knowledge of the buyer’s competitive circumstances, resources, and other
characteristics that play a part in predicting its behavior towards a
substitute.
Relative Value/Price
The value/price of a substitute is the value it provides to the buyer
compared to the price the buyer pays for it. Relative value/price is the
value/price of a substitute relative to the value/price of the product it seeks
to replace (which I term the product). When there are no switching costs
and the product is consumed quickly, the relevant RVP is solely a function
of current conditions. Future circumstances are not important because the
buyer can rapidly and without cost shift back and forth between the
substitute and the product depending on the RVP at the time. When there
are costs of switching or the product is durable, however, the relevant
measure of the attractiveness of a substitute is the expected RVP of the
substitute over the planning horizon.
The current prices of a substitute and a product are relatively easy to
determine. The expected relative prices over the planning horizon are what
should enter the RVP calculation, and must reﬂect the price changes
forecasted over time. The purchase prices of both a substitute and a product
must be adjusted for any discounts, rebates, or free ancillary products or
services involved in their purchase. In ofﬁce equipment, for example, free
service is often part of the deal with a buyer, and must be included in


comparing the prices of substitutes such as copiers and offset duplicators.
Prices must be also adjusted for any tax credits the buyer gains in purchase.
The relative value of a substitute is based on exactly the same factors that
determine differentiation, discussed in Chapter 4. A substitute is valuable if
it lowers buyer cost or improves buyer performance relative to the product.
This value must be perceived by the buyer, however, and hence a
substitute’s ability to signal value relative to the product is part of the value
comparison. As with relative price, it is the expected relative value of the
substitute over its period of use that enters into RVP, not just its current
value.
The role of signaling in substitution is often as or more important than its
role in differentiation. Substitution frequently involves a new product
replacing a well established one. The substitute is typically unproven and its
value may be quite uncertain, while the established product is proven and its
qualities are well known. The ability of the substitute to signal value may,
as a result, take on a signiﬁcance that exceeds the role of signaling in
differentiation.
The relative value of a substitute depends on its cumulative impact on
the buyer’s value chain compared to the product’s, including both direct and
indirect impacts. The principles of the analysis are the same as described in
Chapter 4, though in practice there tend to be greater complexities in the
analysis in substitution not usually present when comparing one brand of a
product to another. A substitute and a product are often not directly
comparable, and a substitute is more likely to involve a different pattern of
impacts on the buyer’s value chain than a competing brand. Two brands of
cloth diapers have essentially the same impact on the household, for
example, while disposable diapers are used very differently than cloth
diapers. The differing patterns of use of a substitute and a product typically
necessitate adjustments in order to determine the relative value of a
substitute.
The following adjustments in measuring impact on buyer cost or buyer
performance are commonly necessary when comparing the value of a
substitute with the value of a product:
Usage Rate. The effect of a substitute on a buyer’s cost depends on the
amount of the substitute necessary to perform the same function. A


substitute can lower buyer cost if less usage of it is required for a given
result. For example, aspartame is much sweeter than saccharin, which
means that less is necessary to achieve a comparable sweetening effect.
Aspartame’s much higher price per pound must thus be adjusted
accordingly. The usage of a substitute required for a given outcome will be
affected by such factors as its purity, concentration, reject rate, or operating
speed.
Delivered and Installed Cost. The effect of a substitute on buyer cost
depends on the delivered and installed cost of the substitute relative to the
product. Delivered and installed cost may include such factors as the cost of
transportation, installation, calibration, expanding or modifying space to
house the substitute, and many other costs that frequently differ for a
substitute and the product.
Financing Cost. The effect of a substitute on buyer cost depends on the
cost of ﬁnancing the purchase of the substitute relative to the product. In
comparing mobile homes and conventional houses, for example, it is
important to recognize that mobile homes are ﬁnanced as vehicles while
conventional houses are ﬁnanced as real estate. Interest rates and/or terms
differ for these different types of ﬁnancing, generally in the form of easier
credit availability but higher rates for ﬁnancing mobile homes. Financing
costs can be a large fraction of total cost in some industries.
Relative Variability of Price or Availability. The cost of a substitute to
the buyer is a function of expected ﬂuctuations in its price or availability (of
both the product and ancillary items such as parts or service). Price
ﬂuctuations are often costly for a buyer to deal with, as are periods of tight
supply. One of the potential beneﬁts of ceramics, for example, is that it uses
a plentiful and cheap raw material while metal parts are subject to greater
price ﬂuctuations because of changing metal prices. Both price ﬂuctuations
and the risk of nonavailability are partly a function of how many credible
sources there are for a substitute relative to the product.
The cost of a substitute to the buyer is also affected by whether adequate
capacity is present to serve key buyers’ needs, particularly in the case of
important inputs. Buyers are often unwilling to switch until enough capacity


and suppliers are available to place the buyer in a tenable bargaining
position. This creates the need in many substitutions to add capacity ahead
of demand.
Direct Costs of Use. The effect of a substitute on buyer cost depends not
only on its initial cost, but also on the present value of the cost of using the
substitute over its entire life compared to that product. Direct costs of use
involve such things as:
• cost of labor (reﬂecting the quality of labor necessary)
• consumables such as materials, fuel, or ﬁlters
• insurance
• time before replacement
• frequency and cost of maintenance
• cost of spare parts
• breakdown time (valued at its opportunity cost or the cost of reserve
capacity)
• costs of maintaining the space required
• salvage value
• dismantling cost
In consumer goods, the cost of labor to use the substitute is the implicit
cost of the buyer’s time. In frozen entrees, for example, a major beneﬁt to
the buyer is time savings in preparation compared to most other meal types.
Valuing a consumer’s time is often difﬁcult because it does not involve a
money cost, though the techniques described in Chapter 4 provide a place to
start.
In many industries, such as elevators and aircraft engines, the costs of
using a substitute over its life are equal or are greater than the initial
purchase price, and can be decisive in determining its attractiveness. For
example, radial truck tires get approximately 25 percent more mileage than
bias ply tires. Radials also have lower downtime from punctures, and can be
retreaded twice compared to once for bias ply tires. Radials also improve
the fuel efﬁciency of a truck on the order of 2 to 6 percent. These
improvements in cost of use more than offset the 40 to 50 percent price
premium for radial truck tires.


Indirect Costs of Use. The relative cost of use of a substitute must reﬂect
costs throughout the buyer’s value chain, and not just costs in the value
activity in which a substitute is directly employed. Such indirect or system
impacts are often overlooked by both ﬁrms and buyers. An automated
material handling conveyor, for example, can reduce the number and
required skill levels of workers on the assembly line, the number of lift
trucks needed in the factory, and the required strength of shipping
containers compared to conventional materials handling methods. Similarly,
disposable diapers eliminate the need for storage and laundering of soiled
diapers in addition to making diapering the baby easier because of attached
fastening tapes and a form-ﬁtting shape. Another example is the electronic
cash register, which can help a retailer to lower required inventory and to
control operating costs better than a mechanical cash register that cannot
generate extensive on-line transactions data.
A substitute may affect the cost of other activities in the buyer’s value
chain if it:
• affects productivity in other value activities
• inﬂuences the need for other raw materials or their required quality
• requires different ancillary equipment
• affects the need for inventory
• affects the frequency and complexity of required quality control checks
• affects the amount and type of packaging materials needed in shipping
• affects product weight and hence transport costs
Buyer Performance. The value of a substitute must reﬂect any
differences in its impact on the buyer’s performance relative to the product.
An electronic switching system for telecommunications can be more easily
adapted to new requirements than an electromechanical switch, for
example. A color TV provides more realistic pictures than a black and
white set and therefore greater entertainment. Another example of a
substitution based heavily on improving buyer performance is disposable
diapers. Disposable diapers offer greater cleanliness than cloth diapers and
are softer and less likely to cause diaper rash. As is often true in
differentiation, the performance of a substitute from the buyer’s perspective
may involve intangibles such as perceived status and the quality of personal


relationships. The effect of a substitute on buyer performance is not always
easy to measure, though it always can be estimated.
The substitution of robotics for a conventional manned machine tool
provides an example of a complex substitution that involves direct cost of
use effects, indirect cost of use effects, and effects on buyer performance. A
robot reduces labor cost by increasing capital cost, and may increase the
output rate of the production step in which it is employed. Robots can also
save raw material cost and do not take sick leave, though they must be
maintained. Indirectly, robots can alter the material preparation needed in
previous production steps as well as material handling needs. Potential
performance effects of robots include higher reliability, greater ﬂexibility,
and higher workplace safety.
Number of Functions. The effect of a substitute on buyer cost and
performance must be adjusted for the range of functions it can perform
relative to the product. Wider functionality usually improves the relative
value of a substitute if buyers value the additional functions. This is not
always the case, however, since wider functionality may come at the
expense of the quality of performance of particular key functions. For
example, personal computers that play video games have many more
functions than video game machines, but video game machines are still
easier to use and the games playable on them have better quality graphics.
Lower functionality usually reduces the value of the substitute but this can
be offset by the corresponding reduction in price or superior performance of
the narrower range of functions. Changing functionality can not only affect
buyer performance but also alter the buyer’s cost of use, as the electronic
cash register example demonstrated.
Attaching a value to additional functions (or missing functions) that
affect performance in RVP calculations is often difﬁcult, just as it is in
differentiation analysis. The problem is particularly severe in consumer
goods, because buyer performance often involves satisfying intangible
needs. The principle of valuing different functionality is to examine how the
functions involved impact the buyer’s value chain, and calculate the effect
on buyer cost or performance. One approach to valuing particular functions
is to look for stand-alone products that perform the functions, and see what
buyers are willing to pay for them. Valuing differences in functions that


affect buyer cost is typically easier than valuing those that affect buyer
performance.
Cost and Performance of Complementary Products. The effect of a
substitute on buyer cost and performance may be a function of the cost and
performance of complementary products used with it relative to those used
with the product.2 For example, movie theaters face the threat of
substitution by home TV and videotape recorders, among other products.
The cost to the buyer of going to a movie in a theater includes the time and
cost of transportation to the theater and parking, and the cost of buying
popcorn. The cost of these complementary purchases that are not necessary
with home entertainment is one of the reasons movies fell from 8.2 percent
of U.S. recreational expenditures in 1936 to under 3 percent by the mid-
1970s.3 Similarly, substitution of recreational vehicles such as motor homes
depends on such complements as gasoline, roads, and campgrounds.
Uncertainty. There is usually some uncertainty involved in how a
substitute will affect the buyer’s cost or performance, and this must be
reﬂected in the RVP calculation. One major source of uncertainty is the
possibility that the substitute will be improved in subsequent generations of
the product. This can substantially delay switching by buyers. Uncertainty
can be introduced into RVP by lowering the assumed value of a substitute
by some discount factor.
Perception of Value. It is the buyer’s perception of the RVP of a
substitute that will determine the threat of a substitute, not necessarily the
reality of RVP. Buyer awareness of a substitute is often not as great as that
of the established product, and knowledge about the beneﬁts and features of
a substitute is often incomplete. Relative inability to signal value will thus
effectively reduce the perceived RVP of a substitute. Buyers are least likely
to perceive the beneﬁts of a substitute when:
• the advantage of the substitute is in lowering the costs of use over time
rather than immediately
• the advantages of the substitute are indirect and involve a number of
value activities rather than direct advantages in the value activity in


which the substitute is employed
• the advantages of the substitute are in raising performance over time
rather than immediately
• gaining the advantages of the substitute requires a signiﬁcant change in
behavior or use patterns by the buyer
• the credibility of the substitute’s beneﬁt is hard to assess
In all these cases, a buyer may not fully understand the impact of a
substitute on its value chain; hence the need for signaling value through a
variety of means is great. The substitution of robotics for conventional
production equipment, described earlier, is a good example of a substitution
where accurate perception of value has been a barrier to substitution,
particularly in the United States relative to Japan.
While it is more common that buyers have difﬁculty recognizing the
value of a substitute, sometimes the opposite occurs. Sometimes
substitution occurs for glamour or to appear progressive, with little
understanding of the actual value of the substitute. In power supplies, for
example, some buyers are changing to the new switch mode technology
whose needs are probably better met by the older linear technology. In such
cases, time may lower the perception of a substitute’s actual value.
A substitute signals value in the same ways a ﬁrm does generally (see
Chapter 4), using tools such as advertising, the sales force, demonstrations,
and placement of units with opinion leaders. The stock of knowledge about
a substitute as well as the expenditures by the substitute industry on
signaling will determine how accurately the value of a substitute is
perceived. Word of mouth and other sources of information not directly
controlled by a ﬁrm are also vital.
Switching Costs
Substitution always involves some costs of switching to the substitute for
the buyer, which are weighed against RVP. The higher the switching cost
relatively, the more difﬁcult substitution will be. Switching costs in
substitution are analogous to those of changing from one supplier to another
in an industry.4 Switching costs are usually higher in substitution than in


switching suppliers, however, because substitution may require switching to
a new supplier plus switching to a new way of performing a function.
Switching costs potentially arise from all the impacts a substitute has on
the buyer’s value chain. Both the value activity in which the substitute is
employed as well as other value activities it indirectly affects may require
one-time costs of changeover. Switching costs most common in substitution
are the following:
Identifying and Qualifying Sources. Finding sources for the substitute
and gathering information about them are switching costs. So is the need to
test a substitute to see if it meets performance standards. The cost of
qualifying a 64K memory chip to replace a 16K chip has been estimated at
$50,000, for example, and the process can take as long as a year.
Cost of Redesign or Reformulation. A buyer’s product or value activities
must often be redesigned to accept a substitute. Reformulating a consumer
food product to accept high-fructose corn syrup instead of sugar, for
example, requires out-of-pocket costs as well as the time and opportunity
cost involved in testing the reformulated product. Redesign costs can affect
many value activities. The layout of an entire plant must be changed to get
the beneﬁts of a new materials handling system, for example. Similarly,
purchasing synthetically produced gas made from coal gasiﬁcation instead
of natural gas requires a user to modify gas burning equipment because of
synthetic gas’s slightly different qualities. The cost of redesign or
reformulation will be lower if the buyer is changing product generations or
building a new facility anyway.
Retraining or Relearning Costs. Switching to a substitute often requires
learning how to use the substitute or changing use patterns. A typist who
has been using a manual typewriter must get used to the much lighter touch
of an electric one, for example, while a cook must learn a new set of
cooking procedures to use a microwave. Similarly, plant engineers and
maintenance personnel must go down the learning curve with a new type of
machine tool.


The cost of retraining includes the cost of downtime and higher reject
rates during the shakedown period and other such costs besides the out-of-
pocket costs of learning or training themselves. Retraining costs will be
highest where a substitute is used very differently from the product. Shifting
from black and white to color TV is easy, for example, while shifting from
conventional ovens to microwave ovens requires learning about oven
operation, procedures, cooking times, and how to get the best results with
different foods.
Changing Role of the User. Quite apart from the need to learn new
behavior, substitution frequently involves a change in role for the user that
can be a positive or negative inﬂuence on the cost of switching. Automating
a manufacturing process can relegate equipment operators or engineers to
passive or noncritical roles, for example, which can be reﬂected in subtle or
open resistance to a substitute. A husband or wife who cooks for the family
may resist a food product that removes all the opportunity for a personal
touch that demonstrates caring.
Risk of Failure. The risk that a substitute will fail to perform is a cost of
switching. The cost of failure will vary widely from product to product. In
ﬁber optics, the severe consequences of failure because of the role of ﬁber
optics as the communications link in larger systems have made buyers
conservative in switching from copper wire and cable.
New Ancillary Products. Changing to a substitute may require
investments in new related equipment or material such as testing gear, spare
parts, and software. While the cost of use of such ancillary products is
included in the RVP of a substitute, the one-time cost of reequipping is a
cost of switching. The need to invest in new ancillary products depends
primarily on the compatibility of the equipment or parts used with the
substitute with those used with the product, and the extent to which the
substitute involves different types of interfaces with related products. Like
redesign costs, the cost of investing in new ancillary products is lowest
when the ancillary products would have been replaced anyway.


Switching Costs Versus Switching Back Costs. Both the cost of failure of
a substitute and the risk that its RVP will shift adversely are a function of
the cost of switching back to the original product. If it is easy and
inexpensive to switch back, the risk of switching is lower. The cost of
switching back to the original product is usually less than the cost of
switching to the substitute, because prior use of the product implies that the
buyer already knows how to use it and has the required ancillary products.
However, some switching costs, such as changeover costs and layout
changes, cannot be avoided in switching back. There may also be some
unique cost of switching back, such as confusing the buyer.
The cost of switching back usually rises as a function of the time since
substitution, though some switching back costs are typically present no
matter how short the experience with the substitute is. The relationship
between switching cost and switching back costs has implications for
substitution strategy that I will discuss below.
Buyer Propensity to Substitute
Buyers with different circumstances and in different industries do not all
have equal propensities to substitute when faced with a comparable
economic motivation. Differences in their circumstances lead buyers to
respond to a given RVP and switching cost differently. While such
differences might be treated as factors that modify RVP or switching costs,
it is more helpful in practice to isolate them.
Resources. Substitution often involves up-front investments of capital
and other resources. Access to such resources will differ from one buyer to
another.
Risk Proﬁle. Buyers often have very different risk proﬁles, the result of
such things as their past history, age and income, ownership structure,
background and orientation of management, and nature of competition in
their industry. Buyers prone to risk taking are more likely to substitute than
buyers that are risk-averse.


Technological Orientation. Buyers experienced with technological
change may be less concerned with some kinds of substitution risks, while
extremely aware of others that a less technologically sophisticated buyer
would be oblivious to.
Previous Substitutions. The second substitution may be easier for a buyer
than the ﬁrst, unless the ﬁrst substitution has been a failure. The buyer’s
uncertainties over undertaking a substitution may have diminished if a past
substitution has been successful, or risen if a past substitution has led to
difﬁculties. In the soft drink industry, this seems to have worked to the
beneﬁt of aspartame.
Intensity of Rivalry. Buyers under intense competitive pressure and
searching for competitive advantage will tend to substitute more quickly to
gain a given advantage than those that are not.
Generic Strategy. The RVP of a substitute will have different signiﬁcance
depending on the competitive advantage that industrial, commercial, or
institutional buyers are seeking or the value of time and particular
performance needs of the household buyer. A substitute that offers a cost
saving will tend to be of more interest to a cost leader than a differentiator,
for example.
Many of these factors that shape the buyer’s propensity to substitute will
be a function of the particular decision maker who is involved in the
purchase decision.
Segmentation and Substitution
Both the identity of substitutes and the threat of substitution often differ
by industry segment. This is because the economics of substitution are
different for different product varieties and buyers, reﬂecting their structural
and value chain differences. Thus a merging of the analysis in Chapter 7
and that in this chapter will not only expose differences in the substitution
threat among segments but also assist in the construction of the industry
segmentation matrix itself.


The threat of substitution will vary by buyer group if RVP, switching
costs, or the propensity to substitute vary. The RVP of a substitute often
varies among buyers in an industry because of differences in how they use a
product, the value they attach to various product attributes, and the other
impacts of the product on their value chain. In the racetrack case discussed
earlier, for example, buyers attending primarily for entertainment will have
different substitutes than buyers attending primarily for gambling.
Similarly, the advantages of radial truck tires in mileage and retreading
ability will have more value to a long-haul ﬂeet operator than to a local
pickup and delivery service. In the same vein, the value of the convenience
of disposable diapers is probably higher to families with two working
spouses than to families in which one spouse stays home.
Switching costs also differ from buyer to buyer within an industry.
Retraining costs are a function of existing procedures. The need for
redesign or new ancillary products will relate to the speciﬁcs of how a
product is used. Buyer propensity to substitute can also vary dramatically
among buyers, a function of buyer resources, orientation, and so on. In
many consumer goods, for example, substitution occurs ﬁrst with high-
income buyers who have the resources to purchase new items while they are
expensive.
A good example of how substitution threat varies by buyer segment is in
the adoption of personal computers by small businesses. Personal
computers are a substitute for manual methods (e.g., standard ofﬁce
machines) and computer service bureaus. As Figure 8–1 indicates, the
degree of penetration of personal computers in small businesses is
correlated to the size of the business. Personal computers have penetrated
much further within larger companies because those ﬁrms have more
complex paperwork needs and thus a greater need for automation, and also
greater resources to invest in capital purchases.
The substitution threat can vary not only for buyer segments but also for
different product varieties, geographic areas, and channels. In each case the
substitute may perform different functions or be used in different ways and
hence its RVP or switching costs may differ. Full-size ofﬁce typewriters are
more vulnerable to substitution from word processors than are portable
electric typewriters, for example, because the special features and correcting


capabilities of word processors are more valuable in ofﬁce uses than for
intermittent personal typing.
The penetration of a substitute often follows such segment differences. A
substitute penetrates by expanding the number of segments it serves,
penetrating new segments in order of the size of RVP of the substitute and
the cost of switching in them. Thus the interaction of segmentation and
substitution is often vital to understanding the path of substitution, a subject
that I will treat below.
Figure 8–1. Use of Personal Computers in Small Business, 1981
Changes in the Substitution Threat


The threat of a substitute often changes over time, with a corresponding
impact on the pattern of substitution. Many of the sources of change in the
substitution threat are predictable and can often be inﬂuenced through a
ﬁrm’s offensive or defensive substitution strategy. Changes in the threat of
substitution occur in ﬁve broadly deﬁned areas that follow directly from the
economics of substitution:
• changes in relative price
• changes in relative value
• changes in buyer perception of value
• changes in switching cost
• changes in propensity to substitute
Relative price will change if (1) the relative costs of a substitute and the
product change, and the change is partially or completely passed on to
buyers, or (2) their relative proﬁt margins change. Relative value will
change if valuable improvements proceed at different rates for the substitute
and the product. Buyer perception of value will be a function of information
dissemination. Switching cost will change if a substitute is redesigned or if
early substituters bear some of the cost for later switchers. Buyer propensity
to switch will be a function of evolving buyer attitudes, resources and
competitive conditions.
Changes in the threat of substitution over time are determined by
industry structure and competitor behavior in both the substitute industry
and the threatened industry, with the substitute industry on the offensive and
the threatened industry on the defensive. The two industries are engaged in
a battle to inﬂuence the substitution process. Industry structure will shape
the nature of competition in both industries and the way ﬁrms behave
toward the substitution process. Because competitors’ moves will inﬂuence
the course of the substitution process in one direction or another, where
competitors place bets is vital. If competitors in the substitute industry are
better capitalized, for example, they can tip the balance in its favor because
they will make greater investments to reduce costs, signal value, or set low
initial prices. Similarly, other competitor strategic moves can impact the
substitution process, such as RCA’s decision to widely license its color TV
patents. Determining future changes in the threat of substitution is thus an


exercise in forecasting the effects of industry structure and competitor
behavior on each of the components of the substitution calculation.
Some important determinants of changes in each of the ﬁve areas that
determine substitution are as follows:5
CHANGING RELATIVE PRICE
Changes in Relative Cost. A substitute and a product are in a
competition to improve relative cost. A substitute often improves its relative
cost as substitution proceeds through the operation of economies of scale or
the learning curve. For example, the price of carbon ﬁbers fell from $100
per pound in the early 1970s to $20 to $25 in 1982 for these reasons,
promoting the substitution of carbon ﬁbers for steel and aluminum in
automotive and aircraft applications. Another factor that often lowers the
relative cost of a substitute over time is that technological change reduces
the amount necessary to perform the required function, as illustrated in the
aluminum and offshore drilling examples earlier in this chapter. Such
improvements, of course, come at the expense of the volume of the
substitute sold. A substitute’s cost can just as easily escalate, however, if its
success forces up the cost of its key raw materials.
There may be fewer opportunities to reduce cost in the industry being
threatened by a substitute because of its age and maturity. Moreover,
penetration of the substitute may reduce the scale and capacity utilization of
ﬁrms in the threatened industry, raising their costs. However, industries that
have been sleepy have achieved remarkable cost reductions under the threat
of a substitute, so one cannot generalize about how relative costs will
change.
The relative cost behavior of a substitute over time is analyzed using the
framework in Chapter 3. The important cost drivers for both the substitute
and the product should be identiﬁed. Cost behavior over time will be a
function of the interplay of these cost drivers coupled with the likely
behavior of competitors. Sometimes the projection of past cost trends for
the substitute and the product will clearly indicate future relative cost. It is
dangerous to count on the continuation of past trends, however, because the
threatened industry may respond and the early pace of cost reduction by the
substitute may be unsustainable. Predicting relative cost changes thus often


requires that the impact of increasing scale, learning, and other factors on
cost is estimated for a substitute and compared to the ability of the product
to reduce cost through redesign, relocation, or introduction of new process
technologies. The sources of cost dynamics described in Chapter 3 will
suggest other important relative cost changes that might occur, such as
differential inﬂation.
Changes in Proﬁt Margins. The prices of a substitute and a product
contain proﬁt margins.6 The relative proﬁt margins of a substitute and a
product are a key factor that can shift over time. A common reason for the
change in relative margins is that the threatened industry lowers its margins
to ﬁght the substitute. Video game margins are falling rapidly to ﬁght
personal computers, for example. The extent to which a threatened
industry’s margins can be reduced before ﬁrms begin to exit is a function of
how high margins were initially, and whether exit barriers keep ﬁrms in the
industry despite low returns.
The margins of a substitute can also change as substitution proceeds,
depending on industry structure in the substitute industry. If early entrants
into the substitute industry were skimming and entry barriers are not high,
the substitute’s margins can fall dramatically as new companies enter. Initial
success in penetration may also lead ﬁrms selling the substitute to set low
penetration prices. Rivalry in selling a substitute often increases over time
as it becomes more standardized and explosive growth slackens, as is
happening in personal computers. Increasing penetration of the substitute
may also raise the threat of backward integration by buyers. All these
factors can squeeze a substitute’s margins. Margins of a substitute and a
product, then, will be a function of the inﬂuence of their changing industry
structures over time, partly in response to each other.
CHANGING RELATIVE VALUE
The relative value to the buyer of a substitute will often change because
of changing technology, better service, and a myriad of other causes.
Producers of a substitute may gain expertise in tailoring their value chains
to meet buyer needs, though producers of the threatened product will look
for ways to enhance value as well. While any of the factors that determine
buyer value described in Chapter 4 may be changing, three important


sources of change are the relative pace of technological change in the
substitute and the product, the development of infrastructure, and
institutional factors.
A substitute and the threatened product are engaged in a technological
race to see which can improve value faster. The likely pace and extent of
technological change can be analyzed using the concepts in Chapter 5. A
substitute may have the edge in technological change if it is a new industry,
but several examples in Chapter 5 have shown how a threatened product or
process can often achieve signiﬁcant technological improvements. The
relative pace of technological change is also strongly inﬂuenced by the
resources and skills of competitors. In the substitution of plastics and
aluminum for steel, for example, the greater technological orientation of
plastics and aluminum ﬁrms was one of the factors leading to a faster pace
of change in those industries.
RVP often changes in favor of the substitute over time as better
infrastructure develops to support it. As a substitute becomes established,
for example, it frequently spawns independent repair shops and is added to
the product lines of established wholesalers. Availability improves and the
perceived risk of shortages falls.
RVP of a substitute can also change as a result of a wide variety of other
exogenous inﬂuences and institutional factors. The rapid substitution of
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) for materials such as aluminum in residential
siding was set back by the revelation that vinyl chloride was a possible
carcinogen. Similarly, the penetration of solar heating has been buffeted by
shifts in government policy and a ﬂuctuating energy price outlook, while
the relative value of food products has been altered by rising concerns about
cholesterol and sodium. Such exogenous inﬂuences are often as hard to
predict as they are powerful.
CHANGING BUYER PERCEPTION OF VALUE
The perception of value by buyers frequently changes over time in
substitution because time and marketing activity are working to alter the
way buyers view a substitute compared to a product. A substitute may gain
in perceived value position over time as buyers become more and more
familiar with how to use it. One of the inhibiting factors in the use of carbon


ﬁbers in aircraft wings and other applications (as a substitute for steel,
titanium, or aluminum), for example, has been that most engineers had no
idea how to design with ﬁbers. Yet the properties of carbon ﬁbers are
sufﬁciently unique that their beneﬁts can be fully reaped only if the designer
understands the material. As this has begun to happen, the perceived value
of ﬁbers is increasing. While time often beneﬁts a substitute, it can also hurt
it. Many substitutes emerge amid overinﬂated buyer perceptions of their
value, and time and trial are moderating inﬂuences.
The perception of a substitute and a product can also be affected by the
relative intensity and creativity of signaling activities. Campaigns to
increase the awareness of a substitute are pitted against efforts by the
threatened industry to improve its perceived value. The U.S. record
industry, for example, has responded to ﬂattening sales at the expense of
video entertainment products with its “Gift of Music” campaign. Record
manufacturers contribute one-half cent per record for advertising, stressing
the value of records as a gift. The appropriate signaling activities will
depend on signaling criteria for the product.
CHANGING SWITCHING COSTS
The costs of switching to a substitute often change over time, frequently
in a downward direction. One reason is that early switchers can bear some
of the costs for later switchers, by developing procedures, designs, or
standards. An early switcher from steel to aluminum beverage cans, for
example, might develop product standards and methods of lithographing
labels on the cans that can easily be copied. Switching costs can also fall
over time because the substitute is redesigned to be more compatible with
ancillary equipment, or suppliers develop procedures to minimize the
buyer’s switching costs. In addition, third parties may spring up to lower the
cost of switching, such as consultants, installers and training ﬁrms. In ofﬁce
equipment, for example, consultants and training ﬁrms are proliferating to
ease the changeover to ofﬁce automation.
Switching costs are partly determined by a buyer’s technological
choices, and thus change over time as buyers alter their products and
processes. In the substitution of aluminum for steel and cast iron, for
example, new buyer technology has reduced switching costs. Automakers


have built more ﬂexible plants that can machine either aluminum or cast
iron, while can makers’ new lines can accept both aluminum and tinplate
can stock.
CHANGING PROPENSITY TO SWITCH
The propensity to switch to a successful substitute frequently grows over
time. Early success with a substitute allays buyer risk aversion, at the same
time as competitive considerations lead buyers to switch so as not to have a
disadvantage relative to early switchers.
Substitution and Overall Industry Demand
In addition to taking share from existing products, a substitute can raise
or lower overall industry demand. A substitute with a longer useful life than
the product it is replacing will lower overall demand after the initial period
when the substitute stimulates faster replacement. This pattern seems to
have occurred in the substitution of longer-lasting radial tires for bias ply
tires.
The penetration of a substitute can also increase overall industry demand
if the substitute expands the industry or increases the usage or replacement
rate. Portable cassette players such as Sony’s Walkman, for example, have
surely expanded the total market for cassette players at the same time as
they have taken share from conventional cassette players. Similarly, the
introduction of disposable ballpoint pens, championed by BIC Corporation,
led to substitution for conventional pens but also stimulated the purchase of
more ballpoint pens per buyer. Any impact of a substitute on overall
demand for a product must be combined with a forecast of the path of
substitution in order to predict the absolute volume of sales of a substitute
over time.
Substitution and Industry Structure
Penetration of a substitute may have second order effects on the resulting
industry structure. A substitute may shift the buyer’s cost structure, for


example, in ways that increase or decrease price sensitivity. A substitute
may also require new suppliers, and entry barriers may differ from those of
the product it replaces. Thus the substitute must be analyzed as a new
industry, not merely as a change in product. The substitute industry can be
more or less attractive structurally than the industry it replaces, a fact that
has important implications for strategy towards a substitute.
The Path of Substitution
The path of substitution in an industry is a function of how RVP, the
perception of RVP, switching costs, and the propensity of buyers to switch
evolve over time. The rate of penetration of substitutes differs widely from
industry to industry. Some substitutes gain quick acceptance, while others
penetrate slowly or not at all and are discontinued. In many industries,
however, the path of substitution for successful substitutes looks like an S-
curve, when substitution as a percent of total demand is plotted against time
(see Figure 8–2).
The S-shaped substitution curve is closely related to the familiar product
life cycle curve, because products early in their life cycles are frequently
substituting for some other products. An S-shaped substitution path is not
characteristic of every successful substitution. However, it is important to
understand why an S-curve might occur so that the economic factors that
underlie it are recognized.7 Where the underlying economics of a particular
substitution suggest an S-curve path, a number of techniques are available
to help forecast the rate of substitution.
In an S-curve path such as that shown in Figure 8–2, substitution is
initially modest and often continues at low levels for a considerable period
of time in what can be called the “informing and testing phase.” Unless a
product ﬂaw emerges with the substitute or the threatened industry responds
to nullify the substitute’s advantages, the penetration of the substitute then
often climbs rapidly in a “takeoff phase” toward an upper bound that
represents maximum penetration. This upper bound is determined by the
number of buyers for whom the substitute is potentially valuable. The upper
bound of substitution can itself change over time as changes in technology
or buyer needs bring buyers in or out of the pool.


Figure 8–2. A Typical S-Shaped Substitution Path
The reasons that an S-shaped substitution curve occurs reﬂect a set of
assumptions about the interplay of actual and perceived RVP, switching
costs, and the buyer’s propensity to switch over time. Initially, the
performance of a substitute is likely to be uncertain, and there may be few
capable ﬁrms to supply it. Many buyers are not even aware of the substitute
or what its characteristics are. The price of the substitute is likely to be high
because of its low volume or because suppliers are skim-pricing. Though
the value of the substitute is often uncertain, however, the cost of switching
is usually very clear and made particularly high by the unfamiliarity of both
buyers and suppliers with how the substitute should be used. Moreover, the
cost of switching must be borne up front, before the beneﬁts of the
substitute are realized.
During the informing and testing period, some adventurous buyers or
buyers who attach a particularly high value to the substitute’s qualities will
switch to the substitute to experiment with it or will switch permanently
because the RVP of the substitute to them appears particularly high. During
this period, either the substitute begins to prove its value or product ﬂaws
become apparent. The product ﬂaws prove uncorrectable (and penetration
never increases), or the substitute is improved (sometimes the substitute is
completely withdrawn from the market and then reintroduced). At the same
time, marketing activity and word of mouth tend to widen the group of


buyers that are aware of the substitute and thus the perception of value
improves.8
Assuming that the substitute eventually achieves acceptable performance
with early buyers, the rate of penetration of the substitute can start to
increase rapidly along the S-pattern for a number of reasons. First, the
uncertainty of perceived value and the risk of failure of the substitute both
fall as early buyers have successful experiences. Second, once a few buyers
successfully switch, competitive pressures force other buyers to switch to
maintain their cost position or differentiation (or self-image for consumers).
Third, the cost of switching may decline for reasons discussed earlier.
Fourth, rising adoption leads to increasing awareness of the substitute and
raises its credibility. Fifth, rising penetration of the substitute often reduces
its cost through economies of scale and learning.9 Sixth, introduction of
new varieties of the substitute opens up new industry segments. Finally,
increasing penetration of the substitute prompts its suppliers to become
more aggressive in pricing, marketing, and R&D, often as a result of entry
by new competitors into the substitute industry. All of these factors tend to
be self-reinforcing, and can lead to the extremely rapid penetration of the
substitute.
Eventually, the penetration of a substitute begins to approach 100 percent
of the buyers to which the substitute is attractive. As this happens,
penetration tends to level off as the penetration of new buyers becomes
more and more difﬁcult. However, improvements in RVP or new varieties of
a substitute may widen the pool of potential buyers beyond those initially
foreseen, fueling new opportunities for growth of the substitute. The upper
bound in Figure 8–2 can thus expand to contain a larger and larger number
of buyers.
At the same time, the buyers’ usage of the substitute may change in ways
that increase or decrease demand. In TV sets, for example, sales of black
and white sets were very robust even after color sets began to penetrate
because buyers bought second, third, and even fourth TV sets. Similarly, in
the substitution of electric shavers for conventional razors, the recent
introduction of small, portable electric razors may well be shifting the upper
bound of penetration of electric shavers by making them more versatile and
less expensive. Thus the upper bound in Figure 8–2 can include a growing
volume of units.


The length of the informing and testing phase is a function of a number
of factors. Clearly important is the size of the RVP improvement offered by
the substitute—the bigger the inducement, the shorter the period will be.
The length of time necessary to prove the performance of a substitute also
differs by product, and can greatly inﬂuence the length of the testing period.
The performance of an automatic drip coffee maker can be proven in weeks
or months, for example, while a new piece of capital equipment may require
years of production line testing to assess its true performance. The period
required for the industry producing the substitute to make necessary
improvements in performance or cost, and to build adequate capacity to
serve major buyers, also inﬂuences the length of the testing phase. Finally,
the intensity of competition of the buyer’s industry and the signiﬁcance of
the speciﬁc RVP of the substitute to that competition inﬂuence the length of
the testing phase, by determining the pressures for imitation if one buyer
switches to a substitute.
The steepness of the takeoff phase is a function of how compelling in an
industry are the reasons for rising penetration described above. In selling a
substitute to an intensely competitive buyer industry, for example, takeoff
can be very rapid. The steepness of takeoff is also a function of the time
required to change over to a substitute and the adequacy of capacity. The
purchasing cycle in the buyer industry is also important, because buyers are
more likely to switch to a substitute when they would normally reorder or
replace the product anyway. This reduces the switching costs associated
with scrapping a product which has years of useful life remaining or where
the buyer has substantial inventory on hand. For similar reasons, switching
to a substitute in durable goods tends to occur faster when the buyer
industry is growing and therefore investing in new facilities and equipment.
The response of the threatened industry is also clearly important to the
path of substitution. An aggressive response by the threatened industry can
sometimes stop the penetration of a substitute altogether or delay it
considerably. Conversely, entry into the substitute industry by credible
competitors can accelerate penetration, as IBM’s entry into personal
computers and Kodak’s entry into instant cameras seem to have done.
Smooth substitution curves such as the one portrayed in Figure 8–2 are
most characteristic of industries where there are many buyers of a
substitute. Where there are few buyers, a decision by a major buyer can


dramatically shift the curve overnight. In such cases, substitution analysis is
best conducted on a buyer-by-buyer basis.
Segmentation and the Substitution Path
The substitution path in an industry is often very closely related to
industry segmentation. Early penetration occurs in industry segments where
a substitute offers the highest RVP, requires the lowest switching costs,
and/or encounters the most adventurous or highest value buyers. Early
segments support the cost reduction or performance improvement necessary
to penetrate later segments. The high value of the substitute to early
segments either offsets the high initial cost of the substitute, or allows its
producers to earn extremely high proﬁts. Margins often will fall over time
in the substitute industry as additional segments are penetrated where the
substitute has lower value.
The substitution of minicomputers provides a good example of how the
substitution path relates to industry segmentation. The early segments
penetrated by minicomputers were scientiﬁc and computer center
applications where computational power was needed but where users could
do their own programming, adapt machines to their needs, and perform
some maintenance in-house. Later penetration was in applications such as
industrial controls, where the buyer was still sophisticated and support
requirements were moderate. Only after some time did minicomputers
develop the service and support capabilities to penetrate small business
applications.
The same factors that lead to early penetration in some segments also
mean that the rate of penetration within segments will vary. Since segments
vary in RVP and switching costs, penetration will proceed much faster in
some segments than others. Hence the industry substitution curve is actually
a collection of segment substitution curves.
Substitution Forecasting Models
The observation that successful substitution often follows an S-shaped
penetration curve can be used in forecasting. A variety of models that are


based on the assumption of S-shaped penetration have grown out of
research on diffusion processes. Data from the early years of a substitution
can be used to forecast the entire substitution curve using such models,
under the assumption that an S-shaped process will occur. The forecasted
substitution curve may then become a base case from which an analysis of
the underlying economics of a substitution can begin. Adjusting the
standard S-shaped curve to reﬂect the economics of a particular substitution
allows a prediction of the extent of substitution in future years. The premise
underlying such a procedure is that the tendency toward an S-shaped
penetration curve is strong enough so that the plotting of such a curve—
derived from the early penetration data—is a useful beginning point for
analysis.
The most commonly used diffusion model is the so-called “logistic
function,” a form of exponential function.10 The functional form of the
relationship as applied to substitution is as follows:
where F = fraction of the total potential market that has switched to a
substitute
K = a constant set equal to the early growth rate of a substitute
The logistic function makes two important assumptions: (1) if
substitution has progressed as far as a few percent, it will proceed to
completion; and (2) the fractional rate of fractional substitution of a
substitute for the product is proportional to the remaining amount of the
product left to be substituted for. It is the latter assumption that produces the
S-curve shape. If F/(1—F) is plotted as a function of time on
semilogarithmic paper, the logistic function results in a substitution curve
that is a straight line with the slope K as shown in Figure 8–3.11
If the logic underlying an S-shaped substitution curve is believed to hold
in a particular substitution process, as well as the assumption about a
constant fractional rate of fractional substitution, the logistic function can
be used to forecast the path of substitution that will occur. To do this, data
on substitution history are used to determine F/(1 — F) for each year. Then


F/(1 — F) is plotted on semilogarithmic paper against time, and a straight
line is ﬁtted through the early history. Extending this line projects the future
substitution path under the assumption that it will follow the logistic
curve.12
Figure 8–3. A Typical Logistic Curve
The procedure is shown in Figure 8–4, which plots the early substitution
history of aluminum for steel in beer cans. The early history ﬁts the logistic
curve quite closely. Based on this history, we could expect the extent of
substitution by 1982 to be approximately 91 percent if the assumptions of
the logistic curve hold. The accuracy of this forecast, however, depends on
how well the logistic curve reﬂects the economics of substitution in the
particular industry. One important issue is the size of the potential market,
and hence the upper bound. In the beverage can case the upper bound is
fairly clear. Where the upper bound is increasing, the logistic curve will
have a tendency to overestimate the rate of penetration. Another important
issue later in the substitution process is whether the intensity of use of the
substitute required to perform its function will change over time.


Figure 8–4. Early Substitution of Steel for Aluminum in Beer Cans
Perhaps the most important issue in whether substitution will follow the
logistic curve growing out of the early substitution history is the extent to
which the RVP that is driving the substitution will change over time. The
logistic curve assumes a stable motivation for substitution. If RVP falls, the
penetration of a substitute may actually decrease, something that never
happens with the logistic curve. If the RVP of a substitute improves, on the
other hand, the rate of penetration will increase from early history—the
substitution path may jump to a new curve. Figure 8–5 illustrates how this
has actually happened in beer cans.
After 1976, the introduction of two-piece steel can technology helped
slow the penetration of aluminum cans. Working with steel companies,


Crown Cork and Seal introduced a cheaper way of making steel cans that
reduced the RVP of aluminum cans. In 1978, however, Miller Beer (number
two in the beer industry) announced a major test of aluminum cans against
steel. The rate of substitution slowed further pending the outcome. Miller’s
decision in 1979 was to switch to aluminum. Once Miller’s switch occurred,
substitution accelerated to a faster pace than before 1976, in part because
Miller legitimized the substitute. An additional factor in the faster
penetration of aluminum after 1979 was the growing recycling of aluminum
cans, which are more recyclable than steel cans. As infrastructure allowed
for more widespread recycling, the RVP of aluminum became even better
than before because recycling reduced the cost of metal. By 1982,
penetration of aluminum was actually about 98 percent instead of the 91
percent that would have been forecasted using the early history.
As the beverage can example illustrates, the logistic curve is not a
substitute for substitution analysis. It is a simple tool that can serve as a
starting point for more careful analysis of the economics of substitution.13
The substitution path will vary from industry to industry, and will be
affected by technological changes and competitive moves. In order for the
logistic curve to be meaningfully used, the factors that determine RVP,
switching costs, and propensity to substitute in a particular industry must be
understood and expected changes in them forecasted. Since the economics
of a substitute often differ by industry segment, logistic curves should
usually be plotted at the segment level and not the industry level. Beer
producers, for example, have different needs in cans than other can users. A
logistic curve for aluminum’s substitution against steel in cans overall
would not be as meaningful as one for beer cans alone.


Figure 8–5. Substitution of Steel for Aluminum in Beer Cans
Substitution and Competitive Strategy
The economics of substitution carry a variety of strategic implications
for ﬁrms attempting to promote substitution, as well as for ﬁrms attempting
to defend against it. Defenses against substitution are, by and large, the
reverse of offensive strategies that promote substitution. I will ﬁrst describe
some principles of promoting substitution and then turn to defense.
Promoting Substitution


A ﬁrm can trigger or accelerate substitution through strategic moves that
enhance RVP, lower switching costs, or raise the propensity of buyers to
switch. While none of these moves are without costs and risks, the
following concepts for promoting substitution can be considered:
1.  Target early switchers. As the section “Segmentation and
Substitution” emphasized, some buyers and buyer segments in an industry
will be much more likely to adopt a substitute than others because of greater
RVP from the substitute, lower switching costs, or greater propensity to
switch. The order of segments that are targeted for penetration is one of the
most important components of a substitution strategy. A ﬁrm attempting
substitution should focus its efforts on the most likely early switchers ﬁrst,
and use the track record it gains with these buyers and their support to
trigger the self-reinforcing takeoff phase. Early switchers may be buyers
who are redesigning their products, are replacing equipment, face a pressing
need for the value the substitute provides, or are adventurous purchasers. To
reach these buyers, a ﬁrm may have to subsidize trial. For example, Mauna
Loa macadamia nuts are sold on very favorable terms to some airlines to
gain trial of target buyers.
2. Improve the ﬁrm’s offering in areas with the highest RVP impacts. The
impact of improvements in the product and elsewhere in the value chain on
substitution will be greater the more RVP is affected. With a sophisticated
understanding of the bases of RVP, drawn from the framework presented
earlier, a ﬁrm can determine its R&D and marketing priorities accordingly.
In color TV, for example, picture quality was much more important to RVP
initially than features or styling, given the preferences of buyers substituting
from black and white sets with high picture quality. Similarly, in many
industries the problem is not actual product performance but the buyer’s
uncertainty about it. Here, guarantees can be an effective tool to promote
substitution.
3. Reduce or subsidize switching costs. Investments to reduce switching
costs can have a major role in stimulating substitution, presuming a
substitute has superior RVP. A ﬁrm should direct part of its technical
development to improvements that lower switching costs, and create


mechanisms for information dissemination among buyers that have the
same effect. This may be as simple as manuals or newsletters.
A ﬁrm may also ﬁnd it advantageous to subsidize switching costs for
some buyers. A ﬁrm need not subsidize the switching costs of all buyers,
but only a core group of buyers whose adoption of a substitute is likely to
trigger the takeoff phase. These buyers should be opinion leaders who will
serve as credible signals of value to other buyers. Subsidizing switching
costs can involve such things as free training, paying for product
reformulation or testing, supplying or assisting in the design of ancillary
equipment, providing free assistance in modifying production procedures,
giving high trade-in allowances, offering money-back guarantees, and
giving free in-home demonstrations.
4. Invest in signaling. A major barrier faced by a substitute may be the
lack of awareness and knowledge by potential buyers. A ﬁrm must identify
the most important signaling criteria used by buyers to judge the value of a
substitute, and invest to inﬂuence them. Buyers often misperceive the RVP
of a substitute, particularly where RVP is not obvious but has the
characteristics described earlier in this chapter. Hence the importance of
signaling can frequently be great to successful substitution.
5. Use tapered forward integration or induce backward integration to
create pull-through. A strategy practiced successfully by the aluminum
industry, among others, is to forward integrate selectively into downstream
products to create pull-through demand for a substitute. A related strategy is
to induce end users to backward integrate into the intermediate industry to
get around intermediate producers who are unwilling to substitute. By
integrating forward and creating demand with end users, a ﬁrm can
sometimes force recalcitrant intermediate buyers to bear the switching costs
of substitution. Forward integration can also demonstrate the performance
of the substitute, and be a means for developing procedures for its use or for
lowering switching cost.
Tapered forward integration is most effective where the end user faces
few, if any, costs of switching to a substitute, while intermediate buyers face
signiﬁcant switching costs. This was the case in metal cans, where beverage


companies could switch to aluminum cans relatively easily but can
companies faced heavy investment costs in new equipment.
6. Ensure multiple sources and/or adequate capacity. Often major buyers
will not incur the costs and risk of substitution when there is only one
source for a substitute or if there is insufﬁcient capacity for it on stream to
meet expected future demand. Substitution can be accelerated by remedying
these concerns, through encouraging entry into the substitute industry or by
building capacity ahead of demand. This is an example of how good
competitors can beneﬁt a ﬁrm (Chapter 6).
7. Promote improvements in complementary products or infrastructure.
A ﬁrm can often improve RVP or switching costs if it can stimulate
improvements in the cost or quality of necessary complementary goods or
infrastructure. This may justify investing in technology for complementary
products and sharing the results freely with other ﬁrms. It may also suggest
the formation of joint ventures or other relationships with producers of
complementary goods, or creating needed infrastructure such as service
facilities.14 RCA originally trained many of the repair personnel who
serviced all color TV sets, for example.
8. Price to balance capturing R VP against creating barriers. The price
of a substitute must share some of the value created with the buyer in order
to give the buyer an inducement to switch. How close the price of a
substitute approaches RVP should depend on industry structure. Where
there are high entry barriers, a ﬁrm may be better off substituting slowly by
penetrating high-value segments ﬁrst at high prices and moving prices down
gradually to capture lower-value segments. Where there are ﬁrst-mover
advantages (Chapter 5), the ﬁrm instead should sacriﬁce short-term proﬁts
to penetrate quickly and build barriers that protect long-term proﬁts. With
low barriers, a ﬁrm must attempt to reap proﬁts quickly before entry erodes
its position.
9. Conceive of new functions to widen a substitute’s market. Conceiving
of new functions a substitute can perform may greatly expand the potential
market. This not only is important in product design and selecting features,


but also in pricing strategy. In fresh ﬂowers, for example, European retailers
recognized that low prices could open up a whole new function for ﬂowers
—everyday use in decorating—in addition to the traditional use of fresh
ﬂowers in weddings and for other special occasions. As a result, the
European market for ﬂowers is much bigger than the U.S. market, where
pricing has tended to be higher. Many industries have accepted maturity of
demand rather than looked for new substitution possibilities.
10. Harvest if competitive position in the substitute is not sustainable.
Investments to build share in a substitute are indicated if a ﬁrm can sustain
its competitive advantage in the substitute industry and if the industry
structure is attractive. Otherwise, a ﬁrm may be better off skimming proﬁts
early in the substitution process rather than pricing to deter entry or widen
the market. A successful substitute is not necessarily a good business.
Defense Against Substitutes
The ﬁrst step in defense against substitutes is to identify all of them. This
is often a difﬁcult task, because it requires a look at the basic functions a
product performs. Strategies to combat substitutes are the reverse of many
of the steps described above:
• improve RVP relative to the substitute by reducing costs, improving the
product, improving complementary goods, etc.
• modify the product image
• raise switching costs
• block pull-through attempts by aggressive selling efforts directed at the
buyers’ buyers
Where switching back costs are high, a ﬁrm must invest aggressively in a
short-term holding action to deter switching while it seeks more
fundamental long-term improvements in RVP. With high switching back
costs, buyers lost to a substitute will be hard to regain.
In addition to these actions, a number of other possibilities in defending
against substitutes warrant consideration:


1.  Find new uses unaffected by the substitute. Sometimes a product
facing substitution can be repositioned into entirely new uses. A good
example is Arm & Hammer baking soda. As a result of a ten-year
marketing campaign, Arm & Hammer is used in over 50 percent of
American refrigerators for odor control, a use that has far surpassed the
original use of baking soda.
2.  Redeﬁne competition away from the strengths of the substitute. A
substitute’s RVP advantage generally stems from either low price or certain
dimensions of value. A good defensive strategy may be to attempt to
inﬂuence industry competition away from these advantages. Repelling a low
price substitute might involve such actions as longer warranties, more
engineering support, or new product features.
3. Enlist suppliers to help in defense. Suppliers of important purchased
inputs often have a big stake in ﬁghting substitution too, and can bring
important resources and technological skills to the defense. Suppliers of
inputs that are large cost items or that have an important inﬂuence on value
are the best candidates for alliances.
4.  Redirect strategy toward segments least vulnerable to substitution.
Some product or buyer segments will be less vulnerable to substitution than
others. A ﬁrm under attack from substitutes may be better off focusing its
defensive investments on such segments. A ﬁrm may also exit from or
harvest its position in the segments most vulnerable to substitution. Early
withdrawal from these segments can allow the ﬁrm to generate the most
cash from harvesting or from liquidating assets, while exiting later will
generate little or no cash.15
5. Harvest instead of defend. Depending on the likely future RVP of a
substitute and the feasibility of defensive strategies, the best strategy for a
ﬁrm facing substitution may be to harvest its position instead of investing in
defense at all. Such strategy involves such actions as concentrating attention
on the segments where substitution will be the slowest, and raising prices.


6. Enter the substitute industry. Rather than viewing a substitute as a
threat, it may be better to view it as an opportunity. Entering the substitute
industry may allow a ﬁrm to reap competitive advantages from
interrelationships between a substitute and the product, such as common
channels and buyers.16
Industry Versus Firm Substitution Strategy
A substitution process is partly under the control of a ﬁrm and partly a
function of the industry as a whole. No matter what it does, the individual
ﬁrm is affected by such things as the industry’s image and the consistency
of industrywide product offerings, which inﬂuence buyer attitude and
confusion about the beneﬁts of a substitute. This implies that industrywide
actions can usefully supplement individual ﬁrm efforts to promote or defend
against substitution. For example, New Zealand producers of kiwi fruit have
greatly stimulated its substitution for other fruits through an industry-
sponsored R&D program to breed one uniform variety of fruit (down from
twenty) and adoption of this single variety by all the growers.17 This
campaign has been reinforced by advertising of the fruit.
Some industrywide activities that can promote (or prevent) substitution
include:
• Image advertising of the product. Total industry advertising can affect
overall industry demand.
•  Collective R&D expenditures to develop uses for the product, or
techniques for integrating the product into buyers’ value chains.
• Establishment and enforcement of product standards to allay buyers’
fears of poor quality or inadequate performance.
•  Gaining the necessary regulatory approvals for the product to lower
buyers’ switching costs and perceived risks.
•  Joint actions to improve the quality, availability, and cost of
complementary products, thereby improving RVP.
Expenditures made by a ﬁrm to promote or discourage substitution also
may beneﬁt competitors, who get a free ride. In order to deal with this
problem, collective industry action through trade associations or other


industry groups is a common approach to promoting or defending against
substitution. For example, the coal industry has recently embarked on a
television and print advertising campaign in the United States to improve
the image of coal as an abundant, easy-to-obtain, and “American” fuel.
Without some collective action, fragmented industries often have difﬁculty
promoting or ﬁghting substitution because of the free-rider problem.
Pitfalls in Strategy Against Substitutes
Substitution is a positive or negative force, to some degree, in every
industry. Yet ﬁrms often make some common errors in dealing with
substitutes. A discussion of these will provide a summary of some of the
important concepts in this chapter:
Failing to Perceive a Substitute. Firms often fail to recognize substitutes
at all until the substitution process is well under way, because they view
their product’s function too narrowly, do not recognize the different
substitutes faced by different segments, or overlook downstream
substitution.
Not Understanding R VP. The determinants of RVP are complex, and
ﬁrms often have a simplistic view of why a substitute is succeeding or
failing. For example, they may believe that superior product performance is
the cause of substitution when the real reason is lower cost of use for the
buyer because of easier installation. Not knowing why a substitute is
succeeding or failing can be a ticket to the wrong offensive or defensive
strategy, or to an unpleasant surprise when a substitute takes off.
Misreading of Slow Early Penetration. The slow early penetration of a
substitute can be misread as a sign that it is not a serious threat, rather than
as a manifestation of the S-shaped nature of the substitution process. While
many substitutes do indeed fail, slow early penetration is not a reliable sign
that this will happen. What is necessary is a careful analysis of RVP, and
early buyer experience with the substitute.


A Static View of RVP. Both offensive and defensive strategy towards
substitution should be driven by the future as well as present RVP of a
substitute. A ﬁrm can mistakenly direct its product and marketing
improvements toward the wrong areas, or fail to plan for improvements in
RVP or reduction in margins by the substitute over time.
Fighting Versus Joining. Many ﬁrms invest heavily to defend against
substitutes when long-term RVP is compellingly against them. Similarly,
their defense against a substitute is across the board, instead of reﬂecting
differences in vulnerability to the substitute in different segments. Early
moves to focus on certain segments, harvest, or enter the substitute industry
are sometimes called for.
Accepting Maturity. Perhaps the most unfortunate pitfall of all is
accepting the maturity of one’s product, and not considering substitution as
a possibility. Firms often look inward, and become preoccupied with
battling rivals. It may be better to expand the size of the pie through
substitution. The age of an industry is not a reliable indicator of the
substitution possibilities. Industry maturity may be just an illusion.


III
Corporate Strategy and Competitive Advantage
