# Chapter 9: Interrelationships among Business Units

practice decentralization with near-religious reverence. Decentralization,
coupled with disenchantment with synergy, has reinforced the view that
portfolio management is the essential task of corporate strategy.
The failure of synergy stemmed from the inability of companies to
understand and implement it, not because of some basic ﬂaw in the concept.
Firms often used it to justify actions taken for other reasons. Ill-deﬁned
notions of what constituted synergy underlay many companies’ acquisition
strategies. Even in instances where companies possessed a genuine
opportunity to harness synergy, they often failed because the tools for
analyzing it were lacking or they could not overcome the substantial
organization problems of implementation.
Compelling forces are at work today, however, that mean that ﬁrms must
reexamine their attitude toward synergy. Economic, technological, and
competitive developments are increasing the competitive advantage to be
gained by those ﬁrms that can identify and exploit interrelationships among
distinct but related businesses. These interrelationships are not the fuzzy
notions of “ﬁt” which underlay most discussions of synergy, but tangible
opportunities to reduce costs or enhance differentiation in virtually any
activity in the value chain. Moreover, the pursuit of interrelationships by
some competitors is compelling others to follow suit or risk losing their
competitive position.
These developments have made horizontal strategy, which cuts across
divisional boundaries, perhaps the most critical item on the strategic agenda
facing a diversiﬁed ﬁrm. Horizontal strategy is a coordinated set of goals
and policies across distinct but interrelated business units. It is required at
the group, sector, and corporate levels of a diversiﬁed ﬁrm. It does not
replace or eliminate the need for separate business units and/or business
unit strategies. Rather, horizontal strategy provides for explicit coordination
among business units that makes corporate or group strategy more than the
sum of the individual business unit strategies. It is the mechanism by which
a diversiﬁed ﬁrm enhances the competitive advantage of its business units.
Horizontal strategy is a concept of group, sector, and corporate strategy
based on competitive advantage, not on ﬁnancial considerations or stock
market perceptions. Corporate strategies built on purely ﬁnancial grounds
provide an elusive justiﬁcation for the diversiﬁed ﬁrm. Moreover, the
beneﬁts of even successful ﬁnancial strategies are often temporary. Without


a horizontal strategy there is no convincing rationale for the existence of a
diversiﬁed ﬁrm because it is little more than a mutual fund.2 Horizontal
strategy—not portfolio management—is thus the essence of corporate
strategy.
Strategically important interrelationships have long been present in many
diversiﬁed ﬁrms. Little attention has been given to identifying and
exploiting them systematically, however, and many interrelationships have
remained untapped. Achieving interrelationships involves far more than
simply recognizing their presence. There are a number of organizational
barriers to achieving interrelationships in practice, which are difﬁcult to
surmount even if the strategic beneﬁts are clear. Without organizational
mechanisms to facilitate interrelationships that work in tandem with a
decentralized corporate organizational structure, horizontal strategy will
fail.
This chapter will provide a framework for analyzing interrelationships
among business units and how they relate to competitive advantage. First, I
will describe the reasons for the growing importance of interrelationships,
and show how they affect many ﬁrms. I will next describe the three broad
types of interrelationships among business units: tangible interrelationships,
intangible interrelationships, and competitor interrelationships. Then I will
discuss how each form of interrelationship leads to competitive advantage,
and how interrelationships can be identiﬁed.
Chapter 10 will draw together the principles of interrelationships to
describe how a ﬁrm can formulate a horizontal strategy for its existing
business units, and a diversiﬁcation strategy for entry into new industries.
Chapter 11 goes on to treat the organizational issues involved in achieving
interrelationships. In achieving interrelationships, strategy and organization
are inextricably linked. There are strong parallels between interrelationships
among business units, segment interrelationships (see Chapter 7), and
geographic interrelationships, or interrelationships among activities located
in different regions or countries. My focus in this chapter is on
interrelationships among business units in different industries, but many of
the principles of strategy can be readily applied to these other forms of
interrelationships.3


The Growing Importance of Horizontal Strategy
Horizontal strategy is something that few ﬁrms today can afford to
ignore. Interrelationships among business units and the ability to exploit
them have been increasing in the last decade, and powerful and
interconnected forces are likely to accelerate the trend in the 1980s and
1990s.4
Diversiﬁcation philosophy is changing. The philosophy guiding many
ﬁrm’s diversiﬁcation strategies has shifted markedly since the early 1970s.
Most now emphasize related diversiﬁcation. This has led to more attention
being paid to “ﬁt,” and widespread pruning of corporate portfolios.
Unrelated or marginally related business units added during earlier phases
of diversiﬁcation have been sold off, and many ﬁrms have boosted their
stock price through this process, including Borden, Scoville, Trans World
Corporation, and IU International. A signiﬁcant fraction of today’s merger
activity involves ﬁrms selling divisions to other ﬁrms where the ﬁt is closer.
Emphasis is shifting from growth to performance. The environment in
most of the developed world is one of relatively slow growth coupled with
growing global competition, a dramatic change from the previous decades.
The emphasis has thus shifted from growth to improving competitive
advantage. While largely independent business units may have been an
appropriate vehicle for pursuing growth, a more difﬁcult environment has
made it increasingly important to coordinate business unit strategies to
exploit interrelationships. Buyers, themselves under pressure, are often a
force for coordination. Increasingly sophisticated purchasing by hospitals,
for example, is compelling ﬁrms such as Johnson & Johnson and American
Hospital Supply to integrate the sales forces and distribution systems of
business units serving hospitals in order to maintain competitive advantage.
Both of these ﬁrms have been among the strongest advocates of
decentralization.
Technological change is proliferating interrelationships and making
them more achievable. Technology is breaking down barriers between
industries and driving them together, particularly those based on


electronics/information technology. Microelectronics, low-cost computers,
and communications technology are permeating many businesses and
causing technologies to converge. As these technologies are assimilated into
many products and production processes, the opportunities for shared
technology development, procurement, and component fabrication are
increasing. The rush of many large diversiﬁed ﬁrms such as Gould and
United Technologies to acquire electronics ﬁrms is a manifestation of this
trend.
These same technologies are changing the functions of products and
making them parts of larger systems, sometimes controlled centrally with a
common computer. Integrated aircraft cockpits, ofﬁce automation,
telecommunications, and lighting, heating, airconditioning, security, and
elevator systems in buildings are just a few examples where historically
distinct businesses are now becoming strongly related.
New technology is also making it possible to share activities across
business unit lines where it was not feasible previously. So-called “ﬂexible
automation” is one important example, in which a computer-controlled
machine can produce a variety of similar products with minimal setup time.
While ﬂexible automation is penetrating slowly and its limits have yet to be
deﬁned, it is enhancing the possibilities for sharing component fabrication
and assembly facilities among business units with related products.
Flexibility that allows sharing also holds promise in other areas such as
automated testing and computer-aided design.
The growing sophistication of information systems is also a powerful
force in opening up possibilities for interrelationships. With the increasing
capacity to handle complex on-line data, information technology is allowing
the development of automated order processing systems, automated
materials handling systems, automated warehouses, and systems to
automate other value activities outside of manufacturing. These systems can
often be shared among related businesses.5 Information technology is also
restructuring distribution channels and the selling process in industries such
as banking and insurance, in ways that can facilitate sharing.
At the same time that technology is creating interrelationships, it is also
reducing costs of exploiting them. The ease of communication has
increased just as dramatically as its costs have fallen, reducing the costs of
coordinating the activities of business units. Information processing


technology has allowed management information systems to be established
in areas such as logistics, inventory management, production scheduling,
and sales force scheduling. Flexibility in activities has become increasingly
possible. While sharing activities may have involved unmanageable
complexity and unacceptable costs in the past, this is less often the case
today.
Multipoint competition is increasing. A ﬁnal compelling motivation for
horizontal strategy is a logical outgrowth of the other three. As more and
more ﬁrms seek out or are forced to pursue interrelationships among
business units, there is an increasing presence of what I term multipoint
competitors. Multipoint competitors are ﬁrms that compete with each other
not only in one business unit but in a number of related business units. For
example, Procter & Gamble, Kimberly-Clark, Scott Paper, and Johnson &
Johnson compete with each other in varying combinations of consumer
paper products industries including disposable diapers, paper towels,
feminine napkins, toilet tissue, and facial tissue. General Electric,
Westinghouse, Square D, and Emerson Electric similarly meet each other in
a number of electrical products industries. Where a ﬁrm has multipoint
competitors, it must view its competitors more broadly than at the business
unit level because competitive advantage will be more broadly determined.
Many important industry sectors are being affected by these forces.
Financial services are being revolutionized by interrelationships created by
information technology and unleashed by regulatory changes. Such ﬁrms as
American Express, Citicorp, Sears, Prudential-Bache, and Merrill Lynch are
aggressively linking previously separate ﬁnancial services industries
together. In health care, I have already noted how producers of medical
equipment and supplies are beginning to pursue interrelationships more
aggressively. A few health care providers are also just beginning to see the
possible interrelationships in operating facilities such as hospitals, nursing
homes, retirement communities, and home care services, though these
interrelationships are not yet being exploited. Entertainment ﬁrms have
begun to recognize the possibilities for coordinated strategies in different
media. Information companies such as McGraw-Hill and Dun and
Bradstreet are moving to combine many data base products. Computers and


telecommunications ﬁrms are combining together and/or invading each
other’s turf, as evidenced by such recent moves as IBM’s link with Rolm
and AT&T’s entry into computers. Automation of the factory and the ofﬁce
is connecting many industries and spawning broadly-based strategies by
such ﬁrms as GE, Westinghouse, and Xerox. This list of industries being
connected by interrelationships is by no means exhaustive.
The forces leading to increasing interrelationships are also illustrated in a
study I conducted of business units in 75 diversiﬁed Fortune 500 ﬁrms in
1971 and 1981. These 75 ﬁrms had organized their thousands of business
units into 300 groups in 1971 and 315 groups in 1981. The nature and
strength of the interrelationships among business units in each group were
examined for both time periods. The number and strength of potential
interrelationships within the groups increased over the ten-year period, as
portfolios were reconﬁgured. However, the ﬁrms’ success at exploiting the
potential interrelationships was less clear. From examining how ﬁrms
changed their organizational structure over the period, it does appear that
ﬁrms became more prone to group related businesses together.
Many factors point to the growing importance of horizontal strategy, and
imply that past experience with synergy is a poor guide for the future. At
the same time, though, many ﬁrms have not converted potential
interrelationships into sources of competitive advantage. The same ﬁrms
that are assembling groups of related business units continue to manage
them like a portfolio. Thus diversiﬁed ﬁrms must learn how to manage
interrelationships at the same time as they will increasingly have to identify
and build upon them.
Interrelationships among Business Units
There are three broad types of possible interrelationships among
business units: tangible interrelationships, intangible interrelationships, and
competitor interrelationships. All three types can have important, but
different, impacts on competitive advantage and are not mutually exclusive:
Tangible Interrelationships. Tangible interrelationships arise from
opportunities to share activities in the value chain among related business


units, due to the presence of common buyers, channels, technologies, and
other factors. Tangible interrelationships lead to competitive advantage if
sharing lowers cost or enhances differentiation enough to exceed the costs
of sharing. Business units that can share a sales force, for example, may be
able to lower selling cost or provide the salesperson with a unique package
to offer the buyer. Achieving tangible interrelationships often involves
jointly performing one value activity while in other cases it involves
multiple activities. When sister business units cross-sell each other’s
product, for example, they are sharing both of their sales forces.
Intangible Interrelationships. Intangible interrelationships involve the
transference of management know-how among separate value chains.
Businesses that cannot share activities may nevertheless be similar in
generic terms, such as in the type of buyer, type of purchase by the buyer,
type of manufacturing process employed and type of relationship with
government. For example, beer and cigarettes are both frequently purchased
recreational products sold on the basis of image as well as taste, while
trucking and waste treatment both involve the management of multiple
sites.
Intangible interrelationships lead to competitive advantage through
transference of generic skills or know-how about how to manage a
particular type of activity from one business unit to another. This may lower
the cost of the activity or make it more unique and outweigh any cost of
transferring the know-how. For example, Philip Morris applied product
management, brand positioning, and advertising concepts learned in
cigarettes to the beer business, substantially changing the nature of
competition and dramatically enhancing the competitive position of the
Miller brand. It performed marketing activities for cigarettes and beer
separately, but used expertise gained in managing activities in one industry
to manage them more effectively in another.
Often intangible interrelationships are manifested in a ﬁrm’s use of the
same generic strategy in a number of business units, reﬂecting
management’s skills in executing a particular strategy. For example,
Emerson Electric and H. J. Heinz compete by using cost leadership
strategies in many of their business units. Emerson and Heinz have learned


how to manage many activities to achieve low cost, and transfer this know-
how to similar but separate value activities in many business units.
Competitor Interrelationships. The third form of interrelationship,
competitor interrelationships, stems from the existence of rivals that
actually or potentially compete with a ﬁrm in more than one industry. These
multipoint competitors necessarily link industries together because actions
toward them in one industry may have implications in another. While
competitor interrelationships occur without tangible or intangible
interrelationships being present and vice versa, the two often coexist
because tangible and intangible interrelationships can provide the basis for
diversiﬁcation. Competitors in one industry, therefore, often expand in the
same directions.
Competitor 
interrelationships 
make 
tangible 
and 
intangible
interrelationships all the more important to recognize and exploit. A
multipoint competitor may compel a ﬁrm to match an interrelationship or
face a competitive disadvantage. Multipoint competitors can also have an
overlapping but different set of business units linked by different
interrelationships than the ﬁrm’s, making the matching of such
interrelationships difﬁcult.
The three types of interrelationships can occur together, as has already
been suggested. Tangible interrelationships involving some value activities
can be supplemented by intangible interrelationships in others. Activities
shared between two business units can be improved by know-how gained
from similar activities in other business units. Both tangible and intangible
interrelationships are often present when multipoint competitors are present.
Each type of interrelationship, however, leads to competitive advantage in a
different way.
Synergy is not one idea, then, but three fundamentally different ideas.
Thus it is no surprise that what is meant by synergy has been vague.
Synergy has most often been described in terms that suggest that what was
meant was intangible interrelationships—transference of skills or expertise
in management from one business unit to another. This form of
interrelationship is perhaps the most ephemeral, however, and its role in
creating competitive advantage often is uncertain though potentially


signiﬁcant. Hence it is not surprising that many ﬁrms have had great
difﬁculty realizing the fruits of synergy in practice.
I will discuss all three forms of interrelationships in this chapter.
Tangible and competitive interrelationships have the most compelling link
to competitive advantage, and are easier to implement. Intangible
interrelationships are fraught with pitfalls and are often difﬁcult to
implement, but can still be a powerful source of competitive advantage in
some industries. All three types play a role in horizontal strategy, as will be
discussed in Chapter 10.6
Tangible Interrelationships
The value chain provides the starting point for the analysis of tangible
interrelationships. A business unit can potentially share any value activity
with another business unit in the ﬁrm, including both primary and
supporting 
activities. 
For 
example, 
Procter 
& 
Gamble 
enjoys
interrelationships between its disposable diaper and paper towel businesses.
Certain raw materials can be procured and handled jointly, the development
of technology on products and processes is shared, a joint sales force sells
both products to supermarket buyers, and both products are shipped to
buyers via the same physical distribution system. The interrelationships are
shown schematically in Figure 9–1. As this example illustrates, tangible
interrelationships between two business units can involve one or many value
activities. If most value activities are shared between two business units,
however, they are not strategically distinct business units but in fact one
business unit.
Sharing an activity can lead to a sustainable competitive advantage if the
advantage of sharing outweighs the cost, provided the sharing is difﬁcult for
competitors to match. Sharing leads to a competitive advantage if it reduces
cost or enhances differentiation. Sharing always involves some cost,
however, that ranges from the cost of coordinating among the business units
involved to the need to modify business unit strategies to facilitate sharing.
Sharing and Competitive Advantage


Sharing a value activity will lead to a signiﬁcant cost advantage if it
involves an activity that represents a signiﬁcant fraction of operating costs
or assets (I term this a large value activity), and sharing lowers the cost of
performing the activity. Sharing will signiﬁcantly enhance differentiation if
it involves an activity important to differentiation in which sharing either
increases the uniqueness of the activity or reduces the cost of being unique.
Thus sharing leads to a competitive advantage if it affects the drivers of cost
position or differentiation described in Chapters 3 and 4.


Figure 9–1. Illustrative Interrelationships Between Value Chains in Paper Products


SHARING AND COST
Sharing will have a material impact on overall cost position only if the
value activities involved are a signiﬁcant proportion of operating costs or
assets, or will be in the future. In the Procter & Gamble example, the shared
value activities add up to more than 50 percent of revenues. Sharing does
not necessarily lower cost, however, unless it favorably affects the other
cost drivers of an activity. Sharing has the potential to reduce cost if the cost
of a value activity is driven by economies of scale, learning, or the pattern
of capacity utilization.7 Sharing increases the scale of an activity and
increases the rate of learning if learning is a function of cumulative
volume.8 Sharing may also improve the pattern of capacity utilization of an
activity if the involved business units utilize the activity at different times.
For example, a sales force or logistical system that is utilized heavily during
only part of the year serving one business unit may be utilized during other
periods by another. All three beneﬁts of sharing for cost position can
potentially occur simultaneously.9
Sharing activities among business units is, then, a potential substitute for
market share in any one business unit. A ﬁrm that can share scale- or
learning-sensitive activities among a number of business units may
neutralize the cost advantage of a high market share ﬁrm competing with
one business unit. Sharing is not exactly equivalent to increasing market
share in one business unit, however, because a shared activity often involves
greater complexity than an equivalent scale activity serving one business
unit. The complexity of a shared logistical system involving ten product
varieties may increase geometrically compared to one that must handle only
ﬁve. The added complexity becomes a cost of sharing.
If scale, learning, or the pattern of utilization are not important cost
drivers, sharing is likely to raise costs. Firms often mistakenly pursue
sharing solely because of excess capacity in an activity. If sharing does not
lead to scale or learning advantages or improve the long-term pattern of
utilization, however, the costs of sharing will usually mean that sharing
creates a disadvantage. The correct solution would have been to reduce
capacity in the activity rather than share it.
Figure 9–2 illustrates how these principles can be used to highlight
activities where sharing is potentially important to cost position.


Interrelationships involving value activities in the upper right-hand quadrant
of the diagram are of potentially greatest signiﬁcance due to their large
costs and sensitivity to scale, learning, or utilization. Interrelationships
involving value activities in the upper left-hand quadrant are not currently
important because sharing will not reduce cost, though the value activities
represent a large fraction of costs or assets. However, changes in the
technology 
for 
performing 
such 
activities 
can 
quickly 
make
interrelationships crucial if their cost becomes more sensitive to scale,
learning, or utilization. The change in order processing technology from
manual systems to on-line computers in many distribution industries, for
example, has begun to create important advantages from sharing order
processing across related product lines. Interrelationships involving value
activities in the lower right-hand quadrant can become important for cost
position if changes in the cost structure raise the percentage of operating
costs or assets they represent. The increasing capital cost of a plant and
supporting infrastructure, for example, will raise the potential advantage of
sharing facilities.
Figure 9–2. Shared Value Activities and Cost Position
SHARING AND DIFFERENTIATION


Sharing affects differentiation in two ways. It can enhance differentiation
by increasing the uniqueness of an activity, or it can lower the cost of
differentiation. Chapter 4 described how many activities can affect buyer
value and, thus, differentiation. Sharing will be most important to
differentiation if it affects value activities that are important to actual value
or to signaling value. In consumer electronics, for example, sharing product
development is important to differentiation because differentiation is
heavily affected by product design. Sharing will also be important to
differentiation where it reduces the cost of expensive forms of
differentiation, such as an extensive sales and service network (e.g., IBM in
ofﬁce products).
Sharing can make an activity more unique both directly and through its
impact on other drivers of uniqueness. Sharing enhances uniqueness
directly if the shared activity is more valuable to buyers because it involves
more than one business unit. Selling several products through the same
sales force may increase convenience for the buyer, for example, or allow
for the differentiation advantages of bundling (see Chapter 12). In
telecommunications, for example, buyers want system solutions and one-
vendor accountability. Similarly, joint product development may lead to
greater compatibility among related products. Sharing may also increase
uniqueness indirectly, through increasing scale or the rate of learning in an
activity. As described in Chapter 4, both scale and learning may allow an
activity to be performed in a unique way.
Sharing can reduce the cost of differentiation through its impact on the
cost drivers of differentiating activities. Sharing product development
among business units can reduce the cost of rapid model changes if product
development is subject to economies of scale, for example, while shared
procurement can lower the cost of purchasing premium quality ingredients
or components. The added complexity of a shared activity is a cost of
sharing, however, that must be weighed against the beneﬁts to
differentiation.
THE ADVANTAGES OF SHARING AND BUSINESS UNIT POSITION
Sharing an activity will usually not lead to an equal improvement in cost
or differentiation for each of the business units involved. Differences in the


scales of the business units are one important reason. A business unit that
uses a large volume of a component may not gain much of a cost advantage
from sharing fabrication of the component with a business unit that uses a
small volume of it. However, the unit that is the smaller user may enjoy a
tremendous improvement in cost position through gaining the beneﬁts of
the larger unit’s scale. The advantages to the unit that is the smaller user
may allow it to substantially improve its market position. Given such
asymmetries, it should come as no surprise that larger business units are
rarely enthusiastic about interrelationships with smaller units.10
Differences in the structure of the industries in which business units
compete may also lead to differential beneﬁts from sharing. A small
improvement in cost position may be very important in a commodity
industry, for example, but less signiﬁcant in an industry where product
differentiation is high and ﬁrms compete on quality and service. The
signiﬁcance of an interrelationship also depends on the strategies of the
business units involved. An interrelationship may lead to uniqueness that is
valuable for one business unit but much less valuable to another. It is rare,
then, that all the business units involved in an interrelationship will perceive
it as equally advantageous. This point has important implications for
horizontal strategy and for the ability of senior managers to persuade
business units to pursue interrelationships.
The Costs of Sharing
Interrelationships always involve a cost, because they require business
units to modify their behavior in some way. The costs of sharing a value
activity can be divided into three types:
• cost of coordination
• cost of compromise
• cost of inﬂexibility
The cost of coordination is relatively easy to understand. Business units
must coordinate in such areas as scheduling, setting priorities, and resolving
problems in order to share an activity. Coordination involves costs in terms
of time, personnel, and perhaps money. The cost of coordination will differ


widely for different types of sharing. A shared sales force requires continual
coordination, for example, while joint procurement may require nothing
more than periodic communication to determine the quantity of a purchased
input required per period by each business unit. Different business units
may also see the cost of coordination differently. The costs of coordination
are often viewed as higher by smaller business units, who see a continual
battle over priorities and the risk of being dictated to by larger units.
Business units that do not manage a shared activity or are located at a
distance from it also tend to fear that their best interests will not be
protected.11
The cost of coordination will be inﬂuenced by the potentially greater
complexity of a shared activity noted earlier. The added complexity
involved in sharing will vary, depending on the speciﬁc activity. Sharing a
computerized order entry system among business units will usually add
little complexity, for example, in contrast to sharing a logistical system
between two business units with large product lines. The added complexity
of a shared activity can sometimes offset economies of scale or reduce the
rate of learning compared to an activity serving one business unit. Thus
sharing can both increase scale and/or learning at the same time as it alters
the relationship between scale or learning and cost. This is important
because changing the scale-or learning-sensitivity of an activity may beneﬁt
or hurt the ﬁrm’s cost position depending on its circumstances.
Computerization generally has reduced the cost of handling the complexity
of sharing. That is one of the reasons why interrelationships are getting
more important.
A second, often more important, cost of sharing is the cost of
compromise. Sharing an activity requires that an activity be performed in a
consistent way that may not be optimal for either of the business units
involved. Sharing a sales force, for example, may mean that the salesperson
gives less attention to both business units’ product and is less
knowledgeable about either product than a dedicated sales force would be.
Similarly, sharing component fabrication may mean that the component’s
design cannot exactly match one business unit’s needs because it must also
meet another’s. The cost of compromise may include costs not only in the
shared value activity but also in other linked value activities. Sharing a sales
force, for example, may reduce the availability of salespeople to perform


minor service functions, thereby increasing the number of service
technicians required. Policy choices required to facilitate sharing, then, can
adversely affect the cost or differentiation of one or more of the business
units involved.
That business units must in some way compromise their needs to share
an activity is almost a given. The cost of compromise may be minor, or may
be great enough to nullify the value of sharing. For example, attempting to
share a logistical system among business units producing products of
widely differing sizes, weights, delivery frequencies, and sensitivities to
delivery time may well lead to a logistical system that is so inappropriate to
any of the business unit’s needs that the cost savings of sharing are
overwhelmed. However, sharing a brand name or sharing procurement of
commodities may involve little or no compromise.
The cost of compromise to share an activity will often differ for each of
the affected business units. A business unit with a product that is difﬁcult to
sell may have to compromise the most in employing a shared sales force,
for example. The cost of compromise may also differ because the particular
value activity plays a differing role in one business unit compared to
another because of its strategy. The compromise involved in joint
procurement of a common grade of milk or butter may be more serious for a
business unit of a food manufacturer pursuing a premium quality strategy
than it is for one attempting to be the low-cost producer if the common
grade is not top quality.
The cost of compromise required to achieve an interrelationship is much
less if the strategies of the business units involved are consistent with
respect to the role of the shared value activity. Achieving such consistency
often involves little or no sacriﬁce to the affected business units if their
strategic directions are coordinated over time. A particular component can
be highly effective in the products of two business units if both units design
their products with the component in mind, for example. If the design
groups of the two business units are allowed to proceed independently,
however, the chances are high that the common component will not meet
either business unit’s needs. Consistency among business units’ strategies
that facilitates sharing will rarely happen naturally. An example of both the
opportunities to shape the cost of compromise and the indirect costs of
compromise that must be weighed comes from General Foods’ successful


new Pudding Pops. Pudding Pops were designed to melt at a higher
temperature than ice cream so that distribution then could be shared with
General Foods’ Birds Eye frozen vegetables. While frozen foods are
transported at zero degrees Fahrenheit, ice cream must be transported at 20
degrees below zero or it will build up ice crystals. While the beneﬁts in
shared logistics were clear, however, sharing had some unforseen
consequences elsewhere in the value chain. Because Pudding Pops had to
be ordered by supermarket frozen food managers along with vegetables,
instead of with other freezer case novelty items, Pudding Pops were often
forgotten. As this example illustrates, the beneﬁts and costs of an
interrelationship must be examined throughout the value chain and not just
in the activity shared.
The cost of compromise is frequently reduced if an activity is designed
for sharing rather than if previously separate activities are simply combined
or if an activity designed to serve one business unit simply takes on another
with no change in procedures or technology. Recent events in ﬁnancial
services have highlighted this point. Merging computer systems initially
designed for separate ﬁnancial products has proven difﬁcult, though a
system designed to process many products would be effective. Similarly,
attempting to sell insurance and other ﬁnancial products through a
distribution system designed for selling stocks and bonds has not served any
of the products very well and has created organizational problems.
However, a new conception of a brokerage ofﬁce is emerging that combines
brokers, customer service personnel to handle simple problems and screen
clients, and specialists to sell other ﬁnancial products together with a new
shared information system. The cost of compromise in sharing distribution
is likely to be much less as a result.
The third cost of sharing is the cost of inﬂexibility. Inﬂexibility takes two
forms: (1) potential difﬁculty in responding to competitive moves, and (2)
exit barriers. Sharing can make it more difﬁcult to respond quickly to
competitors because attempting to counter a threat in one business unit may
undermine or reduce the value of the interrelationship for sister business
units. Sharing also can raise exit barriers. Exiting from a business unit with
no competitive advantage may harm other business units sharing an activity
with it.12 Unlike other costs of sharing, the cost of inﬂexibility is not an
ongoing cost but a potential cost should the need for ﬂexibility arise. The


cost of inﬂexibility will depend on the likelihood of the need to respond or
exit.
Some costs of coordination, compromise, or inﬂexibility are involved in
achieving any interrelationship. These costs, particularly any required
compromise to achieve an interrelationship, will be very real concerns
raised by business units when sharing is discussed. They may appear far
more obvious than the advantages of the interrelationship, which may
appear theoretical and speculative. Business units will also tend to view a
potential interrelationship in the light of their existing strategy, rather than
weigh its cost if their strategies are modiﬁed to minimize the costs of
sharing. Finally, the value of interrelationships is often clouded by
organizational issues involved in sharing, including those of turf and
autonomy which are addressed in Chapter 11. Thus business units can
sometimes oppose interrelationships that may result in a clear competitive
advantage to them.
The advantages of sharing an activity must be weighed against the costs
of coordination, compromise, and inﬂexibility to determine the net
competitive advantage of sharing. The assessment of the competitive
advantage from an interrelationship must be performed separately for each
of the involved business units, and the value of an interrelationship to the
ﬁrm as a whole is the sum of the net advantages to the involved business
units. The net competitive advantage from sharing an activity will almost
inevitably vary for each business unit involved. In some cases, the net value
of an interrelationship may even be negative from the viewpoint of one
business unit because of the required compromise, but will be more than
offset by a positive net value for other affected business units. For this
reason and because of the natural biases in approaching interrelationships
noted above, then, business units will often not readily agree on pursuing
interrelationships that will beneﬁt a ﬁrm as a whole. Interrelationships will
only happen under such circumstances if there is an explicit horizontal
strategy.
While there are always costs of sharing, forces are at work to reduce
them in many industries. The new technologies described earlier in this
chapter are having the effect of reducing the cost of coordination,
compromise, and, to a lesser extent, the cost of inﬂexibility. Easier
communication and better information systems make coordination easier.


Low-cost computers and information systems also introduce ﬂexibility into
value activities, or the technical capability to minimize the cost of
compromise. Programmable machines and robots can adapt to the different
needs of business units sharing them. Many ﬁrms are only beginning to
perceive these possibilities for lowering the cost of sharing, but continue to
base their assessment of interrelationships on outdated methods.
Difﬁculty of Matching
The 
sustainability 
of 
the 
net 
competitive 
advantage 
of 
an
interrelationship will depend on the difﬁculty competitors have in matching
it. Competitors have two basic options in matching the competitive
advantage of an interrelationship: (1) duplicating the interrelationship, or
(2) offsetting it through other means such as gaining share in the affected
business unit or exploiting a different interrelationship. The ease of
duplicating an interrelationship will vary depending on whether competitors
are in the same group of related industries involved. The most valuable
interrelationships from a strategic point of view are those involving
industries that competitors are not in and that have high barriers to entry.
For example, Procter & Gamble’s advantage from the interrelationships
between its disposable diaper and paper towel business units is quite
sustainable because its paper towel competitors are blocked from entering
the diaper business by enormous entry barriers. A competitor may also face
higher or lower costs of coordination and compromise than the ﬁrm in
achieving 
an 
interrelationship 
depending 
on 
the 
strategies 
and
circumstances of its business units. Other things being equal, then, a ﬁrm
should pursue most aggressively those interrelationships that its competitors
will ﬁnd the most difﬁcult to match because of the costs of coordination or
compromise.
The ability of competitors to offset an interrelationship is a function of
whether they can ﬁnd some other way of improving position in the affected
business unit through changes in its strategy or by pursuit of different
interrelationships.13 Since nearly any value activity can potentially be
shared, a competitor may be able to forge an interrelationship among a
different group of business units or share different value activities among


the same group of businesses. If a ﬁrm, through pursuing an
interrelationship, causes a competitor to respond by pursuing different
interrelationships, it faces the danger that the ultimate outcome will be an
erosion in its relative position.
A ﬁnal consideration in assessing the difﬁculty of matching an
interrelationship is whether the same beneﬁts can be achieved by a
competitor through a coalition or long-term contract. Sometimes a ﬁrm can
gain the beneﬁts of sharing through a joint venture or other form of
coalition with another ﬁrm, without actually entering another industry.
While such coalitions may be difﬁcult to forge, they should always be
considered in assessing the value of an interrelationship and how to achieve
it.
Identifying Tangible Interrelationships
To aid in identifying the tangible interrelationships present in a ﬁrm, a
useful starting point is to catalog all the forms of sharing that occur in
practice as well as the alternative ways they can create competitive
advantage. Figure 9–3 divides forms of sharing into ﬁve categories:
production, market, procurement, technology, and infrastructure. I have
included shared human resource management as part of shared
infrastructure. It is useful to separate these categories of interrelationships
because they raise different issues in sharing. Interrelationships ultimately
stem from commonalities of various types among industries, such as
common buyers, channels, or production processes. These commonalities
deﬁne potential interrelationships; whether the interrelationships lead to a
competitive advantage is a function of the beneﬁts and costs described
earlier. The sources of each category of interrelationship and the possible
forms of sharing to capture it are shown in Table 9–1.
MARKET INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Market interrelationships involve the sharing of primary value activities
involved in reaching and interacting with the buyer, from outbound logistics
to service. When business units have only the geographic location of their
buyers in common, sharing is usually restricted to physical distribution


systems, order processing, and to servicing and sales if the products have
similar sales and servicing needs. Richer opportunities for sharing are
present when business units also have common buyers, common channels,
or both. If buyers or channels are the same, sharing of physical distribution
or order processing systems among business units usually involves less
complexity and lower costs of sharing. In addition, common buyers or
channels open up a wide variety of other possible forms of sharing shown in
Table 9–1.
The subtleties in identifying potential market interrelationships stem
from the tendency to view the buyer or channel too broadly. A wide variety
of products and services are sold to oil companies, for example, including
drilling equipment, reﬁnery equipment, and transportation equipment such
as oil tankers and tanker trucks. Thus oil companies might be identiﬁed as a
common buyer by business units in many industries. The various products
are sold to different parts of the oil company, however, which often have
little contact with each other. Even within a product category such as
drilling equipment, equipment used in exploration is frequently sold to a
different organizational unit than production equipment. Even in instances
when the same unit of the oil company makes the purchase, the particular
individuals making the purchase decision or inﬂuencing the decision maker
will often differ for different pieces of equipment. Engineers may be
responsible for choosing some high-technology equipment such as blowout
preventers, for example, while purchasing agents often choose more
standard items such as pipe.


Figure 9–3. Categories of Tangible Interrelationships


TABLE 9–1 Possible Sources of Interrelationships
Another example of viewing the buyer too broadly is becoming apparent
from recent experience in ﬁnancial services. The traditional buyer of stocks
and bonds is a different individual than the average life insurance buyer.
Both are different individuals than the typical buyer of futures. These
differences 
are 
nullifying 
simplistic 
efforts 
to 
achieve 
market
interrelationships in ﬁnancial services. Meaningful opportunities for
exploring market interrelationships among business units are usually
present only where the decision makers for the products are the same or
have some contact with each other.
The same issues arise in identifying common channels. Though two
products might both be sold through department stores, few actual channel
interrelationships are likely to be present if one is sold through discount


department stores and the other through exclusive department stores such as
Lord & Taylor and Neiman-Marcus. There are also often different buying
executives responsible for different classes of products in the same channel.
In most supermarket chains, for example, frozen foods are typically bought
by a different buyer than meats, even though some frozen foods are meat
products. Even if the decision makers are different, however, opportunities
for sharing logistical and order processing systems may exist with both
common buyers and common channels.
Whether products sold to a common buyer are substitutes or
complements can also affect the advantage of sharing market-related
activities. Shared marketing can yield less of a cost advantage when
products are substitutes because the buyer will purchase either one product
or the other but not both. However, offering substitute products to buyers
can reduce the risk of substitution because losses in one product can be
compensated in the other (see Chapter 8). Joint marketing of substitutes can
also enhance a ﬁrm’s differentiation.
When business units sell complementary products to common buyers,
the advantage of sharing is often greater than if the products are unrelated
or substitutes. Complementary products usually have correlated demand
that facilitates the efﬁcient utilization of shared value activities, and other
practices such as common branding, joint advertising and bundling. The
strategic issues raised by complementary products, a subset of market
interrelationships, are treated separately in Chapter 12.
The potential competitive advantages of the important forms of market
interrelationships and the most likely sources of compromise cost are shown
in Table 9–2. Indirect activities such as market research, sales force
administration and advertising production (e.g., artwork, layout) can often
be shared more easily than direct activities because they require lower
compromise costs.14 The beneﬁts of market interrelationships can often be
enhanced by changes in the strategies of the involved business units that
reduce the cost of compromise. Standardizing sales force practices,
repositioning brands to make their images more compatible, or
standardizing delivery standards or payment terms may make sharing easier,
for example.


PRODUCTION INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Interrelationships in production involve the sharing of upstream value
activities such as inbound logistics, component fabrication, assembly,
testing, and indirect functions such as maintenance and site infrastructure.
All these forms of sharing require that activities be located together. Doing
so can lead to a compromise cost if the suppliers or buyers of the business
units sharing the activities have greatly different geographic locations since
inbound or outbound freight costs may be increased. Shared procurement is
different from production interrelationships because merging facilities is not
implied. Purchased inputs can be procured centrally but shipped from
suppliers to dispersed facilities.
Production interrelationships can be illusory when apparently similar
value activities are examined closely. For example, though the machines
themselves are generically the same, a job-shop manufacturing process for
one product may involve different machine tolerances than another, or lot
sizes or run lengths can be quite different. As with market
interrelationships, indirect value activities offer particularly attractive
opportunities for sharing because the compromise costs are often low. For
example, such activities as building operations, maintenance, site
infrastructure, and testing laboratories can be shared despite the fact that the
actual manufacturing processes are different.
Table 9–3 shows the potential competitive advantages of important forms
of production interrelationships, and the likely sources of compromise cost.
The balance will depend on the strategies of the involved business units. For
example, two business units with differentiation strategies are more likely to
have similar needs in terms of component speciﬁcations, manufacturing
tolerances, and testing standards than if one business unit pursues cost
leadership while another offers a premium product.
TABLE 9–2 Determinants of Net Competitive Advantage from Market
Interrelationships
FORM OF
SHARING
POTENTIAL COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGES
MOST LIKELY SOURCES OF
COMPROMISE COST
Shared brand
Lower advertising costs
Product images are


name
inconsistent or
conﬂicting
 
Reinforcing product
images/reputations
Buyer is reluctant to
purchase too much from
one ﬁrm
 
 
Diluted reputation if one
product is inferior
Shared
advertising
Lower advertising costs
Appropriate media or
messages are different
 
Greater leverage in purchasing
advertising space
Advertising effectiveness
reduced by multiple
products
Shared
promotion
Lower promotion costs
through shared couponing
and cross couponing
Appropriate forms and
timing of promotion
differ
Cross selling of
products to
each others’
buyers
Lower cost of ﬁnding new
buyers
Product images are
inconsistent or
conﬂicting
 
Lower cost of selling
Buyer is reluctant to
purchase too much from
one ﬁrm
Interrelated
pricing of
complementary
products
See Chapter 12
See Chapter 12
Bundled selling See Chapter 12
See Chapter 12
Shared
marketing
department
Lower cost of market research Product positionings are
different or inconsistent


 
Lower marketing overhead
Buyer’s purchasing
behavior is not the same
Shared channels Enhanced bargaining power
with the channels leading to
improvements in service,
shelf positioning,
maintenance/repair/support,
or channel margins
Channel gains too much
bargaining power vis-à-
vis the ﬁrm
Channel unwilling to
allow a single ﬁrm to
account for a major
portion of its sales
 
One-stop shopping for the
buyer improves
differentiation
Use of shared channel
will erode support from
other channels
 
Lower cost of channel support
infrastructure
 
Shared sales
force or sales
ofﬁces
Lower selling costs or sales
force infrastructure costs
Different buyer
purchasing behavior
 
Better quality salespersons
Buyer reluctance to
purchase large amounts
from a single
salesperson
 
More products to sell improves
access to the buyer or
enhances buyer convenience
Salesperson is not
allowed adequate time
with the buyer to present
a number of products
effectively
 
Better sales force utilization if
the pattern of utilization is
not the same
Different type of
salesperson is most
effective Certain
products get more
attention than others


Shared service
network
Lower servicing costs
Differences in equipment
or knowledge necessary
to make typical repairs
 
More sophisticated or
responsive servicing, due to
improved technology or
denser service locations
Differences in the need
for timeliness in service
calls
 
Better capacity utilization if
demand for service is
inversely correlated
Differing degrees to
which the buyer
performs service in-
house
Shared order
processing
Lower order processing costs
Differences in the form
and composition of
typical orders
 
Lower cost of employing
improved technology that
improves responsiveness or
billing information
Differences in ordering
cycles that lead to
inconsistent order
processing needs
 
Better capacity utilization if
order ﬂows are inversely
correlated
 
 
One-stop shopping for the
buyer improves
differentiation
 
TABLE 9–3 Determinants of Net Competitive Advantage from
Production Interrelationships
FORM OF SHARING
POTENTIAL COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGES
MOST LIKELY SOURCES
OF COMPROMISE COST


Shared inbound
logistical system
Lower freight and
material handling costs
Input sources are located
in different geographic
areas
 
Better technology
enhances delivery
reliability, reduces
damage, etc.
Plants are located in
differing geographic
areas
 
Sharing allows more
frequent, smaller
deliveries that reduce
inventory or improve
plant productivity
Varying physical
characteristics of inputs
imply that a logistical
system which can
handle all of them is
suboptimal
 
 
Needs for frequency and
reliability of inbound
delivery differ among
business units
Shared components
(identical
components used in
different end
products)
Lower cost of component
fabrication
Needs for component
design and quality differ
among business units
 
Better technology for
component
manufacturing improves
quality
 
Shared component
fabrication facilities
(similar or related
components are
produced using the
Lower component costs
High setup costs for
different component
varieties


same equipment and
facilities)
 
Better fabrication
technology improves
quality
Needs for component
quality or tolerances
differ among business
units
 
Capacity utilization is
improved because
demand for similar
components is not
perfectly correlated
Flexible manufacturing
equipment has higher
cost than specialized
equipment
 
 
Larger workforce in one
location leads to
potential hiring,
unionization or
productivity problems
Shared assembly
facilities (similar or
related end products
are assembled using
the same
equipment/lines)
Lower assembly costs
High setup costs for
different products
 
Better assembly
technology improves
quality
Needs for quality or
tolerances differ
 
Utilization is improved
because demand is not
perfectly correlated
Flexible assembly
equipment is higher cost
 
A shared materials
handling system can
Larger workforce in one
location leads to
potential hiring,


feed different assembly
lines
unionization or
productivity problems
Shared testing/quality
control
Lower testing cost
Testing procedures and
quality standards differ
 
Better technology
increases the
extensiveness of testing
and improves quality
control
Flexible testing facilities
and equipment are
higher cost
Shared indirect
activities (including
maintenance, plant
overhead, personnel
department,
cafeteria, etc.)
Lower indirect activity
costs
Differing needs for
indirect activities among
business units
 
Improved quality of
indirect activities
Larger workforce in one
location leads to
potential hiring,
unionization, or
productivity problems
PROCUREMENT INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Procurement interrelationships involve the shared procurement of
common purchased inputs. Common inputs are frequently present in
diversiﬁed ﬁrms, particularly if one looks beyond major raw materials and
pieces of capital equipment. Suppliers are increasingly willing to make
deals based on supplying the needs of plants located around the world, and
negotiate prices reﬂecting total corporate needs. Some ﬁrms go overboard in
shared procurements, however, because they fail to recognize the potential
costs of compromise or they establish a rigid procurement process that does
not allow for opportunism in negotiating attractive opportunities.


The potential competitive advantage of shared procurement and the
likely sources of compromise cost are shown in Table 9–4:
TABLE 9–4 Determinants of Net Competitive Advantage from
Procurement Interrelationships
FORM OF SHARING
POTENTIAL COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGES
MOST LIKELY SOURCES
OF COMPROMISE COST
Joint procurement of
common inputs
Lower costs of inputs
Input needs are different
in terms of quality or
speciﬁcations, leading
to higher costs than
necessary in business
units requiring less
quality
 
Improved input quality
Technical assistance and
delivery needs from
suppliers vary among
business units
 
Improved service from
vendors in terms of
responsiveness, holding
of inventory, etc.
Centralization can reduce
the information ﬂow
from factory to
purchasing, and make
purchasing less
responsive
TECHNOLOGICAL INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Technological interrelationships involve the sharing of technology
development activities throughout the value chain. They are distinguished
from production interrelationships because their impact is on the cost or
uniqueness of technology development, while production interrelationships
involve sharing activities involved in the actual production of the product on
an ongoing basis. It is important to recognize, however, that


interrelationships in process development often occur together with
production or market interrelationships. Interrelationships in process
technology typically grow out of interrelationships in the primary activities.
As with other forms of interrelationships, apparently promising
technological interrelationships can be illusory. Scientiﬁc disciplines that
overlap for two business units may be of minor importance to success
compared to scientiﬁc disciplines that do not overlap. Harris Corporation,
for example, thought it could reduce the development expense involved in
entering word processing through adapting software from its text editing
system sold to newspapers. Harris discovered that the text editing system
had so many features that were speciﬁc to the needs of newspapers that
development of a word processing system had to start from scratch.
Truly signiﬁcant technological interrelationships are ones involving
technologies important to the cost or differentiation of the products or
processes 
involved, 
as 
microelectronics 
technology 
is 
to 
both
telecommunications and data processing. Many products have superﬁcial
technological similarities, making the identiﬁcation of true technological
interrelationships difﬁcult. As with other types of interrelationships, the net
competitive advantage of a technological interrelationship will differ
depending on the industry and strategies of the business units involved. For
example, the beneﬁts of sharing microelectronics technology will tend to be
greater for two consumer products business units than for a defense
business unit and a consumer business unit. Rockwell International learned
this lesson when it put a team of engineers from its defense business into its
Admiral TV set division. The sensitivity to cost was so much greater in TV
sets than in defense equipment that sharing did not succeed. The same thing
occurred in business aircraft, where a design developed originally for
military use (the Sabreliner) proved too expensive for the commercial
market.
Table 9–5 shows the potential competitive advantages that can stem from
sharing technology development as well as the most likely sources of
compromise costs.
INFRASTRUCTURE INTERRELATIONSHIPS


The ﬁnal category of interrelationships involve ﬁrm infrastructure,
including such activities as ﬁnancing, legal, accounting, and human
resource management. Some infrastructure activities are almost always
shared in diversiﬁed ﬁrms, as described in Chapter 2. In most cases, the
effect of sharing on competitive advantage is not great because
infrastructure is not a large proportion of cost and sharing has little impact
on differentiation. It is ironic, therefore, that the vast majority of literature
on sharing has been on sharing infrastructure—principally ﬁnance and the
utilization of capital. Interrelationships in ﬁnance, particularly, have been
seen as a signiﬁcant beneﬁt the diversiﬁed ﬁrm contributes to its business
units.
There are two basic sources of ﬁnancial interrelationships: joint raising
of capital and shared utilization of capital (primarily working capital).
Economies of scale in raising capital may indeed exist, especially up to a
certain quantity of capital needed. Efﬁcient utilization of working capital is
made possible by countercyclical or counterseasonal needs for funds among
business units, which allows cash freed up by one business unit to be
deployed in another. Financial interrelationships typically involve relatively
few compromise costs that must be offset against any savings. Moreover,
ﬁnancial interrelationships are among the easiest to achieve if they are
present, perhaps a reason why they are so frequently discussed.
TABLE 9–5 Determinants of Net Competitive Advantage from
Technological Interrelationships
FORM OF SHARING
POTENTIAL COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGES
MOST LIKELY SOURCES
OF COMPROMISE COST
Shared technology
development (for
separate products or
where one product
is incorporated into
another)
Lower product or process
design costs (including
shorter design time)
Technologies are the
same, but the
tradeoffs in applying
the technology are
different among
business units
 
Larger critical mass in
R&D, or the ability to
attract better people
 


improves the
innovativeness of
product or process
designs
 
Transference of
developments among
product areas enhances
differentiation or allows
early entry into new
technologies
 
Shared interface
design for products
with a technological
interface
Lower interface design
costs
A nonstandard
interface reduces the
available market
 
Differentiation through
superior and proprietary
interface performance
Risks of bundling
(Chapter 12)
 
Bundling opportunities
created through a
nonstandard interface
(see Chapter 12)
 
The major limitation to the competitive advantage of shared ﬁnancing is
the efﬁciency of capital markets. Scale economies in ﬁnancing appear to be
moderate for most ﬁrms and lead to a relatively small difference in
ﬁnancing costs. Firms can also borrow to cover short-term cash needs and
lend excess cash in the highly efﬁcient markets for commercial paper and
other instruments, mitigating the value of sharing working capital. Hence
ﬁnancial interrelationships are rarely the basis for creating a signiﬁcant
competitive advantage, unless the size and credit rating of competitors
differ greatly. Other forms of infrastructure interrelationships can be
important in particular industries. Shared infrastructure for hiring and
training is important in some service industries, while shared government
relations can be signiﬁcant in natural resource ﬁrms.


Intangible Interrelationships
Intangible interrelationships lead to competitive advantage through the
transfer of skills among separate value chains. Through operating one
business unit, a ﬁrm gains know-how that allows it to improve the way
another generically similar business unit competes. The transference of
skills can go in either direction—e.g., from existing business units to a new
business unit or from a new business unit back to existing business units.
The transference of generic know-how can occur anywhere in the value
chain. Philip Morris transferred generic know-how in the marketing of
consumer packaged goods from its cigarette business to Miller Beer, while
Emerson Electric transferred plant design and cost reduction skills when it
acquired the chain saw ﬁrm Beaird-Poulan. In both cases, the transference
of skills changed the way that the receiving business unit competed and
enhanced its competitive advantage.
Intangible interrelationships lead to a competitive advantage if the
improvement in cost or differentiation in the business unit receiving the
know-how exceeds the costs of transferring it. Know-how residing in one
business unit has already been paid for, and hence transferring it may
involve little cost compared to its cost of development. The actual
transference of know-how always involves some cost, however, whether it
be the cost of time of skilled personnel or perhaps the greater risk that
proprietary information will leak out. Using the know-how that is
transferred will also typically involve some cost in adapting it to the
circumstances of the receiving business unit. These costs of transferring
know-how must be weighed against the potential beneﬁts to determine
whether an intangible interrelationship will create competitive advantage.
Intangible interrelationships are important to competitive advantage
when the transference of know-how or skills allows the receiving business
unit to lower costs or enhance differentiation. This occurs if the transference
of skills leads to policy changes that lower cost or enhance differentiation,
or because the transference of skills gives the receiving business unit better
insight into its other drivers of cost or uniqueness. The transference of skills
from Philip Morris to Miller Beer, for example, resulted in policy changes
in the way beer was positioned and marketed, as well as an escalation of


advertising spending that increased scale economies in the industry and
worked to the advantage of large brands like Miller.
Identifying Intangible Interrelationships. Intangible interrelationships
arise from a variety of generic similarities among business units:15
• same generic strategy
• same type of buyer (though not the same buyer)
• similar conﬁguration of the value chain (e.g., many dispersed sites of
mineral extraction and processing)
• similar important value activities (e.g., relations with government)
Although value activities cannot be shared, these similarities among
business units mean that know-how gained in one business unit is valuable
and transferable to another.16
Because of the myriad possible generic similarities among business
units, it is not possible to be as complete in identifying the important types
as it was with tangible interrelationships. However, the value chain provides
a systematic way of searching for intangible interrelationships. A ﬁrm can
examine the major value activities in its business units to unearth
similarities in activities or the way the chain is conﬁgured that might
provide the basis for transference of know-how or highlight generic skills
that might be applied to new industries.
Intangible Interrelationships and Competitive Advantage. Intangible
interrelationships of one type or another are very widespread. It is always
possible to point to some generic similarity in some value activity between
almost any two business units. An airline is widely dispersed, has multiple
sites, and relies heavily on scheduling, characteristics shared by trucking
companies, international trading companies and industrial gas producers.
Widespread similarities of some kind make the analysis of intangible
interrelationships quite subtle.
The key tests in identifying intangible interrelationships that are
important to competitive advantage are the following:


• How similar are the value activities in the business units?
• How important are the value activities involved to competition?
•  How signiﬁcant is the know-how that would be transferred to
competitive advantage in the relevant activities?
These questions must be answered together. The similarity of two
business units is a function of how much know-how can be usefully
transferred. The importance of the transferred know-how is a function of its
contribution to improving competitive advantage in the receiving business
unit. The transference of just one insight can sometimes make an enormous
difference to competitive advantage, so even business units that are not very
similar can have important intangible interrelationships. However, truly
important intangible interrelationships are much less common than an initial
search for them might imply. It is frequently difﬁcult, moreover, to predict
whether the transference of know-how will prove to be valuable.
The most common pitfall in assessing intangible interrelationships is to
identify generic similarities among business units that are not important to
competition. Either the know-how that can be transferred does not affect
value activities that are important to cost or differentiation in the receiving
business unit, or it does not provide insights that competitors do not already
have. Philip Morris’s acquisition of the Seven Up soft drink company
provides a possible example of the latter. While the beer industry had
historically been populated by family ﬁrms with little marketing ﬂair, the
soft drink industry has long been characterized by sophisticated marketing
by the likes of Coke, Pepsi, and Dr Pepper. Philip Morris’s marketing
expertise appears to have offerred much less of an advantage for Seven Up
than it did for Miller.
Many ﬁrms have fallen into the trap of identifying intangible
interrelationships that are illusory or do not matter for competitive
advantage. Often, it seems, intangible interrelationships are forced, and
represent more of an ex poste rationalization of diversiﬁcation moves
undertaken for other reasons. Intangible interrelationships were prominent
in discussions of synergy. The difﬁculty of ﬁnding and implementing
signiﬁcant intangible interrelationships is one of the reasons synergy proved
such a disappointment to many ﬁrms.


The effective exploitation of intangible interrelationships thus requires
an acute understanding of the business units involved as well as the
industries 
they 
compete 
in. 
The 
importance 
of 
an 
intangible
interrelationship for competition can only be truly understood by
identifying speciﬁc ways in which know-how can be transferred so as to
make a difference. The mere hope that one business unit might learn
something useful from another is frequently a hope not realized.
Even intangible interrelationships where the beneﬁts of transferring
know-how far exceed the cost of transferring it do not lead to competitive
advantage unless the transference of know-how actually takes place. Know-
how is transferred through interchange between managers or other
personnel in the affected business units. This process does not occur
without active efforts on the part of senior management. Personnel in the
receiving business unit may be wary or unsure of the value of know-how
from a “different” industry. They may even openly resist it. Business units
with know-how may be hesitant to commit the time of important personnel
and may view the know-how as highly proprietary. Finally, transference of
know-how is subjective and the beneﬁts of doing so often are hard for
managers to understand when compared to tangible interrelationships. All
these factors imply that even important intangible interrelationships can be
very difﬁcult to achieve. Doing so requires a sustained commitment and the
existence of formal mechanisms through which the required transference of
skills will take place. A conducive organizational setting can greatly reduce
the cost of transferring know-how.
Competitor Interrelationships
Competitor interrelationships are present when a ﬁrm actually or
potentially competes with diversiﬁed rivals in more than one business unit.
Any action taken against multipoint competitors must consider the entire
range of jointly contested businesses. In addition, a ﬁrm’s competitive
advantage vis-à-vis a multipoint competitor depends in part on the
interrelationships that both have achieved. The competitive position of a
multipoint competitor is often more a function of its overall position in a
group of related industries than its market share in any one industry because


of interrelationships. While multipoint competitors and interrelationships do
not necessarily occur together, they often do because both tangible and
intangible interrelationships lead ﬁrms to follow parallel diversiﬁcation
paths.17
Figure 9–4. Corporate Competitor Matrix
Identifying existing multipoint competitors is relatively easy with a
diagram such as that shown in Figure 9–4. For the ﬁrm shown in Figure 9–
4, competitors A, B, C, D, and E are multipoint competitors. The other
competitors are single point, but represent potential multi-points. Analysis
of the ﬁgure suggests that business units 2 and 3 are in strongly related
industries, because four competitors compete in both industries. The
presence of many competitors in two industries is a relatively strong,
though not perfect, indication that they are related. The relatedness of
industries is also a clue to predicting which ﬁrms are the most likely
potential multipoint competitors. Given the apparent relationship of the


industries in which business units 2 and 3 compete, competitor H may be
the most likely potential multipoint competitor.
Table 9–6 shows the multipoint competitor matrix for the consumer
paper products sector in 1983, along with each ﬁrm’s year of entry. It is
clear that competitor interrelationships are numerous and that they have
increased signiﬁcantly over time, particularly during the 1960s and 1970s.
We would observe a similar pattern in many other groups of industries. The
pattern of competitor interrelationships in the table will be discussed further
below.
Closely analagous to the analysis of multipoint competitors is the
analysis 
of 
single-point 
competitors 
with 
different 
patterns 
of
interrelationships from the ﬁrm’s. For example, Xerox, Canon, and
Matsushita all compete in convenience copiers. However, Xerox draws on
interrelationships with its high-volume copiers and ofﬁce automation
equipment. Canon’s interrelationships have historically been strongest with
its calculator and camera businesses, while Matsushita draws on
interrelationships involving its broad range of consumer electronic and
other electronic products. Interestingly, both Canon and Matsushita are
diversifying into ofﬁce automation to match Xerox’s interrelationships
there.
Single-point competitors with different patterns of interrelationships are
important because they bring differing sources of competitive advantage to
an industry. These may be difﬁcult for a ﬁrm to match and may shift the
basis of competition. Moreover, as the copier example illustrates, single-
point competitors with different patterns of interrelationships are sometimes
prime candidates to become multipoint competitors.
Multipoint Competitors in Unrelated Industries
Where a ﬁrm faces a multipoint competitor in industries that are not
related, the strategic issues revolve around how actions in one business unit
can lead to reactions in another and how equilibrium with the competitor
can be reached in several contested industries. Because a ﬁrm and a
multipoint competitor meet each other in a number of industries rather than
one, a greater number of variables enter into determining their relative


position. This implies that ﬁrms need more information about each other to
avoid mistaken interpretations of moves. It also often means that
destabilizing events in one industry can spread to others. This added
complexity of the game makes peaceful coexistence potentially difﬁcult.
TABLE 9–6 Competitor Interrelationships in Consumer Paper
Products, 1983
On the other hand, competing in a number of industries also opens up
greater possibilities for signaling, making threats, establishing blocking
positions, and taking reciprocal actions. For example, a ﬁrm threatened in
one industry might retaliate in a different industry, sending a signal of
displeasure but creating less risk of escalation than if the response were
direct. The threat that a ﬁrm can retaliate in several industries (and inﬂict a
higher cost on the competitor) may also tend to deter a competitor from
making a threatening move in the ﬁrst place.
Another stabilizing factor in multipoint competition is the fact that focal
points, or natural equilibrium points for competition, may be more
prevalent.18 Where only one industry is contested, the number of focal
points consistent with each competitor’s perception of its relative strength is
likely to be small. With equally balanced competitors, for example, an equal
division of market shares may be the only focal point. It may well be an
unstable one because any temporary shift in market shares is likely to
trigger a strong response to preserve the balance. With two jointly contested
industries, there may be a number of additional focal points that are more
stable, and one of them will tend to be found sooner.


Table 9–7 illustrates this. Here focal points 2 and 3 will tend to be more
stable than focal point 1. In each industry, the high-share competitor will
tend to have a clear competitive advantage, and hence a small disturbance
will be less likely to cause either ﬁrm to precipitate a war. Similarly, the
asymmetry of positions reduces the chances that the high-share competitor
in one industry will seek an even greater share, since it remains vulnerable
to retaliation in the industry in which it is weak.
Multipoint competitors must be viewed in their totality for purposes of
offensive and defensive strategy. Most competitor analysis is done at the
business unit level, however, and looks exclusively at competitors’ positions
in a single industry. Some corporate or group-level analysis of multipoint
competitors is essential. Minimally, a broader perspective on multipoint
competitors needs to be applied to test that business unit actions against
them will not have adverse consequences in other business units. Ideally a
more comprehensive analysis of existing and potential multipoint
competitors should be done to uncover opportunities for a coordinated
offensive or defensive strategy across business units.
TABLE 9–7 Focal Points and Multipoint Competitors
 
FOCAL POINT 1
FOCAL POINT 2
FOCAL POINT 3
 
SHARE OF
MARKET
1
SHARE OF
MARKET
2
SHARE OF
MARKET
1
SHARE OF
MARKET
2
SHARE OF
MARKET
1
SHARE OF
MARKET
2
Competitor
A
50
50
60
40
70
30
Competitor
B
50
50
40
60
30
70
Some additional considerations in developing strategy vis-à-vis
multipoint competitors in unrelated businesses are as follows:


Forecast possible retaliation in all jointly contested industries. A
multipoint competitor may retaliate against a move in any or all jointly
contested industries. It may well choose to respond in the industry where its
response will be the most cost-effective (see Chapter 14). For example, it
may respond in an industry in which it has a small share because it can
inﬂict a large penalty on the ﬁrm at low cost. Each industry is not a separate
battleﬁeld.
Beware of a small position by a multipoint in a key industry. A small
position held by a multipoint in an industry in which the ﬁrm has a large
share (or high cash ﬂow) can give the multipoint a lever against the ﬁrm.
Such a position may be an effective blocking position (see Chapter 14).
Look for opportunities to exploit overall corporate position vis-à-vis a
multipoint. The overall corporate position vis-à-vis a multipoint may
provide less costly and less risky means of responding to threats. Similarly,
coordinated actions in a number of industries may make it difﬁcult and very
costly for a competitor to respond.
Establish blocking positions for defensive purposes. A small presence in
one of a multipoint competitor’s key industries can provide a way to inﬂict
serious penalties on it at relatively low cost.
Strategy toward a multipoint competitor is affected by whether or not the
competitor perceives the connections among industries. Perceiving the
connection among jointly contested industries cannot be assumed where a
multipoint competitor is managed via highly autonomous business units. In
some cases, a competitor’s ignorance of multi-industry linkages may allow
the ﬁrm to gain in relative position. For example, an attack on one business
unit may divert competitor attention and resources from defending its
position in a more important business unit.
Multipoint Competition in Related Industries


When a ﬁrm faces multipoint competitors in related industries, the
strategic problem increases in complexity. The issues discussed in the
previous section still apply and are often even more important because
relatedness increases the likelihood that a competitor will perceive the
linkages among businesses. The presence of tangible interrelationships
among industries, however, complicates the assessment of relative position.
A ﬁrm’s competitive advantage or disadvantage in any business unit that
faces a multipoint competitor is a function of overall position in value
activities involving interrelationships. If a ﬁrm and the competitor employ a
shared sales force or logistical system, for example, the relative cost or
differentiation of the sales force or logistical system as a whole is what
matters. The extent to which interrelationships are actually achieved is what
determines their effect on competitive advantage, not the potential to share.
In addition, the net competitive advantage from an interrelationship for both
a ﬁrm and a competitor will be inﬂuenced by their respective strategies. A
competitor may potentially face higher or lower costs of coordination or
compromise than the ﬁrm does, making an interrelationship more or less
valuable to it.
A competitor’s group of interrelated business units may not exactly
overlap with the ﬁrm’s. For example, Procter & Gamble competes in
disposable diapers, paper towels, feminine hygiene products, and bathroom
tissue, but not in paper napkins and towel wipes. Kimberly Clark, on the
other hand, is in all these businesses. When the related industries that are
jointly contested do not overlap exactly, the comparison between a ﬁrm and
a competitor must center on the ﬁrm’s whole array of interrelationships
relative to the competitor’s. Each shared activity must be analyzed for the
competitor as a whole, and compared to the ﬁrm’s cost or differentiation in
that activity. The volume provided by all ﬁve of Procter & Gamble’s paper-
related business units compared to that of Kimberly’s eight business units
will affect their relative position in shared value activities such as the
logistical system, for example. Relative position in any business unit is built
up by comparing all shared activities as well as value activities that are not
shared.
A weak relative position in one related business unit can be partially or
completely offset by superior positions in other related business units.
Procter & Gamble is in fewer paper products industries than Kimberly-


Clark, for example, but it is the market leader in diapers, toilet tissue, and
paper towels. Diapers, particularly, is a very large industry relative to the
others. Procter & Gamble’s total consumer paper products volume is
undoubtedly higher than Kimberly’s. Analyzing a ﬁrm’s relative position
vis-à-vis multipoint competitors thus requires an examination of the
complete portfolios of the two ﬁrms.
The most basic strategic implication of multipoint competition in related
industries is the same as in unrelated industries—competitor analysis must
encompass the competitor’s entire portfolio of business units instead of
examining each business unit in isolation. Competitive advantage in one
business unit can be strongly affected by the extent of potential
interrelationships with other business units in the competitor’s portfolio and
by whether they are achieved.
Balance or superiority in shared value activities relative to a multipoint
competitor can potentially be achieved in many ways. Investing to gain a
stronger position in industries where a ﬁrm is already strong can offset the
advantages a competitor has from being in a broader array of related
industries. If the competitive advantage from shared activities is signiﬁcant
and no compensating advantages can be found, a ﬁrm may be forced to
match a competitor’s portfolio of related business units. Matching can be
important for defensive reasons as well as offensive ones. It may be
necessary to match a competitor’s diversiﬁcation even if the ﬁrm has a
competitive advantage in its existing business units, to prevent the
competitor from gaining the advantages of interrelationships without
opposition. Conversely, if a ﬁrm can discover new related industries that
competitors are not in, it may be able to strengthen position in important
shared value activities.
In consumer paper products, for example, there has been a great deal of
offensive and defensive diversiﬁcation. Table 9–6 shows the dates of entry
of each competitor into the respective industries. Competitors’ portfolios of
businesses have broadened since the late 1950s. Procter & Gamble’s actions
triggered this sequence of moves. P&G began in toilet tissue and then
moved into facial tissue, disposable diapers, and paper towels defensively.
Competitors with Different Patterns of Interrelationships


Single-point and multipoint competitors may well pursue different types
of interrelationships, involving different shared activities or activities shared
in a different way. A good example of this situation is again the consumer
paper 
products 
ﬁeld 
(Table 
9–6). 
Competitors 
have 
pursued
interrelationships in paper products in different ways, reﬂecting their overall
portfolios of business units and the strategies employed in them. In
disposable diapers, for example, Procter & Gamble enjoys joint
procurement of common raw materials, shared technology development, a
shared sales force, and a shared logistical system among its paper product
lines. However, Procter & Gamble has separate brand names for each paper
product line. In contrast, Johnson & Johnson (J&J) competes in disposable
diapers as well as a wide line of other baby care products, all sold under the
Johnson & Johnson brand name. Its interrelationships include that shared
brand name, plus a shared sales force and shared market research in the
baby care ﬁeld. J&J enjoys little sharing in production, logistics, and
product or process technology development. Each competitor in Table 9–6
has a somewhat different pattern of interrelationships.
A competitor with a different pattern of interrelationships represents both
an opportunity and a threat. It is a threat because the competitive advantage
gained through interrelationships cannot be readily replicated, since a ﬁrm
may not be in the appropriate group of industries, or have the right strategy
to allow matching the interrelationships. To match J&J’s shared brand
name, for example, Procter & Gamble would have to change its strategy of
using a different brand for each product. This would probably fail, however,
because of the inappropriateness of using the diaper brand name on other
paper products unrelated to babies. Thus to match this particular advantage
of J&J’s, Procter & Gamble would probably have to diversify further into
baby care, where J&J is dominant.
A smart competitor with different interrelationships will attempt to shift
the nature of competition in each industry in the direction that makes its
interrelationships more strategically valuable than the ﬁrm’s. An escalation
in advertising spending in diapers would work to the advantage of J&J
because of its shared brand, for example, holding other things constant. A
competitor with different interrelationships might also attempt to reduce the
ability of a ﬁrm to achieve its interrelationships. For example, a move by
J&J to make diapers from textile-based materials would, if feasible, reduce


P&G’s ability to share value activities because of its broad presence in
paper products. Similarly, a competitor might shift its strategy in a way that
raised the cost of compromise for the ﬁrm to achieve its type of
interrelationships, thereby forcing the ﬁrm to damage one business unit in
responding to a threat to another.
Thus the essence of the competitive game between ﬁrms pursuing
different forms of interrelatedness is a tug of war to see which ﬁrm can shift
the basis of competition to compromise the other’s interrelationships, or to
enhance the value of its own. The disposable diaper industry offers a good
illustration of how this game can play itself out. Procter & Gamble has
retained leadership in the diaper industry, while J&J was forced to exit from
the U.S. market after costly losses. Though J&J’s market interrelationships
were strong, advertising is a relatively small proportion of total costs in
disposable diapers. Sales force and logistical costs, where Procter &
Gamble enjoyed comparable if not superior interrelationships to J&J, are
each as high or higher than advertising. J&J could not match Procter &
Gamble’s production, procurement, and technological interrelationships,
and this proved fatal since total manufacturing costs for diapers are a very
large percentage of total cost and the pace of technological change in both
product and process is rapid. Without a markedly superior product,
therefore, J&J was unable to match the combination of Procter & Gamble’s
large market share and its interrelationships.
Forecasting Potential Competitors
Tangible interrelationships, intangible interrelationships, and competitor
interrelationships can be used to forecast likely potential competitors.
Likely potential entrants into an industry will be ﬁrms for which that
industry is:
• a logical way to create or extend an important interrelationship
• a necessary extension to match the interrelationships of competitors
To forecast potential competitors, all possible interrelationships
involving an industry are identiﬁed, including competitor interrelationships.
Each potential interrelationship will typically lead to a number of other


industries. The industries in which existing competitors compete besides the
industry may suggest possible interrelationships of other types. By
identifying related industries, a ﬁrm can locate potential competitors for
whom entry into the ﬁrm’s industries would be logical. Analysis must
assess the probability that these potential competitors will actually choose
to enter the industry rather than pursue their other investment opportunities.


10
Horizontal Strategy
There are two fundamental issues in corporate strategy for the diversiﬁed
ﬁrm. The ﬁrst is the selection of industries in which the diversiﬁed ﬁrm
should compete. The second issue is how the strategies of the ﬁrm’s
business units should be coordinated. How both issues are addressed should
be driven by competitive advantage—how the corporation can contribute to
the competitive advantage of business units. Business units inevitably incur
costs as part of a diversiﬁed ﬁrm, both in overhead and potentially through
constraints imposed by corporate policies. Unless the corporation can make
a more than offsetting contribution to the competitive advantage of business
units, diversiﬁcation becomes a liability.
Of the two fundamental issues in corporate strategy, diversiﬁed ﬁrms
have devoted much more attention to the ﬁrst issue than to the second.
While much attention is placed on selecting new industries, however, this
selection has too often been based on tenuous forms of relatedness. Many
diversiﬁed ﬁrms have devoted little or no attention to coordinating business
unit strategies. As the previous chapter demonstrated, however, there is a
growing need to do so as well as to enter new industries in which
contributions to competitive advantage within the corporation are clear. The
presence of multipoint competitors and competitors with different patterns
of interrelationships also dictates that a ﬁrm must exploit the available
interrelationships to maintain relative position.
Horizontal strategy coordinates the goals and strategies of related
business units. It encompasses both existing business units and the selection
of new industries to enter based on interrelationships with existing units.
