# Chapter 10: Horizontal Strategy

Horizontal strategy can and should exist at the group, sector, and corporate
level. Few ﬁrms, however, have anything but the most informal horizontal
strategy, regardless of how thoroughly they formulate strategies for
individual business units. Yet tangible interrelationships constitute a major
potential source of competitive advantage. An explicit horizontal strategy
should be at the core of group, sector, and corporate strategy.
A new pattern of competition is emerging in many industries, driven by
the strong trends described earlier. Competition will be among clusters of
related business units rather than among individual business units.
Coordinated business unit strategies and related diversiﬁcation into new
industries will deepen and extend interrelationships. Strategic choices will
increasingly involve a partnership of the business unit and the ﬁrm as a
whole. Business unit managers will seek new ways to gain competitive
advantage from being part of the diversiﬁed ﬁrm other than capital
availability.
Horizontal strategy cannot be left implicit or allowed to emerge on a
bottom-up basis from business units. Firms without an explicit horizontal
strategy will have difﬁculty resisting the strong pressures that always exist
to undermine corporate performance by optimizing that of individual
business units, particularly those ﬁrms with a tradition of decentralized
decision-making. Moreover, it is a widely held fallacy that business units
should propose and all agree on the desirability of an interrelationship for it
to be strategically sound. This attitude is based on theories of business unit
autonomy that developed in the 1970s. It promotes a hands-off posture by
corporate and group executives and places the burden of identifying and
exploiting interrelationships on business unit managers who lack the
resources and inﬂuence to do so. Bottom-up horizontal strategy rarely ever
happens.
The Need for Explicit Horizontal Strategy
Organizational structure in most ﬁrms works against achieving
interrelationships. However, organizational impediments alone do not
explain why related business units, proceeding independently, will rarely
optimize the competitive position of the ﬁrm as a whole. Without a


horizontal strategy, business units may well act in ways that reduce rather
than enhance their ability to exploit interrelationships:
Business units will value interrelationships differently and not agree to
pursue them. Business units will rarely reap equal beneﬁts from an
interrelationship because of differences in size, strategy, or industry. The
costs of compromise required to pursue an interrelationship can differ
among business units, as can the impact of sharing on their cost positions or
differentiation. Some business units may rightly conclude that the costs of
coordination and compromise outweigh the value of the interrelationship to
them, and interrelationships of value to the ﬁrm as a whole will never be
achieved. Large and currently successful business units often prove the most
resistant to pursuing interrelationships, as do business units which are asked
to transfer their know-how to others to gain intangible interrelationships.
Business 
unit 
strategies 
will 
evolve 
in 
ways 
that 
weaken
interrelationships. Left to formulate strategies independently, business units
may well proceed in inconsistent directions that can make interrelationships
more difﬁcult to achieve. For example, when two business units share a
common buyer or channel, one may pursue a differentiation strategy while
another evolves toward striving for a low-cost position. Though these
strategies may well be appropriate for the business units in isolation, the
potential interrelationships between the two units imply that the inconsistent
strategies will confuse buyers or channels, blur the overall brand image of
the ﬁrm in the related industries involved, and diminish opportunities to
share a brand name and sales force. Another example is the case where two
business units specify slightly different components even though they could
use a common one. Independent business unit strategies will always
undervalue beneﬁts that accrue not to them, but to the ﬁrm as a whole.
Pricing and investment decisions taken independently may erode ﬁrm
position. Interrelationships imply that proﬁts should be taken in some
business units and not other related ones. For example, lowering prices in
one business unit to boost volume can lead to lower costs in another
business unit through increasing the overall ﬁrm purchasing power in shared
components or raw material.1 Yet this sort of action would never be


contemplated by business units that develop strategies independently and
are evaluated solely by their own results. This problem cannot be solved
through transfer pricing, because it arises even though business units do not
buy or sell from each other.
There is also a risk of suboptimal investment decisions if related
business units proceed independently. For example, one business unit
sharing a component may have buyers which are extremely price-sensitive
while the buyers served by other business unit are not. The second business
unit will attach little value to investments that reduce the cost of the
common component and will allocate its resources elsewhere. The business
unit beneﬁting greatly from cost reduction may not be able to justify the
investment on its own.
Business units will have a tendency to go outside to form alliances to
achieve interrelationships available internally. Business units acting
independently may not fully appreciate the beneﬁts of internal projects in
areas such as shared marketing, production, technology development, and
sourcing 
compared 
to 
alliances 
with 
outside 
ﬁrms. 
Achieving
interrelationships internally implies that all the beneﬁts accrue to the ﬁrm.
Interrelationships achieved through coalitions with outside ﬁrms must share
some of the beneﬁts with coalition partners. Outside alliances can also
strengthen coalition partners that eventually emerge as competitors, and can
lead to the diffusion of the ﬁrm’s proprietary technology. These arguments
imply that in many instances business units should accept greater costs of
compromise to work with sister units on an interrelationship. However,
managers rarely see it this way. In fact, they often take the opposite view;
they undervalue the beneﬁts to the ﬁrm as a whole and prefer to deal with
independent ﬁrms where they have full control over the relationship. Some
of the organizational problems that reinforce these tendencies are described
in Chapter 11.
Business units may ignore key potential competitors or the true
signiﬁcance of existing competitors. As described earlier, competitor
analyses by business units will often fail to uncover potential competitors or
the interrelationships that are vital to their existing competitors’ relative


positions. This narrow perspective of competitors also obscures the way in
which competitors view an industry within their broader strategies, an
important determinant of competitor behavior. Business units proceeding
independently will rarely consider the ways in which their actions might
trigger competitive response that affects sister business units.
Transfer of know-how among generically similar business units will not
occur. The transfer of know-how that underpins intangible interrelationships
does not occur naturally. Business units will want to develop their own
strategies, and believe that they know their industries the best. They can
rarely be expected to seek out know-how elsewhere in the ﬁrm. Business
units with the know-how will have little incentive to transfer it, particularly
if it involves the time of some of their best people or involves proprietary
technology that might leak out.
Without an explicit horizontal strategy, there will be no systematic
mechanism to identify, reinforce, and extend interrelationships. Business
units acting independently simply do not have the same incentives to
propose and advocate strategies based on interrelationship as do higher level
managers with a broader perspective.
Formulating Horizontal Strategy
Formulating horizontal strategy involves a number of analytical steps
that ﬂow from the framework described in Chapter 9:
1.  Identify all tangible interrelationships. The starting point in
formulating horizontal strategy is to identify systematically all the tangible
interrelationships that are actually or potentially present among a ﬁrm’s
business units. The ﬁrst step in doing so is to examine value chains of each
business unit for actual and possible opportunities for sharing. Initially, all
interrelationships that seem to be present should be identiﬁed; illusory or
insigniﬁcant interrelationships can be eliminated through further analysis.
In searching for interrelationships, the speciﬁc characteristics of value
activities that would provide a basis for sharing must be identiﬁed. For
example, meaningful production interrelationships must be based on


similarities in speciﬁc production equipment or process steps rather than a
generalized view that there are similar processes. Similarly, speciﬁc
technologies 
and 
subtechnologies 
are 
the 
basis 
of 
technology
interrelationships, and common decision makers in buyers or channels are
the basis of key market interrelationships.
Diagrams like Figure 10–1 provide a simple mechanism to use in
identifying interrelationships within a ﬁrm.


Figure 10–1. Tangible Interrelationships in a Diversiﬁed Firm


Each cell of the interrelationship matrix displays the interrelationships
between a pair of business units, drawing from the types of
interrelationships expressed in Table 9–1 in the previous chapter. If
interrelationships are extensive, a separate matrix can be prepared for each
type of interrelationship. The linkage diagram is another way to display
interrelationships that may be clearer if there are a manageable number of
business units. It allows the clustering of business units that have strong
interrelationships, and can facilitate the visualization of groupings of units
that could be the basis for groups or sectors. Whatever graphical tool one
uses, interrelationships should be divided into potential interrelationships
and those that are actually being achieved.
There are often many different interrelationships within a diversiﬁed
ﬁrm. Different groups of business units are frequently related in different
ways. One group of business units may be related by their markets, while a
different, but partially overlapping, group of business units is related in
production. The interrelationship matrix in Figure 10–1 illustrates one such
pattern, where business units 1, 3, and 4 have a common component and
common raw material, while business units 1, 2, and 3 have a common
buyer.
In a diversiﬁed ﬁrm with many business units, a complex pattern of
interrelationships often emerges. To simplify the analytical task of
identifying interrelationships, it may be possible to break up a diversiﬁed
ﬁrm into a number of clusters of business units that have many
interrelationships among themselves, but relatively few with other clusters.
The correspondence of such clusters to the groups or sectors that have been
established is a subject to which I will return in Chapter 11. Where the
interrelationships between two business units are pervasive and involve
many signiﬁcant value activities, the business unit deﬁnitions are probably
inappropriate. The issues in drawing business unit boundaries have been
discussed in Chapter 7.
2. Trace tangible interrelationships outside the boundaries of the ﬁrm. A
ﬁrm will rarely compete in all the industries that are related to its current
business units. Thus, it is necessary to identify interrelationships between a
ﬁrm’s existing business units and other industries not currently in its
portfolio. This requires that a ﬁrm examine important value activities to


look for related industries where sharing or further sharing might be
feasible. A ﬁrm with an effective sales force serving a particular buyer
group, for example, should identify other products purchased by the same
buyer group or products that ﬁt the sales force’s expertise that might be sold
to other buyer groups. Similarly, each brand name, distribution channel,
logistical system, technological development activity, and other important
value activity should be probed for potential opportunities for sharing with
other industries.
Identifying paths of interrelationship outside a ﬁrm is a creative task, but
one that will yield considerable beneﬁts in diversiﬁcation planning and in
the development of defensive strategies to anticipate and block potential
entrants. The portfolios of diversiﬁed competitors can often provide
important clues to industries with important interrelationships to the ﬁrm’s.
However, detecting new interrelationships not exploited by any competitor
can be even more valuable.
3.  Identify possible intangible interrelationships. After identifying
tangible interrelationships, the next step is to seek out intangible
interrelationships. This involves the isolation of value activities in which a
ﬁrm has valuable know-how that might be useable in other business units or
in new industries. It also requires identifying new industries in which a
presence would lead to know-how that is valuable in the ﬁrm’s existing
business units. Signals of potential intangible interrelationships include
similarities in generic strategy, buyer type, or value chain conﬁguration.
While identifying intangible interrelationships is subtle, it can be important.
Many potential intangible interrelationships are usually present, which
makes screening them to access their importance to competitive advantage
an essential task.
4.  Identify competitor interrelationships. A ﬁrm must identify all its
multipoint competitors, potential multipoint competitors, and competitors
pursuing different patterns of interrelationships. A diagram such as that in
Figure 9–4 above can provide a structure for doing so. The existence of
multipoint competitors often provides clues about the presence of
interrelationships, and can aid in their identiﬁcation. Conversely,
interrelationships often are useful predictors of potential new competitors,


as described above. After the array of multipoint competitors has been
identiﬁed from a ﬁrmwide perspective, the interrelationships within each
important competitor’s portfolio must be charted. Often competitors have
different interrelationships that involve different sets of businesses.
5. Assess the importance of interrelationships to competitive advantage.
The net competitive advantage from a tangible interrelationship is a
function of the advantage from sharing, the costs of sharing, and the
difﬁculty of matching the interrelationship. Shared activities must be
measured against the corresponding activities of competitors on all three
dimensions. The tangible interrelationships present in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm are
often numerous. However, experience has shown that the number with
strategic importance is likely to be relatively small. The challenge is to
isolate the important ones, including those that involve industries in which a
ﬁrm has no presence currently. The fact that an interrelationship is not being
achieved is not a reliable sign that it is not important. The interrelationship
may have been overlooked, or the costs of compromise associated with it
may be reduced by making business unit strategies more consistent.
Intangible interrelationships lead to competitive advantage if the beneﬁts
of transferring know-how exceed the cost of transferring it. Transferring
know-how is beneﬁcial if the similarities among value activities are
signiﬁcant, the activities are important to competitive advantage in the
industries involved, and the ﬁrm has know-how that can materially enhance
competitive advantage if it is transferred. Experience suggests that
skepticism is warranted in assessing intangible interrelationships to avoid
pursuing intellectually plausible but practically useless similarities among
businesses.
6. Develop a coordinated horizontal strategy to achieve and enhance the
most important interrelationships. Important interrelationships can be
achieved or enhanced in a variety of ways.
Share Appropriate Value Activities. Value activities of related business
units should be shared if the beneﬁts exceed the costs. This may involve
measures such as combining sales forces, rationalizing manufacturing
facilities, coordinating procurement, and rebranding product lines. Sharing


will always require some adjustments to current practices. Business unit
strategies may need to be modiﬁed to gain maximum advantage from
sharing. Similarly, activities may have to be redesigned to reduce the cost of
compromise.
Coordinate Strategic Postures of Related Business Units. The strategies
of related business units should be coordinated to increase the competitive
advantage of interrelationships and reduce the costs of compromise. This
can involve everything from minor adjustments of business unit strategies to
major repositionings, including acquisitions and divestitures. The
coordination of strategies requires that marketing programs and investment
spending plans are consistent, and that business units are aware of each
other’s plans in product development and other important areas.
Coordination also implies that actions toward competitors are part of an
integrated group, sector, or corporate battle plan. Market interrelationships
often create the greatest need for consistent business unit strategies, in order
to gain the maximum impact with common customers or channels.
However, a degree of consistency is required for achieving and exploiting
any form of interrelationship. Coordinating business units can involve
difﬁcult tradeoffs between enhancing interrelationships and the position of
individual business units. These tradeoffs are often difﬁcult. However
without a horizontal strategy they will rarely even be considered regardless
of the beneﬁts to the ﬁrm.
Distinguish the Goals of Business Units. The goals of business units
should be set to reﬂect the role of business units in interrelationships. Some
business units, for example, might be given more ambitious sales targets but
lower proﬁt goals because of the contribution of their volume to the position
of other business units. Asking all business units to meet the same goals
may seem to be the “fairest” solution, but it also threatens to undermine
some important sources of competitive advantage.
Business unit goals that reﬂect interrelationships are broader than those
prescribed in portfolio planning techniques, commonly involving mandates
such as build, hold, or harvest. Portfolio models typically ignore
interrelationships, and set different goals for business units only in the sense
that some business units are expected to generate cash while other are


expected to use it. Interrelationships provide a broader perspective of
corporate strategy based on competitive advantage, within which cash ﬂow
considerations are subsumed.
Coordinate Offensive and Defensive Strategies Against Multipoint
Competitors and Competitors with Different Interrelationships. There must
be an overall ﬁrm game plan for dealing with each signiﬁcant multipoint
competitor and each competitor with a different pattern of interrelationships
that could be threatening. Ideally, a ﬁrm should seek to promote industry
evolution in directions that increase the value of its interrelationships and
compromise the value of competitors. More speciﬁc options for offensive
and defensive strategy are discussed in Chapters 14 and 15.
Exploit Important Intangible Interrelationships through Formal
Programs for Exchanging Know-How. A ﬁrm must actively encourage the
transfer of know-how among business units with potentially important
generic similarities. Receiving business units may not be receptive because
of “not invented here” problems, and business units asked to transfer
expertise may resent the commitment of time and people involved.
Achieving intangible interrelationships will require a shared understanding
of their value, and organizational mechanisms to facilitate the transference
of know-how.
Diversify to Strengthen Important Interrelationships or Create New
Ones. Diversiﬁcation strategy should focus on ﬁnding and entering new
businesses that reinforce the most important interrelationships or creating
new interrelationships of high strategic importance. Diversiﬁcation strategy
will be treated in the next section.
Sell Business Units That Do Not Have Signiﬁcant Interrelationships with
Others or That Make the Achievement of Important Interrelationships More
Difﬁcult. Business units that have no important interrelationships to others
in a ﬁrm or are not likely bases of further diversiﬁcation are candidates for
sale in the long term. Even if they are attractive and proﬁtable, such
business units will be worth as much or even more to other owners, since
being part of the ﬁrm does not enhance their competitive advantage and


being part of another ﬁrm might. A ﬁrm can thus be in a position to recover
the full value to it or more of such business units by selling them. The
proceeds can then be invested in business units where interrelationships can
enhance competitive advantage. Practical considerations mean that such a
strategy may have to be implemented over the long-term, however. Buyers
that recognize the value of a business unit may not be easy to ﬁnd, and it
may be hard to replace a highly proﬁtable, albeit unrelated business unit
with an equally attractive one, no matter how great the potential
interrelationships might be.
The presence of some marginally related business units may make it
more difﬁcult to achieve other, more important interrelationships. They, too,
are candidates for sale. A ﬁrm may be less able to build a shared
distribution channel, for example, if it has another business unit that uses a
different and competing channel to reach the same buyer group. Similarly, a
ﬁrm may be less able to exploit opportunities for sharing a sales force and
marketing to reach a particular buyer group if it has a business unit in the
buyer group’s industry that competes with it. Interrelationships may create
conﬂicts with buyers, suppliers, or channels. American Express has
experienced this as it increasingly competes with banks which are also a
key outlet for its travelers checks. Unlocking some interrelationships, then,
may require a ﬁrm to get out of some industries.
When there are several patterns of interrelationships within a ﬁrm
involving different groups of business units, taking some of the steps noted
above may involve tradeoffs. Coordinating strategic postures to facilitate
one type of interrelationship can reduce the ability to achieve another.
Distinguishing business unit goals can lead to the same sort of tradeoff.
Where such tradeoffs exist, the principle must be to reinforce those
interrelationships that have the greatest impact on competitive advantage,
even at the expense of others. However, organizational mechanisms
described in the next chapter can often allow interrelationships among
different groups of business units to be achieved simultaneously.
7. 
Create 
horizontal 
organizational 
mechanisms 
to 
assure
implementation. Firms cannot successfully exploit interrelationships


without a horizontal organizational structure that encourages coordination
and transfers skills across business unit lines. Such tasks as deﬁning the
right business units, clustering them into the proper groups and sectors, and
establishing incentives for business unit managers to work together are vital
to success. The principles of horizontal organization are the subject of
Chapter 11.
Interrelationships and Diversiﬁcation Strategy
Diversiﬁcation based on interrelationships is the form of diversiﬁcation
with the greatest likelihood of increasing competitive advantage in existing
industries or leading to sustainable competitive advantage in new industries.
Both tangible and intangible interrelationships have an important role in
diversiﬁcation strategy. Tangible interrelationships should be the starting
point for formulating diversiﬁcation strategy. Intangible interrelationships
have a less certain effect on competitive advantage and are more difﬁcult to
achieve in practice than tangible interrelationships.
Interrelationships can allow a ﬁrm diversifying through internal
development to overcome entry barriers into a new industry more cheaply
than other potential entrants that lack them.2 The presence of
interrelationships also facilitates entry through acquisition because an
acquisition candidate will have greater value to the ﬁrm than it does to its
present owners or to other bidders without similar interrelationships. Hence
proﬁts associated with the acquisition are less likely to be bid away in
setting the purchase price. The presence of interrelationships also means
that diversiﬁcation through either an acquisition or internal development
will beneﬁt existing business units that have interrelationships with the new
business unit.
Any diversiﬁcation move must also pass the test of structural
attractiveness (Chapter 1). Industries that are related to a ﬁrm’s existing
business units are not more structurally attractive simply because of their
relatedness. A new business unit must be in an industry that is actually or
potentially structurally attractive. The presence of interrelationships per se
is not sufﬁcient justiﬁcation for entering an industry unless they allow a
ﬁrm to transform an unattractive industry into an attractive one. Thus
seeking industries with both an attractive structure and interrelationships


that will yield the ﬁrm a competitive advantage in competing in those
industries are the dual guides to diversiﬁcation strategy.
Diversiﬁcation Based on Tangible Interrelationships
Diversiﬁcation strategy can seek to extend any of the types of tangible
interrelationships described in Table 9–1. The most desirable directions for
diversiﬁcation are those that lead to interrelationships offering the greatest
impact on competitive advantage, using the criteria described earlier. In
some cases, diversiﬁcation will strengthen a ﬁrm’s position against key
competitors, while in others it will be dictated by the need to match
competitors’ diversiﬁcation defensively. A ﬁrm may also enter industries
where it can use interrelationships to overwhelm single-business
competitors or competitors with poorly conceived arrays of business units.
The beneﬁts of tangible interrelationships can ﬂow in two directions. It is
just as valuable to pursue interrelationships that enhance the position of
existing units as it is to use existing unit positions to improve new business
units.
Three of the broad types of tangible interrelationships shown in Table 9–
1—market, 
production, 
and 
technological—represent 
three 
broad
diversiﬁcation avenues. A market-oriented diversiﬁcation strategy aims to
sell new products to common buyers, channels, or geographic markets in
order to reap the beneﬁts of market interrelationships. A production-
oriented diversiﬁcation strategy aims to produce similar products with
shared production value activities. Procurement interrelationships often
stem 
from 
production 
interrelationships. 
A 
technology-oriented
diversiﬁcation strategy aims to develop or enter new industries based on
similar core technologies, that involve products sold to either existing or
new markets. The successful Japanese typewriter ﬁrm Brother, for example,
uses its “technology tree” in driving diversiﬁcation. Brother has built on
technologies developed in one business to enter another. Small motor
technology from the original sewing machine business led to entering small
appliances and electric typewriters, while electronics expertise gained in
typewriters has led to entering electronic printers.


These three broad diversiﬁcation paths often lead a ﬁrm in different
directions. Broadening the range of products sold to common buyers,
channels or geographic areas often involves different technologies and
production processes, while broadening the range of products with similar
technologies or production processes implies getting into new markets. This
is not always true, however. In consumer electronics, for example, ﬁrms
such as Sony and Matsushita have diversiﬁed into new products with
technology shared with their existing products. Opportunities also existed at
the same time for market and production interrelationships. Sony and
Matsushita (Panasonic) have each developed shared value activities such as
brand names, service organizations, plants, and procurement across wide
product lines. Interrelationships, in fact, are one of their primary sources of
competitive advantage. Another example is Black and Decker’s entry into
small appliances, which exploits technological interrelationships and
production interrelationships involving small electric motors used in its core
business, power tools.
Diversiﬁcation will offer the greatest potential for enhancing overall ﬁrm
position when several important value activities can be shared. The most
successful diversiﬁers do not view market-, production-, and technology-
oriented diversiﬁcation as mutually exclusive, but seek ways to combine
them. In my study of interrelationships in 75 Fortune 500 companies in
1971 and 1981 described in Chapter 9, high-technology companies showed
the greatest ability to increase interrelationships in markets, production, and
technology simultaneously. This ﬁnding is consistent with the role of
electronics/information processing technology in linking industries together.
As technology develops, ﬁrms should be able to ﬁnd more avenues for
diversiﬁcation where multiple forms of interrelationships can be exploited.
Diversiﬁcation Through Beachheads
Firms will differ in their ability to achieve important interrelationships
through diversiﬁcation. The opportunities a ﬁrm has may be limited by a
number of factors:


•  The existing mix of business units in the ﬁrm may enjoy few
meaningful interrelationships with other industries.
• The signiﬁcant interrelationships may have already been exploited.
•  The industries that are related to a ﬁrm’s existing industries may be
structurally unattractive.
• No feasible strategy may exist for entering related industries because
competitors have preempted.
• Antitrust considerations preclude entry into some related industries.
When opportunities to diversify along tangible interrelationships are few
or exhausted, a ﬁrm should consider diversiﬁcation based on intangible
interrelationships. 
Since 
intangible 
interrelationships 
involve 
the
transference of generic skills and not actual sharing of activities, there will
usually be more industries with potential intangible interrelationships to
existing business units than industries with tangible interrelationships.
Finding opportunities in which intangible interrelationships will lead to
competitive advantage is a subtle process, though, because it requires that a
ﬁrm understand a new industry well enough to see how transference of
skills will really make a difference.
Generic similarity of a new industry to an existing industry does not
itself imply that transference of skills will create competitive advantage.
Competitors in the new industry can have equal or superior skills
themselves. The relevance of a ﬁrm’s skills in a new industry must also be
questioned, and superﬁcial analyses of generic similarities can be very
misleading. Basing diversiﬁcation on imagined or irrelevant generic
similarities among industries led to the failure of diversiﬁcation strategies in
the 1960s and 1970s. All these caveats aside, however, careful industry
analyses can uncover new industries in which intangible interrelationships
are a sound basis for diversiﬁcation.
Diversiﬁcation based on intangible interrelationships should be viewed
not only as a stand-alone opportunity, however, but also as a potential
beachhead. Once a ﬁrm enters a new industry based on intangible
interrelationships, it can then use this beachhead to spawn new
opportunities for diversiﬁcation based on tangible interrelationships. A
good example is Procter & Gamble’s initial acquisition of Charmin Paper
Company, a beachhead which allowed Procter & Gamble to build the highly


interrelated cluster of paper products business units described earlier. Figure
10–2 illustrates schematically the process of diversifying through
beachheads. An intangible interrelationship with the original cluster of
tangibly related business units becomes the foundation for a new cluster.
The diversiﬁed ﬁrm emerges as a number of clusters of business units
related by tangible interrelationships, with the clusters related by intangible
interrelationships. A key test of diversiﬁcation opportunities based on
intangible interrelationships, therefore, is their potential as a beachhead.
Figure 10–2. Interrelationships and the Pattern of Diversiﬁcation
Diversiﬁcation and Corporate Resources
The unique corporate assets of a diversiﬁed ﬁrm are the existing and
potential interrelationships that reside in the value chains of its business
units. These interrelationships represent the major contribution of a
diversiﬁed ﬁrm to its business units, and to the new industries it might enter.
The central role of the diversiﬁed ﬁrm is to nurture and expand these
interrelationships.


Diversiﬁcation is a means to widen a ﬁrm’s stock of assets and skills by
expanding the perimeter of the value activities in which it participates. Each
new industry not only may be related to existing ones, but also may bring
value activities to the ﬁrm that are the sources of new interrelationships. The
best diversiﬁcation is that which does both—it reinforces the ﬁrm’s existing
strengths and creates the basis for new ones.
Pitfalls in Horizontal Strategy
Although substantial competitive advantages can be gained from
harnessing interrelationships, pitfalls exist in implementing horizontal
strategy. The most serious pitfall is to ignore interrelationships altogether.
Strategic planning solely done by business units is not enough. At the same
time, however, it can be an equally big mistake to assume that every
relationship should be pursued.
Pitfalls in Ignoring Interrelationships
This chapter and Chapter 9 have raised numerous pitfalls that result from
ignoring interrelationships. A few notable ones are mentioned here:
Misreading the Strategic Contributions of Business Units. A ﬁrm that
fails to understand interrelationships will measure business unit
performance on a stand-alone basis. It may, in the process, encourage units
to take actions that will undermine interrelationships and erode overall ﬁrm
position.
Misreading Position Vis-à-vis Key Competitors. A ﬁrm that plans only at
the business unit level will fail to diagnose its position vis-à-vis key
diversiﬁed competitors. It will also fail to formulate moves against them
that enhance overall ﬁrm position.
Portfolio Management. The presence of interrelationships, particularly
tangible interrelationships, limits the usefulness of portfolio planning
models as they are usually applied. Portfolio planning models are narrowly
conceived tools designed to aid a diversiﬁed corporation in achieving a


ﬁnancially balanced portfolio. In doing so, they may obscure the most
essential strategic issue in constructing a ﬁrm’s portfolio of businesses—the
creation and enhancement of interrelationships. When interrelationships
exist, decisions to build or harvest business units cannot be made
independently. The use of portfolio tools is particularly dangerous at the
group or sector level, because business units within a group or sector tend to
have tangible interrelationships and need to be managed accordingly.
Corporate, sector, and group executives must not mistake portfolio
planning for horizontal strategy. Horizontal strategy is more difﬁcult to
formulate than portfolio strategy, but is the way a diversiﬁed ﬁrm creates
true economic beneﬁts for its business units.
Pitfalls in Pursuing Interrelationships
It can be equally risky to pursue interrelationships indiscriminately:
Negative Leverage from Sharing or Transfering Know-how. Tangible
interrelationships usually involve some compromise in the strategies of the
business 
units 
involved. 
Because 
of 
this, 
pursuing 
ill-chosen
interrelationships can harm all the involved business units for little net
strategic gain. Transferring know-how also involves costs, and transferring
know-how that is in fact inappropriate to competition in another business
unit in the name of supposed intangible interrelationships can also do great
harm. There must be clear potential net beneﬁts of sharing or transfer of
know-how for the related business units in order for an interrelationship to
be strategically desirable.
Pursuing Interrelationships Involving Value Activities That Are Small,
Have Few Scale or Learning Economies, or Have Little Effect on
Differentiation. In their zeal to build a related diversiﬁcation strategy, ﬁrms
can fall into the trap of making too much of an interrelationship that, while
indeed present, has little competitive signiﬁcance. The presence of an
interrelationship does not imply that a horizontal strategy should be built
around it, even if it is the only one available.


Illusory Interrelatedness. Often superﬁcial similarities in technologies,
logistical systems, fabrication processes, and buyer groups are not, in fact, a
basis for shared activities. A technology that appears similar in two business
units may, upon closer scrutiny, be sold to buyers with very different needs
that compromise the ability to employ a shared R&D organization. Despite
the apparent similarity to outsiders between offshore drilling for oil and
onshore drilling, for example, few activities in fact can be shared by drilling
contractors. Intangible interrelationships can also be illusory. There are
many generic similarities among business units that are not important for
competition. Potential interrelationships should be scrutinized carefully
before being translated into shared activities or altered strategies, to prevent
discovering the lack of compatibility through a failure.


11
Achieving Interrelationships
Achieving interrelationships in practice has proven to be extraordinarily
difﬁcult for many ﬁrms. Part of the reason is that the costs of sharing mean
that some interrelationships do not enhance competitive advantage and
should not be implemented. Even for interrelationships that clearly create
competitive advantage, however, a formidable array of organizational
impediments work against achieving them in practice, ranging from
organizational structure to cultural and managerial factors. In fact,
achieving interrelationships among business units contradicts the
philosophy prevailing in many diversiﬁed ﬁrms.1
Most major diversiﬁed ﬁrms have decentralized into business units with
proﬁt responsibility, embracing the principle of autonomy. Some ﬁrms
practice decentralization with near-religious devotion. Uncontrolled
decentralization, however, undermines the pursuit of interrelationships by
encouraging business unit managers to pursue strategies that maximize unit
performance and not the corporations. Moreover, portfolio planning
techniques have reinforced the view of business units as unconnected cash
generators or users. Many other organizational practices typical of large
diversiﬁed ﬁrms also work against interrelationships, such as incentive
plans and transfer pricing policies. The organizational difﬁculties of
achieving even clearly beneﬁcial interrelationships is perhaps the single
biggest reason many managers have rejected the concept of synergy.
Any treatment of strategic interrelationships among business units must
confront the difﬁculties of actually achieving them or horizontal strategies
will fail.2 Throughout this chapter, I will make the assumption that a ﬁrm
