# Chapter 11: Achieving Interrelationships

has identiﬁed interrelationships that meet the tests of strategic signiﬁcance
described in Chapter 9. The focus here is on mechanisms for exploiting
them.
I will ﬁrst identify the organizational impediments to achieving
interrelationships that are present in many ﬁrms and their causes. Having
done so, I will describe the ways in which ﬁrms can overcome these
impediments through what I term horizontal organization. The predominant
form of corporate organization in diversiﬁed ﬁrms is a vertical organization,
through which top management directs the activities of the various business
units. Information, decisions, and resources ﬂow vertically, from business
units to top management and vice versa. Organizational subunits in
between, often referred to as groups and sectors, are designed primarily to
oversee this vertical process and reduce the span of control of top
management. Firmwide strategic planning and incentive systems further
reinforce the vertical nature of decision making and control.
In contrast, horizontal organization in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm overlays the
business unit structure and facilitates collaboration among business units.
Horizontal organizational mechanisms include the grouping of business
units, standing committees, management systems, human resources
policies, and a variety of other formal and informal devices designed to
coordinate 
business 
unit 
activities. 
Any 
ﬁrm 
with 
signiﬁcant
interrelationships needs a horizontal corporate organization to supplement
its vertical organization. The pervasiveness of interrelationships suggests
that a new organizational form for managing the diversiﬁed ﬁrm will
become increasingly necessary—one that involves a much closer balance
between the horizontal and vertical dimensions of organization.
Horizontal organization does not seek to eliminate or replace
decentralization. The logic of decentralization is sound and some diversiﬁed
ﬁrms, in fact, have failed to decentralize enough. Horizontal organization
overlays a set of mechanisms on the vertical organization to ensure that
interrelationships yielding a competitive advantage are exploited.3 The
result is not a matrix organization, but independent business units that are
connected by organizational devices and a set of shared values. While
business unit autonomy may be reduced in the process, the real purpose of
horizontal organization is to redeﬁne business unit autonomy in terms more
conducive to the ﬁrm’s overall success.


Impediments to Achieving Interrelationships
Achieving tangible interrelationships requires a business unit to share
activities in its value chain with other units while remaining a separate
entity that acts independently in other value activities and maintains proﬁt
responsibility. Similarly, achieving intangible interrelationships requires the
transfer 
of 
know-how 
among 
business 
units. 
The 
pursuit 
of
interrelationships may well lead to joint activity with more than one sister
unit in different parts of the value chain. A business unit may share a sales
force with one division, for example, and a plant with another.
Implementing any interrelationship inevitably requires costs of
coordination no matter how a ﬁrm is organized. However, a variety of
organizational impediments can raise these costs unnecessarily for many
ﬁrms. These impediments bear some relationship to the factors that make
functional coordination difﬁcult within a single business unit. However, the
organizational impediments to interrelationships are usually much stronger
than impediments to functional coordination. Nothing compels coordination
among business units, while the functions within a business unit must
coordinate in order to do business. In fact, business units often view each
other as rivals competing for limited resources and senior management
attention on the basis of performance.
Sources of Impediments
Impediments to business unit coordination grow out of the differences
between the perspective of business unit and corporate managers. Some of
the most important impediments are as follows:
ASYMMETRIC BENEFITS
Interrelationships are often resisted by some business units because the
beneﬁts are or appear to be asymmetric. As I discussed in previous chapters,
differences in the size and strategy of business units often mean that the
competitive advantage arising from an interrelationship accrues more to one
business unit than another. In some cases, an interrelationship can have a
net negative impact on one business unit while being clearly beneﬁcial to


the ﬁrm as a whole. Unless the motivation system reﬂects these differences,
it will be extremely difﬁcult to get business units to agree to pursue an
interrelationship and to work together to implement it successfully. Instead,
they become embroiled in fruitless negotiations over the allocation of
shared costs or over procedures for sharing revenue. The result is that
interrelationships that clearly beneﬁt all the involved business units are
quickly adopted when recognized, but those with asymmetric beneﬁts
frequently remain untapped.
LOSS OF AUTONOMY AND CONTROL
In addition to resistance on economic grounds, managers often
vigorously resist interrelationships to avoid a perceived or actual loss of
autonomy. Some of the common sources of resistance include:
Protection of Turf. Business unit managers may jealously guard their
“turf.” They exercise full control over their operations and draw personal
satisfaction from it as well as perceived inﬂuence within the corporation.
Autonomy has become associated in many ﬁrms with full control over all
functions, which makes managers loath to give up any of them.
Perceived Dilution of Buyer Relationships. Business units often resist
market interrelationships because of fears that they will lose control of their
buyers, or that relations with buyers will be damaged. Business units are
concerned that sister units will steal “their” buyers, damage their image, or
create confusion in buyers’ minds over the appropriate point of contact with
the ﬁrm. Stockbrokers, for example, have been reluctant to share client lists
with sister units in their parent companies despite the existence of
interrelationships in ﬁnancial services.
Inability to “Fire” a Sister Division. Business units often feel in more
control when dealing with an outside company, rather than being saddled
with a sister unit’s service, delivery, or product problems. Working with a
sister unit is perceived as locking the business unit into an adverse
bargaining situation, because corporate management will be prone to
intervene in disputes and not allow an interrelationship to be severed in the


event of poor sister unit performance. Managers perceive fewer constraints
in dealing with an outside ﬁrm, because an outside ﬁrm can be “ﬁred” if the
interrelationship fails.4
Conﬂicts Over Priorities in Shared Activities. Business units are often
quick to recognize the risk of conﬂicting priorities in shared value activities
such as a shared sales force, shared logistical network, or shared
development center. In a shared development center, for example,
engineering time may be allocated in favor of the business unit with the
most pressing need; a shared sales force will inevitably concentrate more on
some products than others. While setting such priorities is rational from a
corporate viewpoint, business unit managers do not welcome the prospect
of compromising their plans. Thus business units resist sharing in the ﬁrst
place, or press to create their own autonomous unit once the shared activity
has been established.
Unfair Blame for Poor Performance. Business unit managers often fear
that they will be unfairly blamed for the failure of an interrelationship.
Managers see the possibility that they will be evaluated for results over
which they lack full control. This can encourage them to forgo the beneﬁt of
an interrelationship to ensure control over their own destiny.
A ﬁrm’s history and organizational conﬁguration have an important
inﬂuence on the strength of managers’ desire for complete autonomy. In
many diversiﬁed ﬁrms, business unit autonomy is a longstanding policy that
has been carefully nurtured and emphasized. In companies such as
Consolidated Foods, Beatrice Foods, Johnson & Johnson, Emerson Electric,
and Hewlett-Packard, for example, the belief in business unit autonomy is
strongly held and has been emphasized as a key to the ﬁrm’s success. While
autonomy does indeed play an important positive role, there is a strong
tendency to carry it too far and ignore changing competitive circumstances.
Business units in ﬁrms with a long history of autonomy may resist even the
most worthwhile joint projects. Emerson Electric, for example, has had to
struggle to get divisions to cooperate on such relatively non-threatening
interrelationships as joint R&D centers on selected technologies.
Firms with a long commitment to business unit autonomy have trained
and promoted those managers who have performed well in an environment


stressing independence. Self selection has also attracted managers who
value independence to join the ﬁrm. Moreover, acquisitions are also often
consummated by a promise of autonomy. With such a legacy, managers are
likely to resist any intrusion on their autonomy or any corporate move
toward centralization on principle.
Firms that have pushed the principle of decentralization down to the
smallest viable business units often face the most difﬁculty in achieving
interrelationships, despite the fact that they frequently have the greatest
need to achieve the scale economies that result from them. Autonomy can
be most jealously guarded when business units are small. For example,
American Hospital Supply has many small divisions selling various kinds
of medical products to the same buyers, via many separate yet overlapping
sales forces. It seems to have experienced difﬁculties in achieving
coordination among its many units, due to the ﬁerce independence of many
of its managers.
BIASED INCENTIVE SYSTEMS
Corporate incentive plans often exacerbate the difﬁculties of
implementing interrelationships by indirectly penalizing managers for
pursuing them. Business units often lack any positive incentive to
participate in interrelationships. They see little gain in changing the way
they perform activities to facilitate sharing or transferring know-how, both
essential to a successful interrelationship. Worse yet, some incentive
systems actually encourage the formation of outside coalitions in preference
to interrelationships with sister units.
Some of the ways in which incentive systems work against
interrelationships include:
Lack of Credit for Contributions to Other Units. Incentive systems
typically measure only a business unit’s performance and fail to value its
contribution to sister units. A business unit’s contribution to an
interrelationship, and hence to overall corporate performance, is often
difﬁcult to measure. Uniform ﬁnancial objectives across business units and
mechanical transfer pricing and allocation formulas are easy to administer


and convey the impression of precision. However, they can fail to measure a
business unit’s total contribution to ﬁrm performance.
Managers are reluctant to spend time and resources on interrelationship
projects if they are uncertain to receive credit for them. They see no point in
participating in interrelationships in which they must bear compromise
costs or, worse yet, get less beneﬁt from the interrelationship than a sister
unit. In Matsushita, for example, cross-divisional product development
teams have encountered some problems of this type. Participants do not
know if the new products will contribute to their division’s proﬁts and
therefore are reluctant to contribute to their development.
Measurement Biases. In some ﬁrms, there are biases in the way
revenues, costs, or assets are measured and allocated that prompt business
units to ignore or resist interrelationships. For example, investing in assets
or making acquisitions is capitalized, while the cost of pursuing an
interrelationship must be expensed. Business units that are measured on
return on sales will tend to invest in assets rather than diminish their
proﬁtability, while business units with narrowly conceived revenue growth
objectives will be loath to split revenues with other units on an
interrelationship project. They will prefer instead to incur the cost of
contracting with an outside ﬁrm.
DIFFERING BUSINESS UNIT CIRCUMSTANCES
Interrelationships are difﬁcult to achieve where business units have
different organizational circumstances. Such differences raise problems of
communication, and cause business units to perceive sister units as “other
companies.” Some of the most common organizational differences among
business units that impede interrelationships include:
Strong Business Unit Identities. Pursuing interrelationships is difﬁcult
where business units have distinct histories and identities apart from the
parent ﬁrm’s. For example, business units may have originally been separate
companies that were acquired, or have long been freestanding units with
their own names. In such cases, managers and staff often identify more with
the business unit than with the parent. The problem is exacerbated by past


success. If business units have been industry leaders or pioneers, for
example, they often resist any move toward joint efforts with sister units.
Differing Cultures. Cooperation can prove very difﬁcult to achieve if
business units have differing cultures. Relevant cultural differences include
such things as norms of interpersonal behavior, terminology and basic
business philosophy. Such differences can inhibit communication and make
working relationships hard to negotiate and maintain. American Express’s
banking subsidiary has struggled to integrate with the Swiss based Trade
Development Bank it acquired, for example, because of different styles and
language barriers, among other reasons.
Corporate and business unit managers are also sometimes uneasy about
interrelationships between culturally distinct units on the grounds that they
will blur the differences among them. They see interrelationships as threats
to the distinct cultures that made the business units successful in the ﬁrst
place. This issue is particularly likely to arise in business units that were
acquired, or in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm with a strong tradition of autonomy. For
example, the senior management of Brunswick has expressed such fears.5
Brunswick operates in a variety of leisure-oriented industries and has
acquired a number of well-known companies. It is hesitant to integrate them
for fear of disrupting their cultures.
Management Differences. If the proﬁle, skills and style of managers
differ among business units, forging interrelationships may prove difﬁcult.
Contacts may be uncomfortable or strained, making agreements harder to
reach. Management differences that may inhibit interrelationships include
differences in age, titles, educational background, technical skills, and
tenure in ofﬁce.
Differing Procedures. Business units may have different operating
procedures that make interrelationships difﬁcult to achieve, including
different accounting and information systems, approval limits, and union
agreements. Procedural differences create friction and confusion when units
attempt to work together, and add extra costs of coordination.


Geographic Separation. Business units separated geographically can
have difﬁculty achieving the ongoing coordination required to make
interrelationships a success. Distance reduces the ongoing interchange so
necessary to work out problems.
FEAR OF TAMPERING WITH DECENTRALIZATION
The impediments to achieving interrelationships discussed so far stem
largely from the orientation and motivation of business unit managers.
Corporate management may be equally hesitant to tamper with
decentralization. A number of common reasons for this include:
Dampening Entrepreneurship. Corporate management may fear that
anything that tampers with decentralization will undermine the
entrepreneurial spirit in business units.6 No fundamental contradiction
exists between entrepreneurship and interrelationships, however, unless one
equates entrepreneurship narrowly with independence. While there is some
justiﬁcation for extreme decentralization in startup ventures, business unit
managers can often create the greatest competitive advantage through
entrepreneurship 
that 
identiﬁes 
and 
exploits 
interrelationships.
Nevertheless, the view that pure decentralization provides the greatest
entrepreneurial incentives remains deeply ingrained in many ﬁrms. Business
unit managers often raise reduced incentives as an argument for resisting
interrelationships as well.
Desire for a Consistent Organization. Many diversiﬁed ﬁrms have
tended to organize all business units identically. This may simplify
management’s task in some ways, but it is inconsistent with
interrelationships. Interrelationships imply that different business units (and
groups of business units) should have varying degrees of autonomy and
control over different activities, as well as different measures of
performance and objectives.
Difﬁculty of Measuring Performance. Many ﬁrms base incentives solely
on objective, quantiﬁable criteria such as growth and proﬁtability.
Interrelationships almost inevitably introduce some subjectivity into


performance measurement, however, because business unit contributions to
the ﬁrm as a whole are often hard to quantify precisely. In some ﬁrms,
however, subjectivity is considered undesirable.
Fear of Providing “Excuses.” Interrelationships almost inevitably cloud
the clean lines of authority and responsibility in business units. Hence top
management 
may 
fear 
that 
business 
unit 
managers 
will 
use
interrelationships as excuses to justify poor performance.
Interrelationships and Equity
Many 
of 
these 
organizational 
impediments 
to 
achieving
interrelationships 
are 
based 
on 
the 
perceived 
conﬂict 
between
interrelationships and equity. Equity, or fairness, is a principle embraced by
virtually all ﬁrms. It is part of the fabric of an organization that allows
conﬂicts to be reconciled and underpins the motivation of managers. Yet
interrelationships can conﬂict with equity in the minds of some managers.
Interrelationships can yield differing beneﬁts to the business units involved.
Interrelationships also imply that managers should have different degrees of
autonomy, differing objectives, and differing bases for incentives. Managers
may complain that they are “carrying” other business units, and that rewards
are given to other managers whose performance is not as good.
Many diversiﬁed ﬁrms have explicitly or implicitly adopted a narrow
view of equity that stems from their decentralized organizational structures.
Equity is deﬁned to mean treating every business unit the same and
avoiding any subjectivity in decision making—particularly in such sensitive
areas as incentives or transfer prices. Equity is further deﬁned as meaning
that all business units must agree on interrelationships.
A narrow view of equity is not only logically incorrect but makes
interrelationships achievable only in those rare cases where all business
units beneﬁt equally or the interrelationship can be achieved through arm’s-
length dealings with little loss of autonomy. A more constructive view of
equity, which emphasizes fairness rather than sameness in the ways in
which top management treat business units, is a prerequisite to successfully
achieving interrelationships. Creating such a view of equity, as well as


building allegiance to a higher corporate purpose, is an essential task of
horizontal organization.
Differences in Impediments among Firms
The extent of impediments to achieving interrelationships differs widely
among ﬁrms, as a result of their histories, mix of businesses, organizational
structures, 
and 
policies. 
The 
greatest 
difﬁculties 
in 
achieving
interrelationships tend to occur under the following conditions:
• Highly decentralized ﬁrms with many small business units
• Firms with a strong tradition of autonomy
• Firms built through the acquisition of independent companies
• Firms that have made little or no effort to create a corporate identity
• Firms with little or no history of interrelationships, or who have had a
bad experience in attempting to pursue an interrelationship
Organizational Mechanisms for Achieving Interrelationships
A purely vertical corporate organizational structure is insufﬁcient to
assure that beneﬁcial interrelationships will be recognized and achieved.
The impediments to achieving interrelationships not only get in the way of
interrelationships at the working level, but also provide business unit
managers with a set of arguments with which to counter efforts by group or
corporate management to champion important interrelationships. Business
unit managers will also clearly see the compromises required to achieve
interrelationships, and may be suspicious of the beneﬁts. Senior
management may be ill equipped to counter the resistance without an in-
depth knowledge of the industries involved.
Companies tend to react in one of two broad ways to these
organizational 
impediments 
to 
achieving 
interrelationships. 
Some
companies conclude that, despite their strategic logic, interrelationships can
never work. After encountering such problems, business unit managers give
up on working with sister units and resolve instead to proceed
independently. Corporate management becomes frustrated with resolving
disputes and dealing with unclear accountability, and opts for extreme


decentralization. In other companies, however, there is recognition that the
beneﬁts of interrelationships are so important that the traditional ways of
managing diversity must change to accomodate them.
Interrelationships will not occur by accident or by ﬁat. Positive
organizational mechanisms must be put in place to encourage business unit
managers to pursue interrelationships and to ease the inherent coordination
and communication difﬁculties in making them work. I term organizational
practices 
that 
facilitate 
interrelationships 
horizontal 
organization.
Horizontal corporate organization links business units together within a
vertical structure. A balance must be struck between the vertical and
horizontal elements in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm if the potential of interrelationships
is to be unleashed.
Horizontal organization can be divided into four broad categories:
•  Horizontal structure. Organizational devices that cut across business
unit lines, such as grouping of business units, partial centralization,
interdivisional task forces, and market or channel focus committees.
•  Horizontal systems. Management systems with a cross business unit
dimension, in areas such as planning, control, incentives and capital
budgeting.
•  Horizontal human resource practices. Human resource practices that
facilitate business unit cooperation, such as cross-business unit job
rotation, management forums and training.
•  Horizontal conﬂict resolution processes. Management processes that
resolve conﬂicts among business units. Such processes can be usefully
distinguished from horizontal structure and systems, and relate more to
the style of managing a ﬁrm.
Organizational structure and systems frequently have both a horizontal
and vertical dimension. Grouping business units, for example, can be a
purely vertical device to reduce the span of control of top management or
can play a major role in horizontal strategy, depending on how groups are
managed. Similarly, corporate incentives systems can be entirely vertical or
contain provisions that encourage cross-business unit cooperation. I will
concentrate on the horizontal aspects of organizational practices,
recognizing that the horizontal and vertical aspects will interact. The issues


raised by vertical aspects of organizational structure and systems in
diversiﬁed ﬁrms have been the subject of considerable study.7
No single device for encouraging and facilitating cooperation among
business units is sufﬁcient to ensure that all strategically beneﬁcial
interrelationships are achieved. Instead, a variety of practices that reinforce
each other are required. Firms with successful horizontal strategies tend to
employ an array of practices simultaneously to gain the maximum beneﬁts
from interrelationships. The array of appropriate practices can differ for
each business unit, because each will have its own pattern of
interrelationships with other units with a different balance of beneﬁts and
costs.
Corporate management also has a powerful role in reinforcing horizontal
organization through its behavior, the way in which it articulates corporate
purpose, and its choice of modes of entry into new businesses. After
describing the use of horizontal organization in achieving interrelationships,
I will return to the role of top management.
Horizontal Structure
Horizontal structure refers to temporary or permanent organizational
entities that cut across business unit boundaries, supplementing the business
unit structure. A variety of such entities, which are not mutually exclusive,
may be employed to facilitate interrelationships.
GROUPING BUSINESS UNITS
Perhaps the most common form of horizontal structure is the group or
sector, in which a number of business units report to a single executive.
Most group and sector structures were originally created to reduce the
CEO’s span of control, or to train and evaluate managers in managing
diversity as a stepping stone to corporate management. Groups and sectors
have long played an important role in the vertical organization.
Group and sector executives have tended to play a relatively passive role
in strategy formulation, however. They review and approve business unit
strategies and coach business unit managers, rather than initiate strategy.
Yet the group or sector executive should have a vital role in identifying,


pursuing, and managing interrelationships, provided the boundaries of the
group or sector are properly drawn and the role of the group or sector
executive is properly constituted.
The grouping of business units into groups and sectors should reﬂect
strategically important interrelationships. The boundaries of groups and
sectors are often difﬁcult to draw, however, because there are multiple
patterns of interrelationships among business units. In General Foods, for
example, some business units have common buyers and channels while
different but overlapping groups of business units are related by product
form and production technology (e.g., frozen food). Where there are several
possible bases for grouping business units reﬂecting different types of
interrelationships, a ﬁrm must choose one. Interrelationships are frequently
not equally signiﬁcant for all the business units involved, making the
selection of a basis for grouping all the more difﬁcult.
While grouping business units is never an exact science, the principle is
clear. Groups (and sectors) should be constructed around the
interrelationships that are most signiﬁcant for competitive advantage,
growing out of a systematic look at all the interrelationships within the ﬁrm.
For example, if a large percentage of cost or the most signiﬁcant sources of
differentiation reside in product positioning, advertising, and distribution,
groups should be formed around market interrelationships. In a consumer
package goods company, for example, it may be more appropriate to group
businesses by buyer or channel than to organize around manufacturing
technology. In a high-technology company with a differentiation strategy,
conversely, it may make more sense to group business units around
technologies, since exploiting technological interrelationships will be a key
to competitive advantage. Tangible interrelationships should generally be
the primary basis for grouping, with intangible interrelationships serving as
the basis if tangible interrelationships are minor or are exhausted. For
example, groups may link business units with strong tangible
interrelationships, while sectors may be based on weaker tangible
interrelationships and/or intangible interrelationships.
Business units should be grouped around the most strategically
important interrelationships because grouping is perhaps the single most
powerful device for focusing attention on and reinforcing interrelationships,
if groups are managed accordingly. Where all business units report to a


single group (or sector) executive, coordination, the management of shared
activities, conﬂict resolution, transfer or know-how, and setting of the
appropriate objectives and incentives are all facilitated.
The principle that business units should be grouped around the most
important interrelationship does not imply that all groups in a diversiﬁed
ﬁrm should be based on the same type of interrelationship. All groups need
not and should not be market-based, production-based, or technology-
based, though ﬁrms sometimes have a tendency to use the same basis for
grouping all their business units. Unless one form of interrelationship is
dominant throughout an entire ﬁrm, different groups should be based on
different types of interrelationships.
The strength of interrelationships among the business units in a group
may well vary from group to group, depending on a ﬁrm’s particular mix of
businesses. Some groups may have strongly interrelated business units,
while others may be characterized by few if any interrelationships and exist
largely to reduce span-of-control. The way groups are managed should
reﬂect these differences. Within a group, moreover, the interrelationship
present will vary in strategic importance for the different business units.
Business units that perceive few beneﬁts of being in the group will have to
be managed differently from others since they will have the greatest
tendency to choose strategies that are inconsistent with strengthening
interrelationships in the group. The way their performance is measured and
their incentives may well have to be modiﬁed. It is important, however, that
such business units are not forced to compromise their strategies so greatly
as to undermine their relative competitive position. Managing any
interrelationship is always a process of balancing the overall competitive
advantage gained against the cost, using the tools described in Chapter 9.
ROLE OF THE GROUP EXECUTIVE8
Historically, the role of many group executives has sometimes been
ambiguous and uncomfortable.9 Business unit managers frequently are the
strategists in diversiﬁed ﬁrms, while group executives act as reviewers.
Many group executives feel, as a result, that they receive much blame but
little credit for the group’s performance.


Identifying and achieving interrelationships both within and outside the
group may well be the single most important task of a group executive. In a
group with signiﬁcant interrelationships, the group executive must become
the chief strategic ofﬁcer of the group. What a “group strategy” is is
ambiguous in many diversiﬁed ﬁrms. Group executives have had the
tendency to behave as if they were mini-portfolio managers, balancing the
capital needs of different business units in the group. Where there are
interrelationships, this conception of the group executive’s role is
fundamentally ﬂawed. Group strategy must be more than the summation of
independently proposed business unit strategies. It must include a horizontal
strategy that encompasses all the business units. A group strategy does not
replace the need for business unit strategies, but integrates them.
In order to achieve interrelationships, the group executive must have
ultimate authority to modify business units’ strategies. Furthermore, the
group executive must be willing to initiate horizontal strategy as well as
respond to business unit proposals. For all the reasons described earlier,
business units acting independently will rarely propose the strategies
necessary to reap the beneﬁts of interrelationships, or risk compromising
their objectives for the beneﬁt of the group. To play the role of chief
strategist, a group executive will typically require the capacity to identify
and analyze interrelationships within and outside the group and to analyze
multipoint competitors. An in-depth knowledge of the businesses in the
group will be necessary. The role of the group executive as a horizontal
strategist must also be reinforced by other horizontal devices that orient
business unit managers toward the goal of achieving interrelationships.
Partial centralization of key value activities, control over part of incentives,
and a role in recruiting will all reinforce the ability of the group executive to
build a true horizontal strategy.10
PARTIAL CENTRALIZATION
Another type of horizontal structure is partial centralization. It may be
appropriate 
to 
centralize 
value 
activities 
because 
of 
important
interrelationships, while still maintaining the proﬁt responsibility of
business units. Centralized value activities may also sometimes serve more
than one group.


Partial centralization is relatively common in activities such as
procurement, sales, and logistical systems. In General Foods, for example,
manufacturing, procurement, and logistics are quite centralized across a
range of divisions that span groups, while product development and
marketing functions all report directly to division managers. McGraw-Hill
has a shared order fulﬁllment system that serves many book, magazine, and
other business units, while Castle and Cooke has a shared marketing and
distribution system for many types of fresh foods.
Shared activities can have a variety of reporting relationships. One
business unit can have formal control while others have a dotted-line
relationship. Alternatively, shared activities can report to several business
units, or shared activities can report directly to a group or corporate
executive. It is desirable that centralized activities report to a line executive
in order to maintain a marketplace orientation. The responsible executive
must take an active role in managing the coordination between the
centralized value activity and the business units, mindful of the issues raised
in this and the previous chapter. Such a management provides a contrast to
the passive, arm’s-length approach sometimes employed in guiding
relations between business units and shared activities.
Success in partial centralization requires creating the proper structure
and incentives for business units to manage an activity themselves, or
assigning the activity to a line executive with authority over the involved
business units. Success also requires an awareness on the part of all
concerned that the interrelationship is valuable to the ﬁrm, as well as the
creation of formal and informal coordinating mechanisms between
centralized activities and involved business units. Joint planning for
centralized activities that involve the affected business units is beneﬁcial, as
is regular formal contact between activity managers and business units.
OTHER CROSS-BUSINESS UNIT ORGANIZATIONAL MECHANISMS
Grouping of business units and partial centralization of value activities
are 
the 
strongest 
forms 
of 
organizational 
impetus 
to 
achieve
interrelationships. Group structure should be designed to capture the most
important interrelationship. It may not encompass all interrelationships,
however, because secondary interrelationships may be present that go


outside the group but that also enhance competitive advantage. Thus
temporary and permanent cross-business unit mechanisms that provide a
means of achieving interrelationships not captured in the primary
organizational structure are an important part of horizontal structure. Such
mechanisms can serve not only as ways of initiating and implementing
interrelationship projects, but also as mechanisms for educating managers
about the importance of interrelationships.11 They should not be
misconstrued as a “matrix” organization, but rather as devices to facilitate
cross business unit cooperation.
Some of the most important organizational devices to serve this purpose
are as follows:
1. Market focus committees. Where a ﬁrm is organized around products
or 
technologies, 
there 
are 
often 
important 
though 
secondary
interrelationships around markets. McGraw-Hill, for example, has
established its primary organization around product forms such as books,
magazines, and data bases. However, there are a number of markets, such as
construction and ﬁnancial services, into which many of the business units
sell. McGraw-Hill can harness these interrelationships if it can attack the
markets in a coordinated way, while exploiting the interrelationships around
products through the primary organizational structure.
A ﬁrm can gain market interrelationships through what might be termed
market focus committees. To form such committees, a ﬁrm identiﬁes the
critical markets where potential interrelationships exist and designates an
executive to be responsible for overseeing the ﬁrm’s efforts in each such
market. A standing committee is constituted consisting of senior managers
of business units serving or potentially serving the market, which meets
regularly to supervise market research, identify and plan for the
achievement of interrelationships in existing product areas, and identify
gaps that need to be ﬁlled to strengthen the ﬁrm’s overall position in the
market. Staff resources are drawn in to perform the necessary analysis.
Speciﬁc interrelationship projects are then assigned to line executives
within the affected business units. While such committees can be time
consuming, competitive advantage will be lost without them to competitors
who can organize to achieve interrelationships.


Market focus committees can also serve as an interim step in shifting
from a product- or technology-based organization to a market-based
organization in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm, if market interrelationships become the
most strategically important. If a ﬁrm shifts to a market-based primary
organization, however, it should probably establish some organizational
mechanisms to reinforce the production or technological interrelationships
present.
2. Technology, channel and other interrelationship committees. Standing
committees or working groups involving a number of business units can
also be created around other important interrelationships, in products (e.g.
ofﬁce 
automation), 
production, 
procurement, 
technologies, 
shared
distribution channels, logistical systems, or order processing systems. Their
function is analogous to market focus committees, and the principles for
organizing them are similar. A senior line executive must accept overall
responsibility for the effort, and regular progress reviews are required so
that the effort will be taken seriously.
3. Temporary Task Forces. While important interrelationships that cut
across the primary organization structure may well require standing
committees 
to 
manage 
their 
ongoing 
implementation, 
some
interrelationships may be best exploited through temporary cross-business
unit task forces. Temporary task forces are a very common mechanism to
achieve the transfer of know-how involved in intangible interrelationships
and some tangible interrelationships can be implemented this way. In
addition, temporary task forces can be a device for studying
interrelationships and recommending permanent ways to achieve them,
whether through partial centralization, a standing committee, or a one-time
change in the way business units operate.
Temporary cross-business unit task forces may address numerous types
of interrelationships. General Motors, for example, forms project centers to
manage critical projects that cut across business unit lines. Staff members
are completely detached from existing organizational units to participate for
periods of up to several years. An example of a less formal temporary
organization is McGraw-Hill’s Information Resources Task Force, which
studied the management of computing capacity across the corporation. This


temporary organization used part-time staff drawn from divisions,
supported by staff from the corporate planning department. Another
example is Sears, that is now using study groups to search for
interrelationships among its businesses and to pursue interrelationships in
ﬁnancial services.
GROUP OR CORPORATE INTERRELATIONSHIP CHAMPIONS
A ﬁnal structural device to facilitate interrelationships is the appointment
of executives at the group, sector, or corporate level to act as champions for
interrelationship. While staff roles such as this have fallen out of favor in
some ﬁrms, they can contribute signiﬁcantly to managing interrelationships.
Staff executives can take responsibility for identifying key interrelationships
in their areas, and then work with the affected business units to assist in
achieving them. For example, a marketing staff executive can coordinate the
procurement of advertising space to maximize bargaining leverage, or
coordinate plans vis-à-vis a shared distribution channel. Staff executives can
also assist in the management of other mechanisms to harness
interrelationships such as committees and task forces of business unit
managers.
MANAGING CROSS-BUSINESS UNIT ORGANIZATIONS
Cross-business unit organizations are difﬁcult to manage, particularly in
U.S. ﬁrms. Because the principle of autonomy is so ingrained and because
committees are often viewed as a “waste of time” rather than an integral
part of the management function, careful design of cross-business unit
organizations is necessary if they are to be accepted.
A cross-business unit organization must report to a senior line executive,
in order to provide it with the necessary inﬂuence within the ﬁrm and to
ensure that its efforts remain focused on important issues. The cross-
business unit organization must also be headed by a credible executive who
is not too closely identiﬁed with a particular point of view, and who is held
responsible for results. The organization must result in tangible action, or it
will not be taken seriously. Top management should assign line executives
from each affected business unit to the cross-business unit organization to


help ensure that plans for achieving interrelationships will be implemented
once developed. The representatives assigned should be senior enough to be
able to inﬂuence their units to action. Some staff capability must be made
available to cross-business unit organizations, or members may be called on
to contribute personnel to allow meaningful analysis and thoughtful
recommendations. Finally, cross-business unit organizations must be
supplemented by other types of horizontal organization to help overcome
the other impediments to interrelationships. In a ﬁrm with signiﬁcant
interrelationships, simply overcoming the cynicism toward cross-business
committees will yield a major competitive advantage.
Horizontal Systems
A second aspect of horizontal organization is horizontal systems—
management systems that reinforce coordination and linkages among
business units. While most management systems have a strong vertical
element, they can also be designed to support the achievement of
interrelationships. A number of systems have particular signiﬁcance for
achieving interrelationships.
Horizontal Strategic Planning. Most diversiﬁed ﬁrms employ vertical
strategic planning systems. Business units prepare strategic plans and
submit them to senior management for approval. When there are important
interrelationships, however, a horizontal component must be overlaid on the
vertical strategic planning process to make planning truly meaningful.
There are a number of possible approaches for introducing a horizontal
dimension into strategic planning. First, the corporate planning department
can accept responsibility for identifying interrelationships and initiating
steps to exploit them. Second, group and sector executives can be given
responsibility for horizontal strategy and the content of the group plan
should concentrate on interrelationships. A third approach is to add an
interrelationships section to business unit plans. Each business unit is asked
to identify important interrelationships it has with other units inside and
outside its group, and to develop action plans to exploit important ones. A


ﬁnal approach is to require separate, joint strategic plans from business
units involved in important interrelationships.
NEC Corporation has opted for the ﬁnal approach, and has adopted two
planning systems. In addition to a normal business unit planning system, it
has established the CBP (Corporate Business Plan) system in which
separate strategic plans are prepared for critical investments or programs
that cut across business unit lines. The system forces business unit
managers involved in an interrelationship to meet and agree on a strategic
plan for dealing with it over the long term. In effect, this system requires a
special plan for important horizontal issues.
The various approaches to adding a horizontal component to planning
are not mutually exclusive. Usually, several should be pursued
simultaneously. At the very least, mechanisms for horizontal planning must
exist at both the group and corporate levels, since the horizontal strategy
issues at these levels differ. No business unit will have the perspective to
identify all interrelationships or develop plans to achieve them.
Horizontal Procedures. Interrelationships are facilitated by the presence
of procedures governing cross-business unit activities. Many ﬁrms have
transfer pricing policies, and some ﬁrms have policies governing in-house
versus external purchasing. Relatively few ﬁrms, however, have guidelines
for issues such as revenue or cost sharing on joint projects, or capital
budgeting procedures for joint projects. Without such guidelines, pursuing
interrelationship will involve a great deal of administrative turmoil and
protracted 
negotiations. 
General 
guidelines 
can 
greatly 
facilitate
interrelationships, limiting incentives for business units to seek outside
coalitions or avoid internal interrelationships.
Transfer pricing and purchasing rules often reﬂect a misunderstanding of
interrelationships. Simple transfer pricing rules, based on market prices,
treat business units as stand-alone entities in arm’s-length relationships with
each other. This negates the logic underlying interrelationships, no matter
how administratively appealing it may be. Interrelationships imply that
transfer pricing and other decisions should be designed to improve the
ﬁrm’s overall position and not the ﬁnancial results of individual business
units.12 For example, Perkin-Elmer has a system in which the selling
division sells at market price, while the buying division buys at cost. Both


have the incentive to do business, while the buying division sets prices
based on the true cost to the corporation.13 Business unit goals also may
need to be adjusted in order to make them consistent with transfer pricing
rules. Business units that transfer at cost, for example, should not be held to
ﬁrmwide proﬁtability targets.
Purchasing rules are another area where administrative simplicity often
outweighs strategic logic. Firms defeat the purpose if they adopt the hands-
off view that units can buy from the “best” source, external or internal.
Most ﬁrms that are successful at achieving interrelationships treat in-house
purchasing as the assumption, and business units that supply sister units
view them as their most important buyers. Senior management should
clearly communicate this expectation throughout the ﬁrm, and ensure that
business units who treat their sister units as unimportant buyers or suppliers
are not rewarded.
Horizontal Incentives. The incentive system must recognize that the ﬁrm
can gain from interrelationships, and should reward business unit and group
managers for achieving them instead of encouraging them to concentrate on
their individual results. It is also necessary to remove any biases in
measurement that favor external or go-it-alone investments instead of joint
efforts with other business units. In ﬁrms with important interrelationships,
the incentive system should reward business units and their managers to
some extent on group and corporate results as well as on business unit
results. In nearly every ﬁrm I have observed that is successful at achieving
interrelationships, compensation plans emphasize group or corporate
performance. These ﬁrms have proven that business unit managers do not
need to have all their compensation based on business unit results in order
to be highly motivated. Tying compensation solely to business unit results
reﬂects a simplistic view of motivation. Instead, business unit managements
can and should be made part of the ﬁrm’s general management team
through a broader basis of compensation.14 Performance measurement
should differ for each unit. Performance targets should reﬂect the differing
balance between individual business units’ results and their broader
contribution to the ﬁrm through interrelationships. Senior management must
accept the responsibility to convince all its business unit managers that this
is fair and reﬂects a higher corporate purpose.


Incentives should contain a subjective component in ﬁrms with important
interrelationships. A business unit’s contribution to the ﬁrm cannot usually
be measured quantitatively. Any one quantitative standard will not be able
to weigh all factors and may indirectly bias behavior against a ﬁrm’s
interests. Instead, group and corporate management must be prepared to
judge a business unit’s contribution to group or corporate strategy. While
ﬁrms have traditionally avoided subjective incentives, top management
must communicate to groups and business units a need for them and a sense
of fairness in rewarding contributions to the ﬁrm as a whole.15
Horizontal Human Resource Practices
A third aspect of horizontal organization is human resource policies.
These are policies for hiring, training, and managing human resources that
facilitate cross-business unit collaboration, as well as successful
relationships between business units and centralized functions. As with
horizontal systems, horizontal human resource policies should apply to an
entire ﬁrm or to those parts with signiﬁcant interrelationships.
Personnel Rotation among Business Units. The rotation of personnel
among business units facilitates the achievement of interrelationships in a
number of ways. It helps to reduce cultural and procedural differences
among business units, creates personal relationships that facilitate joint
projects, 
educates 
managers 
about 
areas 
of 
opportunity 
for
interrelationships with other units, and promotes a corporate (or group)
identity in addition to the business unit identity.16 Though there may be
some cost in terms of training time and continuity when rotating personnel,
the long-term beneﬁts can be signiﬁcant not only for interrelationships but
also in retarding the onset of conventional wisdom in business units. Firms
such as DuPont, General Electric, and Citicorp have active rotation
programs that seem to have facilitated interrelationships.
Some Firmwide Role in Hiring and Training. A ﬁrmwide (or group) role
in hiring and training can help build a corporate identity and an awareness
of the overall interests of the ﬁrm. Corporate orientation and training
programs can educate managers about other business units, and encourage


personal relationships among incoming managers who will eventually be
dispersed to different units. Ongoing management development programs
can also facilitate interrelationships. Programs that bring managers from
different units together not only can have an educational function, but also
develop understanding and encourage personal relationships. Such a
corporate role in orientation and training need not reduce the ability of
business units to hire personnel that ﬁt their needs.
Promotion from Within. Promotion from within tends to reinforce a
corporate perspective, and can lead to managers adopting a longer time
horizon. Both of these effects can facilitate interrelationships. Home-grown
managers not only tend to identify more strongly with a ﬁrm, but are also
more likely to develop a network of personal relationships within the ﬁrm
that facilitates horizontal collaboration. While there are risks of reinforcing
conventional wisdom, a general preference to promote from within (though
not necessarily from within the same business unit) can be important to
ﬁrms with strong interrelationships.
Cross-business Unit Forums and Meetings. Carefully designed meetings
that bring managers from different business units together can facilitate the
discovery and achievement of interrelationships. It is particularly effective
in such meetings to ask managers to brief their peers about their respective
businesses, and to encourage group discussions of issues that cut across unit
lines.
Education on Interrelationship Concepts. It is vital that key managers
understand the strategic logic of interrelationships and have a language
system for discussing and an analytical framework for identifying them in
their own businesses. This education can be part of management
development programs, companywide meetings, and other forums. While
top management often understand the concept of interrelationships, middle
managers frequently do not and changes in their behavior will make or
break the achievement of interrelationships in practice.
Horizontal Conﬂict Resolution Processes


The fourth aspect of horizontal organization is management processes
for resolving conﬂict among business units. Any successful organizational
structure combines formal structures and systems with ongoing processes
through which managers interact. While less tangible than structure and
systems, these processes can be just as important to success, particularly
where responsibilities are not clear and frequent interaction among
organizational units is necessary.
Achieving interrelationships nearly always involves the sharing of
authority, the need for frequent coordination, and subjective performance
evaluation. Hence processes for resolving conﬂict among business units are
vitally important to achieving interrelationships. The processes themselves
vary greatly from ﬁrm to ﬁrm, though senior management always plays an
important role by setting the tone for how business units should interact and
by acting as ﬁnal arbiters of any disputes. What is important is not the exact
form of the process in a ﬁrm, but the existence of some process that is
managed by group, sector, and corporate management which is perceived as
fair.
The Corporate Role in Facilitating Interrelationships
A purely bottom-up approach to interrelationships rarely succeeds. Chief
executive ofﬁcers can have a major impact on the achievement of
interrelationships through their behavior, as can other line executives above
the business unit level. There are many opportunities available to senior
management to deﬁne a larger corporate purpose, to stress the importance
of interrelationships, and to discourage parochial behavior by business unit,
group, and sector managers. A strong set of ﬁrmwide values and a strong
corporate identity are vital links in reducing cynicism toward committees,
resolving conﬂicts, and so on.
One important way to reinforce interrelationships is through articulating
a unifying theme. A unifying theme at the corporate, sector, and group
levels that stresses interrelationships can be a powerful tool for motivating
managers to ﬁnd and implement them. It should be prominently and
repeatedly stressed by senior management both externally and internally,
and at all levels of the company. NEC Corporation, for example, has the


theme of “C&C” (computers and communications), which symbolizes the
converging of electronics and communications technology into integrated
C&C systems. Going hand in hand with the theme is a diagram that vividly
displays the merging of the technologies. This theme is a constant one in
top management speeches, annual report copy, and internal discussions.
NEC’s managers at all levels understand the theme, and it has reinforced the
search for interrelationships by business units.
Interrelationships are also facilitated if the corporate identity is displayed
prominently in each business unit on logos, signs, and stationery. This does
not imply the abandonment of valuable business unit trade names. Instead,
it suggests that a ﬁrm should develop both its corporate identity as well as
those of business units, within the ﬁrm and outside. This not only affects
management’s view of themselves, but can directly facilitate the
achievement of market interrelationships by making buyers more aware of
the connection among business units.
Interrelationships and the Mode of Diversiﬁcation
The achievement of interrelationships is facilitated by developing new
businesses internally rather than acquiring them. Internal development is
typically based on interrelationships, and organically grown units are likely
to have strategies consistent with other parts of the ﬁrm. Shared value
activities are more likely to be designed for sharing. Acquisitions, on the
other hand, require that interrelationships be forged with a heretofore
separate organization, with all the associated impediments. Acquisitions
also raise the odds that compromises in strategy will be necessary to pursue
interrelationship opportunities.17 Firms such as IBM, Kodak, GE, DuPont
and 
Procter 
& 
Gamble, 
which 
have 
successfully 
exploited
interrelationships, have traditions of creating many businesses internally.
The difﬁculties posed by acquisitions for achieving interrelationships do
not imply that ﬁrms should never make acquisitions. Rather, they suggest
that ﬁrms apply a rigorous test in choosing between acquisitions and
internal entry, and that horizontal strategy issues be prominent in the search
for acquisitions. The choice of acquisition should reﬂect the added difﬁculty
of achieving interrelationships with acquired ﬁrms. Many ﬁrms have chosen


to acquire to minimize start-up losses and to have a quicker impact on
revenues, sacriﬁcing interrelationships in the process that were important to
the ﬁrm’s long term strategy.
If acquisition emerges as the best way to enter a new business, horizontal
strategy issues should not be ignored. Unless an acquisition is in an
unrelated ﬁeld, the ability to integrate the acquired ﬁrm in a way that
achieves interrelationships must be weighed. Many acquirers almost
guarantee that interrelationships will not occur by promising complete
autonomy to the management of prospective acquisitions. For example, in
Transamerica’s purchase of Fred S. James Company, an insurance broker,
Transamerica pledged that the James Company would be independent and
report directly to the CEO instead of through Transamerica’s insurance
group. Despite the fact that the James acquisition offered great possibilities
for achieving interrelationships, achieving them has been made substantially
more difﬁcult, at least for a time.
Managing Horizontal Organization
Achieving interrelationships is a function of instituting an array of
horizontal practices. As many companies have discovered, organizational
structure alone is not sufﬁcient. Merely grouping related businesses together
will not guarantee the exploitation of interrelationships. Structure must be
reinforced by group and sector executives who understand their roles as
horizontal strategists, as well as appropriate management systems and
human resource policies. The array of horizontal practices must not be
uniform across the ﬁrm, but tailored to reﬂect the patterns of
interrelationships that are present. Some business units are more connected
than others, and hence the balance between vertical and horizontal
organization should vary. Top management must also reinforce
interrelationships by sending clear signals about their importance, and
promoting a culture where the corporation has an identity that transcends
and reinforces that of business units.
Achieving interrelationships usually requires the creation of some shared
values within a ﬁrm. Managers must perceive that collaboration with other
business units is important and will be rewarded, and that senior


management will act fairly in measuring the performance of the individual
units involved. While interrelationships can sometimes be imposed,
interrelationships that are imposed on business units will rarely be so strong
or durable as those based on common understanding and consensus.
Instituting horizontal organizational mechanisms throughout the ﬁrm is
usually necessary for this attitude to occur. The process takes time, and
cannot be expected to occur just because the potential for interrelationships
is discovered.
Promising Examples
American Express provides an example of a ﬁrm with a corporate
strategy built on interrelationships. It has set out to be a broadly based
ﬁnancial services company for upwardly mobile afﬂuent consumers, as well
as providing specialized services for ﬁnancial institutions and corporations.
The acquisition of Shearson Loeb Rhoades was a major step in this strategy,
as was the earlier acquisition of Fireman’s Fund. There are many
interrelationships among the businesses of American Express, Shearson,
and Fireman’s Fund, as well as many potential new businesses that could
add to American Express’s overall competitive position in ﬁnancial services
via interrelationships. American Express and Shearson had different
cultures, however, exacerbating the problems inherent in achieving
interrelationships. Moreover, American Express had traditionally been run
with quite autonomous units.
To achieve interrelationships, American Express has employed a wide
range of horizontal devices. A coordinated ﬁnancial services strategy has
become the overall theme for American Express, and top management has
frequently stated and reinforced this theme. A quotation from American
Express’s Annual Report is illustrative:
Key to the Company’s future is our ability to work as “one enterprise,” with staff ofﬁces at each
of our major business segments interacting with one another to blend products, services,
distribution and expertise to meet the demands of sophisticated customers and add to their
convenience and satisfaction. Last year’s Annual Report cover graphically depicts the one
enterprise concept: our American Express logo at the center of four distinct but interrelated
business lines.18 (See Figure 11–1.)


Figure 11–1. The American Express Logo
A ﬁnancial services committee composed of executives from American
Express and Shearson was constituted, with responsibility for developing an
overall scheme for approaching the ﬁnancial marketplace. Shearson’s name
was changed to Shearson/American Express, reinforcing a ﬁrmwide
identity. Executives, including many at senior levels, have been cross-
posted. A coordinating group has been established to manage the ﬁnancing
of the various units. Unity across the company is stressed at management
meetings. American Express has also recognized that although cultures are
different in acquired units and homogenization of cultures should not be the
goal, some parts of each business unit’s culture can usefully be transplanted.
It remains to be seen to what extent American Express will actually be
successful in exploiting all its potential interrelationships. Managers
occasionally complain of endless meetings, and cultural and style
differences are still strong among units. However, there are many examples
of interrelationships that the company has achieved. Cross selling of buyers
is now well under way, and units are providing products to each other. New


acquisitions such as Investors Diversiﬁed Services (IDS) and Ayco
Corporation 
(personal 
ﬁnancial 
counseling) 
are 
extending 
old
interrelationships and creating new ones. Moreover, interrelationships
appear to be driving the search for new acquisitions, and the ability to
integrate acquired companies into the overall strategy has become a key test
of further acquisitions. The acquisition of IDS was postponed after a close
look uncovered problems of sharing computer systems. The acquisition
occurred only after the purchase price had been reduced to reﬂect the added
coordination and compromise costs. If American Express continues to be
able to identify and achieve interrelationships, it seems on its way to
becoming a leading ﬁnancial services ﬁrm.
NEC Corporation is another ﬁrm in interrelated businesses that has made
considerable progress in achieving interrelationships. NEC competes in
semiconductors, telecommunications, computers, and home electronics.
These four broad business areas are linked by numerous interrelationships
in buyers, channels, technology, procurement, and production processes.
NEC has been remarkably effective in exploiting these interrelationships
without internal conﬂict. Business units share many activities, including
R&D labs, sales forces, plants, and channels. A great deal of internal
coordination takes place across divisions in joint selling, transfers of
technology, buyer/supplier relationships, and many other areas. Given
NEC’s moderate size relative to its competitors in each of its four main
business areas, an important reason for its success is its ability to exploit
interrelationships while its larger competitors were largely focusing on only
one or two business areas.
How has NEC been able to achieve these interrelationships? The answer
lies in the extensive horizontal organization NEC has put in place to
facilitate interrelationships. This overlays an equally well-developed
vertical organization, in which decentralized business units are managed
through planning, control, resource allocation, and incentive systems.
Structurally, NEC has organized itself into four broad groups—electron
devices, telecommunications, computers, and home electronics—that each
reﬂect strong interrelationships in products, markets, and technology. Note
that the computer, telecommunications, and electron devices groups are
organized around technology while home electronics is a market-oriented
grouping. Within these broad groups, related products such as switching


equipment and transmission equipment have been grouped together,
reﬂecting even stronger interrelationships.
To promote interrelationships across groups there are forty-four ongoing
corporatewide committees, many involving important interrelationships.
Perhaps the most powerful of these is the “C&C Committee,” charged with
identifying and exploiting the potential interrelationships created by the
convergence of computers and communications. Partial centralization of
activities is also prevalent at NEC in sales, distribution, manufacturing, and
technology development. Corporate units in areas such as production
technology and software development share the development of widely
used technologies. Finally, many temporary committees are employed to get
managers in different business units together.
NEC’s C&C theme has constantly reinforced the need to exploit
interrelationships. Every division also identiﬁes itself with the NEC brand.
The vast majority of businesses have been developed internally. Managers
rotate among divisions and undergo extensive training upon joining the
corporation (all personnel are hired centrally) and throughout their careers.
Frequent forums allow managers to meet with counterparts in related
business units.
The strategic planning process at NEC includes the CBP system
described earlier, which allows uniﬁed planning for businesses with
interrelationships. Incentives are not solely linked to ﬁnancial results, but
reﬂect the business unit’s overall contribution to the company. Internal
customers are viewed as the most important, and external sourcing is
practiced only if superior quality and price are available from outside. The
net result is a clear culture at NEC which reinforces ﬁnding and exploiting
interrelationships.
Japanese Firms and Interrelationships
While there are many non-Japanese ﬁrms that have achieved
interrelationships, a number of characteristics of many, though not all,
Japanese ﬁrms make them well positioned for exploiting interrelationships:
• strong belief in overarching corporate themes


• internal development of new businesses
• a less rigid tradition of autonomy
• more ﬂexible incentives, less based on business unit results
• willingness to centralize activities
•  greater tradition of committees and frequent personal contact among
executives
• intensive and continuing in-house training
• corporatewide hiring and training
Given their history, Japanese ﬁrms may be in a position to strike a better
balance between horizontal and vertical organization in the diversiﬁed ﬁrm
than U.S. and European ﬁrms, which tend to have either a strong tradition
of autonomy or a high degree of centralized control. In many ways, the
ability of Japanese ﬁrms to achieve interrelationships can be viewed as a
major 
future 
challenge 
in 
competing 
with 
Western 
ﬁrms 
as
interrelationships grow in importance. The ﬁrst Japanese challenge, low
labor costs, has been replaced by the second Japanese challenge of quality
and productivity. Perhaps interrelationships will emerge as the next
Japanese source of competitive advantage, coupled with an increasing
ability to innovate.
It is also intriguing to note that the U.S. companies that have achieved
interrelationships, such as GE, DuPont, IBM, and Procter & Gamble, have
many of the same characteristics. As interrelationships become increasingly
critical to competitive advantage, these ﬁrms may serve as role models for
ﬁrms steeped in the tradition of extreme autonomy and diversiﬁcation
through acquisition so characteristic of U.S. industry.
A New Organizational Form
The principles underlying horizontal organization imply a new
organizational form for diversiﬁed ﬁrms. The concept of decentralization
has revolutionized the way diversiﬁed ﬁrms are managed, bringing with it a
wide range of practices and management expectations. Many leading
companies have successfully made the transition to decentralization.


Diversiﬁed ﬁrms must undergo further organizational evolution if they
are to respond to today’s competition. Because of the importance of
interrelationships, there is a growing need for a new corporate
organizational form that recognizes both vertical and horizontal dimensions.
Decentralization in diversiﬁed ﬁrms is still a necessity, but must be overlaid
with mechanisms to achieve the important interrelationships. The balance
between the vertical (decentralization) and horizontal dimensions in the
organization of the diversiﬁed ﬁrm is an ever changing one, and the ideal is
perhaps a constant shifting of the balance as the need to emphasize different
activities changes. However, a balance that combines signiﬁcant elements of
both vertical and horizontal will be increasingly necessary.19 The balance
must also reﬂect differing interrelationships from business unit to business
unit.
Increasingly, diversity does not imply the absence of interrelationships.
Business units can be distinct and beneﬁt from decentralization, while being
linked by interrelationships. Hewlett-Packard, a ﬁrm noted for its strong
tradition of decentralization, is just one example of the growing need to
balance vertical with horizontal. Recently, HP has recombined a number of
divisions involved in the design and manufacture of personal computers and
related products. These divisions were proceeding independently, but lacked
the scale economies and cross-product coordination to mount a concerted
attack on IBM and Apple.
This new organizational form requires a modiﬁcation of rigid or narrow
views of autonomy, as well as changing attitudes toward incentives systems
and toward the role of group and sector executives. Instead of seeking
autonomy and viewing committees and other joint efforts as a waste of
time, business unit managers will have to modify their conception of what
“managing their own business” means. The new requirements of the
diversiﬁed ﬁrm will involve a price in terms of less simplicity, greater
ambiguity, more subjectivity, and potentially more conﬂict. However,
diversiﬁed ﬁrms that can successfully negotiate this transition will reap
rewards in terms of competitive advantage. If they can make this new
transition, there will be little debate over whether diversiﬁed ﬁrms add
value.


12
Complementary Products and
Competitive Advantage
Most industries are affected in some way by complementary products—that
is, products that are used jointly with their product by the buyer. Computer
software and computer hardware, for example, are complements.
Complements are the opposite of substitutes, because the sale of one
promotes the sale of another. Sometimes a number of complements are part
of a ﬁrm’s product line, while in other cases complements are supplied by
other industries.
Complementary products represent one type of interrelatedness among
industries, and raise important issues for a ﬁrm’s competitive scope. Though
interrelationships among industries in general terms have been the subject
of the previous chapters, complementary products are singled out for
attention here because they involve not only questions of the breadth of a
ﬁrm’s competitive scope but also of how it should compete within particular
industries.
This chapter examines the three important strategic practices in
industries that have important complementary products:
•  Control over complementary products. Offering a full range of
complementary products rather than leaving some of them to be
supplied by others (“we sell both”).
•  Bundling. Selling a group of distinct but complementary products
together only as a bundle, at a single price (“we only sell both
together”).
