# Chapter 12: Complementary Products and Competitive Advantage

•  Cross subsidization. Selling one product at terms that deliberately
promote the sale of complementary products (“we sell one to sell
another”).
The ﬁrst strategic choice a ﬁrm must make is whether it should supply
complementary products itself or allow outside suppliers to provide some of
them. This is an issue in competitive scope. Having resolved this question, a
ﬁrm must then decide how to compete in the complementary products. One
option is to bundle, or sell the complements together as a package. Bundling
in some form is present in almost every industry, though it is frequently not
recognized as such. Cross subsidization is a different approach to selling
complementary products, in which products are not sold together at one
price but sold separately with prices that reﬂect their complementarity. A
ﬁrm whose products have important complements must make choices in all
three areas.
These three practices are pervasive and affect competitive advantage and
industry structure in some form or another in many industries. Yet all three
issues are frequently overlooked, and the pitfalls in dealing with them are
numerous. Many ﬁrms do not even recognize that they are bundling, for
example. Or ﬁrms maintain cross subsidization after the conditions
supporting it have changed, thereby creating an opening for competitors to
attack them by focusing on the products being used to subsidize.
In this chapter I will describe in detail the conditions under which
control over complements, bundling, and cross subsidization can lead to
competitive advantage, as well as the risks of each practice. I will also
describe how a ﬁrm’s strategy toward complements should change as its
industry evolves. Finally, some of the strategic pitfalls that ﬁrms have
encountered in pursuing each of the three practices will be identiﬁed.
Control Over Complementary Products
In nearly every industry, products are used by the buyer in conjunction
with other complementary products. Computers are used with software
packages and programmers, for example, and mobile homes are often used
in mobile home parks—plots of land specially designed as permanent sites


for mobile homes, complete with streets, electricity, and sewer hookups.
Tennis equipment is used with tennis courts, and jet engines are used with
spare parts.
The sales of complementary products are necessarily linked, so that their
fortunes tend to rise and fall together. However, complementary products
can have a strategic relationship to each other that goes far beyond related
growth rates. One complementary product often affects another’s market
image and perceived quality, as well as the cost of using the other from the
buyer’s viewpoint. Both of these effects are important to differentiation
(Chapter 4). The relationship among complements can also affect the cost
of supplying them (Chapter 3).
Where an industry’s product is used with complements, an important
strategic issue arises: the extent to which a ﬁrm should offer the full range
of complements or leave some to be provided by independent suppliers.
Offering the range of complements provides an important competitive
advantage in some industries, but represents an unnecessary and even risky
distraction in others. Control over complements is a distinct issue from
bundling, though the two issues are related. A ﬁrm that supplies
complements may or may not choose to bundle, because the beneﬁts of
controlling complements can often be gained even if they are sold
separately.
Competitive Advantages from Controlling Complements
A ﬁrm can potentially gain competitive advantage from controlling
complements in one of several ways, depending on the ﬁrm’s strategy and
industry structure. Broadly, the advantages stem from coordinating the
value chains of a ﬁrm’s product and complements in order to gain
interrelationships that are similar in character to those discussed in Chapter
9:
Improve Buyer Performance and Thus Differentiate. Complements often
affect the performance of a product or the ﬁrm’s overall value to the buyer.
Well-designed software can improve the performance of a personal
computer, just as toner affects the copy quality of plain paper copiers.


Similarly, a food concessionaire can signiﬁcantly affect the buyer’s
satisfaction with a racetrack. Gaining the performance beneﬁt of controlling
complements often requires bundling. A ﬁrm that controls a complement
may thus be able to enhance differentiation.
A ﬁrm gains a competitive advantage in differentiation from controlling
complements if competitors do not. Even if control over a complement is
widespread in an industry, however, it can still be beneﬁcial if it improves
overall industry structure though no ﬁrm gains a competitive advantage.
Improve the Perception of Value. Complements frequently affect each
other’s image or perceived quality. If mobile home parks look shoddy or are
poorly designed, for example, this can adversely affect how buyers perceive
mobile homes. Because of their association in the buyer’s mind,
complements are frequently signaling criteria for each other.1 Controlling a
complement can yield a competitive advantage in signaling even if a ﬁrm
does not bundle. For example, Kodak’s strong position in ﬁlm improves its
perceived differentiation vis-à-vis other camera manufacturers that do not
sell ﬁlm, even though Kodak sells cameras and ﬁlm separately.
Controlling complements to signal value may be beneﬁcial to industry
structure even if no one ﬁrm gains a competitive advantage from doing so.
In the mobile home industry, for example, the overall image of mobile
homes could be improved if all mobile home producers also developed
high-quality mobile home parks. This would increase the demand for
mobile home versus other forms of housing and beneﬁt the entire industry.
Control over complements by one ﬁrm may, in fact, have little impact on
buyer perceptions unless a sufﬁcient number of competitors also control the
complement. In these cases a ﬁrm should actually work to encourage its
competitors to enter the complementary industry along with it.
Optimal Pricing. The buyer’s purchase decision is frequently based on
the total cost of a product and complements, rather than on the cost of the
product alone. For example, buyers usually measure the cost of a
condominium or automobile by the total monthly payment required
(including principal and ﬁnancing cost), rather than looking solely at the
price of the condominium or automobile itself. Similarly, buyers may


evaluate the cost of going to a movie in terms of the cost of the movie plus
the cost of parking.2
Under these circumstances, prices must be set jointly to maximize
proﬁts, and this is difﬁcult to do without controlling the complement. When
setting the price of parking at a movie theater, one must recognize that
lowering the cost of parking may increase the number of movie tickets sold,
for example. I will discuss when such deliberate cross subsidization is the
best strategy in the ﬁnal section of this chapter.
As with differentiation, the beneﬁts of controlling a complement for
pricing do not require that the ﬁrm sell the product and complements as a
bundle, or even that the ﬁrm have a market share in the complement that is
comparable to its share of the base product. Even with a relatively small
position in the complement, a ﬁrm can inﬂuence pricing in the
complementary industry by initiating pricing moves that competitors are
forced (or inclined) to follow. By lowering its own parking prices, for
example, a movie theater ﬁrm may be able to force down prices at other
parking garages in the area to some extent. Thus a position in the
complement gives the ﬁrm a leverage point with which to inﬂuence the
development of the complement’s industry, and its position in the
complement need only be big enough to allow exercising such leverage.
Reduce Marketing and Selling Cost. Control over complements can lead
to economies in marketing, because the demands for a product and for
complements are related. Advertising and other marketing investments for
one complement often boost demand for the other, and complements may
be susceptible to shared marketing or selling. Similarly, an installed base in
one product can lower the cost of marketing complements. In video games,
for example, an installed base of machines helps the ﬁrm sell game
cartridges. The economies are sometimes large enough so that a ﬁrm not
controlling complements is unable to reach the threshold spending on
marketing needed to be effective.
A ﬁrm gains a cost advantage in marketing if it is one of relatively few
ﬁrms that controls a complement. Widespread control over complements
can beneﬁt the industry as a whole, however, if it raises marketing
expenditures and boosts overall industry demand relative to substitute
products. Widespread control over complements may also help overcome


the “free rider” problem, where ﬁrms selling one complement piggyback on
the marketing investments of ﬁrms selling others. Even if a ﬁrm’s decision
to control a complement is quickly imitated by competitors, such a move
will still be beneﬁcial to the industry as a whole.
Sharing Other Activities. Controlling a complement may allow a ﬁrm to
share other activities in the value chain besides marketing and sales. The
same logistical system may be employed to deliver a product and
complements, for example, or the same order entry system. Opportunities
for sharing will often be present because of the fact that complements are
sold to the same buyers. The circumstances under which sharing value
activities leads to a competitive advantage are discussed in Chapter 9.
Raise Mobility Barriers. Where controlling a complement leads to one or
more of the competitive advantages described above, it may also increase
overall entry/mobility barriers into the industry if entry barriers into the
complementary product are signiﬁcant. For example, a real estate developer
that could own a bank (and get preferential access to ﬁnancing) would
signiﬁcantly increase the sustainability of its competitive advantage because
the barriers to entry into banking are signiﬁcant for most real estate
developers. Today real estate developers are legally prohibited from owning
banks, though deregulation may change this in the future.
The beneﬁts of controlling a complement are not mutually exclusive, and
any or all can be present in an industry. For example, the food concession
can not only affect the buyer’s satisfaction with the racetrack, but prices
should be set jointly on concessions and admission. Depending on the
characteristics of buyers, low admission prices may well raise the number
of patrons who will buy high priced hot dogs. Control over both the
racetrack and the food concession can lead at the same time to economies in
marketing. The sustainability of the competitive advantage from controlling
a complement depends on the presence of some barriers to entering the
complementary good. Without them, competitors can readily replicate the
advantage through entering the complementary industry themselves.
The beneﬁts of controlling a complement can sometimes be achieved
through coalitions with other ﬁrms without the need for actual ownership.


For example, a ﬁrm and the supplier of a complement can agree to
coordinate prices, or agree to pool their marketing budgets. The problem
with such arrangements is the difﬁculty of reaching a stable agreement. As
long as ﬁrms supplying complements are independent, each will be tempted
to free-ride on the other, and to set prices and strategies to maximize its
proﬁts rather than the joint proﬁts of both. Nevertheless, the possibilities of
using coalitions to achieve the beneﬁts of controlling complements must
always be explored. If the possibility exists it may be the most cost-effective
option for a ﬁrm (or for the ﬁrm’s competitors). Sometimes equity
investments or other forms of quasi-integration between a ﬁrm and the
supplier of a complementary product can overcome the difﬁculties of
coordinating behavior.3
Problems of Controlling Complements
Against the beneﬁts of controlling complements must be weighed some
potential problems. The ﬁrst is that the structural attractiveness of a
complementary industry may be low, and its proﬁtability signiﬁcantly lower
than in the base industry. Though control of the complement may improve
proﬁtability in the base industry, this must be weighed against the
proﬁtability of the complement relative to alternative uses for the funds. The
tradeoff does not always favor control of the complement.
A second problem with controlling complements is that the
complementary 
industry 
may 
involve 
very 
different 
managerial
requirements for which a ﬁrm is ill-equipped and a ﬁrm may have little
competitive advantage in the complementary industry. Thus any beneﬁts
from controlling a complement must be weighed against the risk that the
ﬁrm will fail or only achieve a weak competitive position. The lack of skills
in the complementary industry cannot be completely overcome by acquiring
a complementary product supplier and managing it as a free-standing entity,
because close coordination between complements is required to achieve
most of the beneﬁts.
Control over Complements and Industry Evolution


The value of controlling complements may well shift as an industry
evolves. The need to control complements to improve their quality or image
may be greatest early in the evolution of the complementary industry,
because of uneven quality or the presence of ﬂy-by-night ﬁrms.4 In the early
years of color TV, for example, RCA’s need to have an in-house service
organization was much greater than later when independent service shops
had mastered color set repair techniques. As a complementary industry
matures, it may become desirable to exit or harvest a ﬁrm’s position in the
complementary industry. Independent suppliers may be able to do an
adequate job, and the ﬁrm may no longer be able to offer anything unique in
the complementary industry to bolster its overall differentiation. Staying in
a complement too long when there are capable outside suppliers can
actually erode differentiation rather than enhance it.
The pricing advantages of controlling a complement also may erode as
the complementary industry matures. In the emerging phase, prices of
complements are more likely to be higher than would be desirable because
suppliers are skimming or inefﬁcient. Early fragmentation of the
complementary industry may also lead to inefﬁciency of complementary
products suppliers, and to under-investment in marketing.
While there is a tendency for the need to control complements to decline
with industry maturity, this is by no means a universal pattern. The
advantages of controlling complements for marketing costs and other
shared activities often persist, for example. A resort that owns not only a
hotel but also the golf course, other sports facilities, and transportation may
have a compelling advantage over one who only operates the hotel. What is
necessary is for a ﬁrm to ask itself periodically whether there are beneﬁts to
controlling each complement. For some complements the beneﬁts will
persist or even increase, while for others a timely exit may be justiﬁed.
Identifying Strategically Important Complements
In view of the potential importance of complements both to a ﬁrm’s
competitive position and to industry structure, a ﬁrm must be aware of what
products are complements to its product. The identiﬁcation of complements
is sometimes subtle, and often complements can be uncovered that are not


generally perceived as such. Most industries will have a rather long list of
products that are complementary to some degree. Table 12–1 gives an
illustrative (and partial) list of products that are at least somewhat
complementary to residential home building.
TABLE 12–1 Partial List of Complements to Houses
Financing
Lawn mowers
Homeowner’s insurance
Grass seed
Real estate brokerage
Swimming pools
Furniture
Barbecue grills
Appliances
Light bulbs
Carpets
Pets
Nurseries
Garden hose
Given the potentially numerous complements in many industries such as
home building, it is necessary to distinguish those complements that are
strategically important from those that are not. It is clear that a house
builder such as U.S. Home will gain little competitive advantage from
competing in all the industries listed in Table 12–1, though it may well gain
an advantage from competing in some of them.
Strategically important complements have two characteristics: (1) they
are or could be associated with each other by the buyer, and (2) they have a
signiﬁcant impact on each other’s competitive position. Some association of
a complement and a ﬁrm’s product by the buyer is implied in most of the
potential competitive advantages of controlling a complement. The
association among complements leads the buyer to connect their images,
measure their performance collectively rather than individually, or measure
their cost as a group. This association is also what underlies joint marketing
or sales.
The strategic relationship among complements is thus in large part a
function of buyer perceptions. A ﬁrm can rank complements based on how
strong the association with its product is or could be. Houses and ﬁnancing
are commonly associated by buyers, for example, while houses and grass
seed are rarely associated though their demand is undeniably related.
Similarly, movies and parking costs are commonly associated, while the
cost of driving to the movie is rarely associated with the cost of the movie.


If products are in fact connected but not presently associated by buyers, a
ﬁrm may be able to gain competitive advantage by educating buyers to
make the association. A sophisticated knowledge of buyer purchasing
behavior is necessary to uncover actual or potential buyer associations
among complements.
The second test of the strategic signiﬁcance of a complement is the effect
of controlling it on competitive advantage or industry structure. A
complement will not be important for a ﬁrm to control unless it has a
material effect on overall cost or differentiation of the group of related
products. Light bulbs are complements to lamps, for example, but light
bulbs do not have a meaningful impact on the differentiation of a lamp or on
the cost of marketing it. Since widespread control over complements can be
a signiﬁcant beneﬁt for industry structure, however, some complements are
important to control even if they cannot be turned into a competitive
advantage.
Bundling
Bundling is selling separable products or services to buyers only as a
package, or “bundle.” For example, IBM bundled computer hardware,
software, and service support for many years, while the manufacturers of
antiknock additives for gasoline have traditionally provided various
technical services along with their product all at a single price. Bundling in
some form is pervasive, though not always recognized. Identifying when
bundling is occurring often requires a rather fundamental look at an
industry akin to that in segmentation (Chapter 7). All the potentially
separable products and services that are offered must be isolated, even
though they may not be seen as separate by industry participants. For
example, delivery and after-sale service are often included as part of the
product although they are potentially separable and could be sold
separately. Similarly, retailers often provide free parking, while airlines
provide free meals and baggage handling. Because some forms of bundling
are age-old industry practices, ﬁrms may not even perceive that they are
bundling.


Bundling means that all buyers are provided with the same package of
products and services, regardless of differences in their needs. Some buyers
of antiknock compounds, for example, would prefer to sacriﬁce the service
provided by manufacturers in return for a lower price, but they do not have
that option. Buyers often differ in their receptiveness to bundling because
they want different collections of products or services, or because they
differ in the intensity of their need for the various products or services. In
either case, bundling is suboptimal for some buyers.
Bundling will not be desirable unless it has some countervailing beneﬁts
that overcome the fact that it is suboptimal for some buyers. Bundling can
create competitive advantage in a number of ways, however, that vary in
importance from industry to industry and even by industry segment. In
some industries bundling also has signiﬁcant risks that must be identiﬁed.
Competitive Advantages of Bundling
The potential competitive advantages grow broadly out of the ability to
share activities in the value chains for providing parts of the bundle if the
entire bundle is supplied together. The advantages of bundling can be
grouped into a number of categories:
Economies of Providing the Bundle. A ﬁrm may lower its costs by
providing only a single package instead of whatever mix of products or
services a particular buyer desires. These economies arise from
interrelationships in a ﬁrm’s value chain that can be exploited by supplying
only the package. Bundling can allow a ﬁrm to better share activities in the
value chain in supplying the parts of the bundle. If the same bundle of
products is sold to each buyer by the same salesperson, shipped on the same
truck, or serviced by the same technician, for example, there may be cost
savings in providing the bundle together. The price of the bundle could thus
be lower than the collective price of the individual parts. For example, in
providing services for offshore drilling for oil, a ﬁrm that provides two
related services together may need only one person on the rig while
competitors require a person for each service. Economies from bundling
can also result from shared cost of gathering information about buyers. A


consulting ﬁrm may learn about a client through providing one service, and
apply this knowledge at low cost in providing other services in the bundle.
The unbundled competitor must make the full investment in information
even though it provides only one service.
Bundling may also reduce costs by promoting manufacturing economies
of scale or learning. Providing the same package to all buyers guarantees an
equivalent volume of all items in the bundle, perhaps lowering cost. For
example, manufacturing a ﬁre engine with standard features would allow a
manufacturer to achieve greater economies of scale and learning than if
each engine gets a different collection of bells and whistles, the current U.S.
industry practice. Providing a common package may also increase the
productivity of the sales force, by eliminating the need to inform the buyer
about what parts of the bundle to select. Finally, bundling can signiﬁcantly
reduce administrative and selling costs. Providing the same package to all
buyers usually simpliﬁes transaction costs, including paperwork, logistical
arrangements, and the like. Economies of standardization, scale, or learning
can in some cases allow a ﬁrm to sell the bundle at a lower price than it
would have to to charge customers who only wanted part of it.
Economies from bundling will yield a substantial competitive advantage
to a bundled ﬁrm only if unbundled competitors cannot duplicate them
through coalitions or contractual arrangements among themselves.
However, the difﬁculties of reaching agreement on such coordination with
independent ﬁrms often preclude a contractual solution.
Increased Differentiation. Bundling may allow a ﬁrm to differentiate
itself vis-à-vis competitors selling only parts of the bundle. The role of
bundling in differentiation arises from linkages among parts of the bundle in
the buyer’s value chain because they are used or purchased together.
Without bundling, a ﬁrm may not only forgo differentiation but be forced to
compete with each specialist competitor in its area of greatest strength.
Bundling can increase differentiation in the following ways:
MORE BASES FOR DIFFERENTIATION. A ﬁrm that can bundle has more
dimensions on which to differentiate itself than a competitor with a more
limited offering. For example, a bundled ﬁrm may be able to guarantee


reliability of the entire bundle or offer a single point for after-sale service.
Similarly, it may differentiate itself or its service even though its product is
not unique.
HIGH-PERFORMING INTERFACE. Bundling may be necessary when the
interface among complementary products is not standardized. Compatibility
among items in the bundle is facilitated if the same ﬁrm provides the whole
package of items needed jointly to meet the buyer’s needs. This presumes
that interface technology is relatively difﬁcult, and that compatibility cannot
be achieved.
OPTIMIZED PACKAGE PERFORMANCE. Even if the interface among products
in the bundle is standard, the bundled ﬁrm may be able to optimize the
performance of the whole package (system) by controlling the design,
manufacture, and service of all the parts. It may have better information
about the capabilities of each part of the bundle than a specialist competitor
who must gather information externally about parts of the bundle and
cannot control their design directly. This advantage of bundling presumes
that the parts of the bundle are interdependent in determining its overall
performance.
ONE-STOP SHOPPING. Bundling simpliﬁes the buyer’s shopping task.
Offering the bundle may also reassure the buyer that all the items in the
bundle will work, and reduce the buyer’s perceived risk of purchase. A
single point of responsibility, a single place where complaints can be
lodged, and a single service organization may also be valued by buyers.
Buyer frustration over divided responsibility in the newly deregulated Bell
System is a good example of how unbundling can lower differentiation
through this mechanism.
Enhanced Opportunity for Price Discrimination. Bundling may allow a
ﬁrm to increase total proﬁts where different buyers have different price
sensitivities for the individual parts of the bundle. Particularly in a “mixed”
bundling strategy—where a ﬁrm offers both the full bundle at one price and
the individual parts of the bundle at prices which sum to greater than the


bundle price—bundling may increase total revenue compared to selling the
parts separately.5
The mechanism by which this occurs is a function of the cost of the
bundle versus the cost of the parts of the bundle a buyer would want if they
could be purchased separately. Bundling can cause some buyers to buy the
whole bundle even though they would not buy all the parts individually,
provided the incremental cost of the whole bundle over the cost of the parts
they desire is low. In addition, a mixed bundling strategy can allow the ﬁrm
to extract high prices from buyers who strongly desire only one part of the
bundle, while at the same time selling the whole bundle to other buyers.
The value of bundling in pricing depends on the distribution of buyer
needs in the industry. Bundling is most likely to raise proﬁts if buyers have
widely differing price sensitivities for parts of the bundle. Bundling is a way
of capturing differing price sensitivities without charging different prices to
different buyers for the same product.
Increased Entry/Mobility Barriers. Bundling may lead to higher
entry/mobility barriers, presuming there are one or more of the other
competitive advantages of bundling. Bundling raises barriers because a
competitor must develop capabilities in all parts of the bundle rather than
being able to specialize.
Mitigated Rivalry. Rivalry among a group of bundled competitors may
be more stable than rivalry in an industry containing both bundled and
unbundled competitors. If all competitors offer the same bundle and the
only industry price is the bundle price, the ability to recognize mutual
dependence among ﬁrms is likely to be higher and the incentives for price
cutting may be less than if competitors offer any part of the bundle
separately.
Risks of Bundling
A bundled strategy involves a number of risks, which vary in importance
depending on a ﬁrm’s strategy and industry structure. The risks of bundling
are determined by the potential vulnerability of a bundled ﬁrm to attack by
an unbundled competitor employing a more focused strategy.6 Sometimes a


ﬁrm with a substantial competitive advantage can preserve bundling despite
signiﬁcant risks, as IBM did for many years in computers.
Diversity of Buyer Needs. Bundling presumes that a signiﬁcant
proportion of buyers desire and are willing to pay for the whole bundle. If
buyer needs vary widely in an industry, a bundled strategy may be
suboptimal for a segment of buyers and thereby vulnerable to a focused
competitor who tailors the particular bundle it offers to the needs of the
segment. For example, if the need for after-sale service varies widely
among buyers in an industry, a focused competitor may be able to enter by
selling only the product with no service included, and achieve enough
market share to be viable. People Express, for example, unbundled the
airline product by eliminating free meals, free baggage handling, and other
parts of the traditional airline bundle. This appealed to price-sensitive
buyers who had little need for the parts of the bundle that were eliminated.
Similarly, off-price retailers have successfully attacked traditional retailers
with strategies involving little service, no credit, no alterations, and no
advertising to appeal to a particular buyer segment.
Buyer Ability to Assemble the Bundle. In a bundled strategy, the ﬁrm
assembles the bundle and sells it as a package to the buyer. This strategy is
vulnerable if buyers have the technological, ﬁnancial, and administrative
capabilities to assemble the bundle themselves. The buyer may purchase the
parts of the bundle individually from suppliers and put them together, or
purchase some parts from suppliers and produce others (e.g., service) in-
house.
Specialist Ability to Provide Parts of the Bundle on More Favorable
Terms. A bundling strategy is vulnerable if specialists that focus on one or a
few parts of the bundle can achieve low cost or differentiation in producing
them. A specialist may gain a competitive advantage for the reasons
described in Chapter 7. It can tailor its value chain to produce and sell just
one item in the bundle that it views as its primary business. A specialist may
also avoid costs of coordination or compromise with shared activities
supplying other parts of the bundle that are borne by a bundled competitor.


A specialist that focuses on one part of the bundle can also potentially
reap advantages from interrelationships with other industries. A specialist
electronics company may have a cost advantage in producing an electronic
part for an electromechanical system vis-à-vis a bundled competitor who
provides the entire system, for example, because the electronics company
can share value activities (e.g., R&D, test equipment) with other related
electronics businesses.7
Bundling Through Coalitions. A bundled competitor is vulnerable if the
advantages of bundling can be duplicated by focused competitors who form
coalitions among themselves. Coalitions can take many forms, such as
technology sharing and joint sales or service organizations.
Bundled Versus Unbundled Strategies
The balance between the competitive advantages of bundling and its
risks determines the appropriateness of the bundled strategy for a ﬁrm. The
risks of bundling provide the strategic levers with which focused
competitors attack bundled competitors. Bundling will be the predominant
strategy in an industry if the competitive advantages of the bundled ﬁrm are
signiﬁcant and the risks of bundling low. Bundled and unbundled strategies
are natural adversaries, however, and the balance between them can shift
quickly in an industry in either direction.
In many industries, it may be difﬁcult for the bundled and unbundled
strategies to coexist. If a successful unbundled competitor becomes
established, this creates pressure on the bundled competitor to unbundle.
The presence of an unbundled competitor makes buyers more aware that
their needs are not being exactly met by the bundled ﬁrm, and provides an
alternative to purchasing the whole bundle.
In entering an industry against bundled ﬁrms, an unbundled competitor is
likely to attack those parts of the bundle that by themselves would fully
satisfy the needs of a signiﬁcant group of buyers, such as a basic product
without the ancillary services. Another likely avenue of attack is to supply a
peripheral item such as spare parts or service, where the bundled competitor
is inefﬁcient or overcharging. Attacking a bundled ﬁrm through unbundling


is one of the characteristic ways of gaining market position that are
discussed in detail in Chapter 15.
After the ﬁrst entry by an unbundler, the incentive is created for other
unbundled competitors to enter and offer other parts of the bundle. Over
time, then, more buyers are able to construct the particular bundle they
desire. Once a number of unbundled competitors achieve signiﬁcant market
penetration, some of the motivations for bundling, such as scale economies,
rivalry reduction, or building barriers, are often eliminated. Thus the
remaining bundled competitors may be forced to unbundle.
The bundled and unbundled strategies can coexist in an industry,
however, if there are wide differences in buyer needs and compelling
advantages to bundling for some buyer segments that are not a function of
volume (or of bundling being the dominant strategy). For example,
optimization of system performance through bundling may be particularly
critical for some buyers, and thus a bundled strategy will remain sustainable
for this buyer segment despite the fact that specialist competitors supply
parts of the bundle to other segments. Bundling may also be particularly
valued by less sophisticated buyers, even though sophisticated buyers want
to assemble the bundle themselves. In business aircraft, for example, Cessna
is offering a bundle including a plane, maintenance, pilots, a hangar, ofﬁce
space, and landing fees all for a single monthly price. This appeals to
buyers that want the convenience of one ﬁrm’s taking responsibility for
everything. A strategy of mixed bundling may also be appropriate
depending on the particular competitive advantages sought from bundling.
While offering the buyer an option to purchase either the whole bundle or
parts of it from the same ﬁrm tends to undermine the ﬁrm’s ability to sell
the bundle, mixed bundling may be appropriate if the key advantage to
bundling is differentiation or price discrimination.
Bundling and Industry Evolution
The appropriateness of bundling often changes as an industry evolves,
because industry structural change alters advantages of bundling or the
risks. There is no valid generalization possible about whether bundling
becomes more or less attractive as an industry evolves, because many


patterns are observed in practice. In the majority of industries, however,
there seems to be a tendency towards unbundling as an industry evolves. In
commercial insurance, for example, standardized insurance packages have
been replaced by the separate sale of services such as loss prevention
counseling. Buyers are able today to purchase broad coverage or specialized
services depending on their needs. Another industry where unbundling may
well occur is video systems. Just as audio systems were once bundled but
are now often unbundled, video systems are likely to unbundle into
displays, speakers, controllers, game units, and so on. Unbundling trends
have also been evident in such other industries as building control systems,
gasoline retailing, computers, and hospital management services.
The tendency for unbundling to occur over time is due to some
characteristic changes in the competitive advantages and risks of bundling
that accompany industry evolution:8
Buyer Ability to Assemble the Bundle Increases. Buyer learning over
time, coupled with diffusion of technology, implies that buyers may become
more able to assemble the bundle themselves. Buyers can gain the expertise
to ensure compatibility, and need less reassurance from a single source of
responsibility. This is reinforced by the tendency of buyers to backward
integrate as industry volume grows. Buyers become more able to make
some parts of the bundle themselves, and therefore do not desire the whole
package.
Product/Technological Standardization Occurs. Standardization of the
product as an industry matures often reduces the need to control the entire
package in order to optimize system performance. It also lowers entry
barriers into parts of the bundle, and simpliﬁes the buyer’s task of
assembling the bundle in-house. The problems of interface compatibility
also tend to be reduced over time as an industry matures and standards are
established. Qualiﬁed suppliers thus appear for parts of the bundle where
there were none previously, and trigger the unbundling process described
above.
Needs for Various Parts of the Bundle Are Reduced/Changed. Industry
maturity tends to reduce the need of many buyers for service, applications


engineering, and other parts of the bundle. Early in industry development,
product quality is often erratic, products are unproven, and the perceived
risk of purchase is often high (see Chapter 8). All of these characteristics
lead buyers to seek the security of a bundled competitor, and bundling may
be necessary to get an industry off the ground (the case in ﬁber optics and in
electronic fuel injection systems for cars). As the industry matures,
however, service and support either move in-house or are less needed by
buyers. In addition, new buyers are often attracted to the industry and/or
competitors segment the industry more ﬁnely, increasing the diversity of
buyer needs. Different bundles thus become appropriate for different
buyers, and the stage is set for an unbundled competitor to enter.
Industry Size Offsets Bundling Scale Economies. As an industry passes
from emerging to maturing, the increase in industry size may make it
possible for specialists to viably provide only parts of the bundle. Growth in
demand for the parts of the bundle overcomes manufacturing scale
thresholds as well as ﬁxed selling costs. This is a special case of the
emergence of a new segment as viable for a focus strategy, discussed in
Chapter 7.
Increasing Buyer Price Sensitivity Leads to Pressures for Cost Reduction
through Unbundling. Increasing buyer price sensitivity leads buyers to press
for cost savings. One avenue is often for a buyer to purchase parts of the
bundle and assemble it in-house, or to purchase just those parts of the
bundle that it needs. Buyers often provide the impetus for unbundling even
if no specialist competitors emerge.
Specialist Competitors Are Attracted. The success and growth of bundled
ﬁrms may attract competitors looking for a way to get into the industry.
Since entering with a bundled strategy usually involves overcoming higher
entry barriers, new entrants naturally gravitate toward unbundled strategies
(see Chapter 15). All the other forces described above provide the opening
for them to succeed.
The tendency for unbundling to occur over time tends to be accentuated
where an industry has powerful, capable buyers. Such buyers often have the


technological strength to quickly develop in-house capability to assemble
the bundle themselves, the bargaining leverage to force suppliers to
unbundle, and the resources to lower the barriers facing specialist
competitors. For example, the leading automobile ﬁrms purchase entire
systems such as brake systems or fuel injection systems only very early in
their development. Later, when the technology becomes developed, these
ﬁrms break the systems into parts to be sourced from separate suppliers.
They in the process often help put unbundled suppliers in business.
Unbundling is also triggered or accelerated during periods of intense
industry rivalry, such as an economic downturn. Desperate competitors turn
to unbundling for incremental revenue, setting in motion an often
irreversible process. This pattern seems to have been at work in commercial
insurance, where a disastrous downcycle has made ﬁrms anxious to gain
incremental sales.
Industry followers or new entrants are often the ﬁrst to break down the
bundle. Followers tend to lead unbundling because of their desire to
neutralize their competitive disadvantages in competing with bundled
competitors. Often the best hope is to change the competitive rules in order
to lower mobility barriers. New entrants also often break down the bundle
by identifying latent or emerging segments or situations where there is no
clear economic motivation for bundling, where bundling creates mixed
motives in retaliation for bundled ﬁrms, or where buyer needs are changing.
A prime source of new entrants that unbundle is spinoffs from bundled
competitors, who recognize that some buyers’ needs are not being served.
Despite a tendency for unbundling to occur over time, bundling is
sustainable if the competitive advantages from bundling remain signiﬁcant
and unattainable any other way. Performance or cost beneﬁts of bundling
can persist, for example, even after the buyer’s need for reassurance or
assistance in assembling the bundle disappears. Bundling is also sustainable
if an industry leader controls a proprietary part of the bundle and buyers are
forced to purchase the entire bundle to gain access to it. Moreover, a leader
can sometimes protect the bundle by protecting proprietary interfaces
among parts of it. By making the problem of interfacing with its products
difﬁcult, the leader can deter the entry of specialist competitors.9 IBM has
been accused of such behavior, for example.


While the more common direction of change is from bundled to
unbundled competition, it is important to recognize the opposite possibility.
Technological changes may lead to product performance or interface
motivations for bundling. Economies of scale in providing the bundle may
also sometimes increase over time if the manufacturing process changes.
Regulatory barriers that prevented economically rational bundling may fall.
Unbundled strategies may also have developed over time in an industry
where in fact there are economic motivations for bundling. If many
specialists initially entered the industry and no ﬁrm had the resources or
orientation to develop total capability in the whole bundle, buyers may have
been forced to take the role of assembling the bundle themselves. A
strategic innovation by one ﬁrm in bundling may transform the industry
structure.
Two cases where bundling appears to be supplanting unbundled
strategies are ﬁnancial services and health care. Services such as Merrill
Lynch’s Cash Management Account (CMA), which combine stock
brokerage, a checking account, a credit card, and other ﬁnancial services,
are bundles of previously separate services. They are a manifestation of
deregulation as well as developments in information system technology that
made such accounts feasible. Similarly, health maintenance organizations
are combining separate services. In the same health care sector, however,
home care services and specialized emergency room or ﬁrms performing
minor surgery are a form of unbundling of the product line offered by
hospitals. This example illustrates how the competitive advantages of
bundling must be viewed on a segment-by-segment basis.
Strategic Implications of Bundling
The analysis of bundling carries important strategic implications for both
bundled and unbundled competitors. There is usually a constant tension
between bundled and unbundled strategies that requires that both be
continually reexamined:
Bundle Where the Advantages Outweigh the Risks. Bundling can be a
powerful source of competitive advantage where the beneﬁts described


above outweigh the risks. Where producers of products have lost sight of
the buyer’s ultimate need to integrate them into a system, a bundled
competitor can sometimes transform the industry in its favor. Sophisticated
analysis of the buyers value chain and how it varies by segment is a
prerequisite to effective choices to bundle and unbundle.
Avoid Unconscious Bundling. Many companies have de facto bundled
strategies though they do not recognize them as such. Unconscious bundling
is dangerous because a bundled ﬁrm may be vulnerable to attack by a
focused competitor but may not perceive the threat. A bundled strategy
should be the result of a conscious decision in which the advantages of
bundling are judged to outweigh the risks, and not the result of a failure to
distinguish among the potentially separable products or services that the
ﬁrm offers.
Be Prepared to Unbundle Over Time if Conditions Change. Given the
tendency for unbundling to occur over time, a bundled competitor must be
constantly aware of the potential need to unbundle if the balance of
advantages and risks shifts. A ﬁrm must distinguish between hard economic
reasons for bundling and reasons based on lack of buyer sophistication that
may be transient. Many bundled competitors have surrendered market share
unnecessarily because they have stubbornly clung to bundled strategies.
Bundled Competitors May Represent Opportunities for Industry
Restructuring. Bundling can create vulnerabilities that an unbundled
competitor can exploit, particularly if bundling is unconscious or if the
industry is evolving structurally. Industries in which bundling is being
practiced, ideally as a long-standing industry convention, are potential entry
targets for a ﬁrm.
Cross Subsidization
When a ﬁrm offers products that either are complementary in the strict
sense of being used together or are purchased at the same time, pricing can
potentially exploit the relatedness among them. The idea is to deliberately


sell one product (which I term the base good) at a low proﬁt or even a loss
in order to sell more proﬁtable items (which I term proﬁtable goods).
The term “loss leadership” is commonly used to describe the application
of this concept in retailing. Some products are priced at or below cost in
order to attract bargain-conscious buyers to the store. The hope is that these
buyers will purchase other more proﬁtable merchandise during their visit.
Loss leader pricing is also a way of establishing a low price image for the
store.
The same pricing principle is at work in the so-called “razor and blade”
strategy, which involves complementary products. The razor is sold at or
near cost in order to promote future sales of proﬁtable replacement blades.
This same strategy is also common in amateur cameras, aircraft engines,
and elevators. The complementary good is either a consumable item used
with the product (e.g., ﬁlm), a nonconsumable product used with the item
(e.g., software cartridges with video games), replacement parts (e.g., aircraft
engine parts), or service (e.g., elevator maintenance and repair).
Another variation of cross-subsidization is a trade-up strategy. Here
product varieties that are typically ﬁrst purchases are sold at low prices, in
the hopes that the buyer will later purchase other more proﬁtable items in
the line as trade-up occurs. This strategy is sometimes employed, for
example, in light aircraft, motorcycles, copiers, and computers.
Conditions Favoring Cross Subsidization
The motivation for cross subsidization is clear—increase total proﬁt by
selling larger quantities of proﬁtable goods as a result of discounting the
base good. The logic of this strategy depends on the existence of a number
of conditions:
Sufﬁcient Price Sensitivity in the Base Good. Demand for the base good
must be sufﬁciently sensitive to price that discounting increases volume (or
foot trafﬁc) enough to result in a more than compensating increase in proﬁt
through the induced sales of the proﬁtable good. If demand for the base
good is not sensitive to price, however, the ﬁrm is better off making normal
proﬁts on both the base good and proﬁtable good.


Sufﬁcient Price Insensitivity in the Proﬁtable Good. The proﬁtable good
must have demand that is not very sensitive to price, so that raising price
does not greatly lower volume. Unless this is the case, proﬁts lost in
discounting the base good will not be recouped through proﬁts on proﬁtable
goods. Insensitivity of demand to price in the proﬁtable good is a function
of the value it creates for the buyer and the threat of substitution for it.
Strong Connection between the Proﬁtable and Base Good. The sale of
proﬁtable goods must also somehow be tied to the sale of the base good, so
that buyers do not cherry-pick by purchasing only the low-priced base good.
The connection between the products does not necessarily have to be
binding, but it should be strong enough so that the proportion of buyers that
purchase both from a ﬁrm is sufﬁcient to justify discounting the base good.
The source of the connection between the base good and proﬁtable good
will vary from industry to industry. In retailing, the connection is created by
shopping costs, which lead buyers to purchase other goods during the same
visit to the store. In trade-up, brand loyalty and switching costs are the
connection between one product and another. In a razor and blade strategy,
brand loyalty and switching costs also may cause the buyer to purchase the
blade from the ﬁrm that supplies the razor. In addition, perceived or actual
compatibility may connect the goods (e.g., in ﬁlm, spare parts), as does the
belief of the buyer that the manufacturer of the product is best qualiﬁed to
provide parts, maintenance, or repair (e.g., in elevators). The connection
between the base and proﬁtable goods also depends on the possibility of
substituting for the proﬁtable good. If spare parts can be refurbished, for
example, then there is no longer the same relationship between equipment
sales and parts sales.
Barriers to Entry into the Proﬁtable Good. It must be difﬁcult to enter
the proﬁtable good in order for cross subsidization to succeed, unless the
base good and proﬁtable good are strongly tied. Barriers to copying spare
parts or consumables are essential, for example, to the logic of the razor and
blade approach.
Risks of Cross Subsidization


The risks of cross subsidization tend to arise from failure to meet the
third condition above. If the connection between the base good and
proﬁtable good is not sufﬁciently strong, a ﬁrm practicing cross
subsidization may ﬁnd itself selling only the low-priced base good and not
the proﬁtable good, which is purchased by the buyer from competitors. This
can happen in a number of ways:
Buyer Cherry-picking. The buyer only purchases the base good, and
either does without the proﬁtable good or purchases it from another supplier
that is not cross subsidizing.
Substitutes for the Proﬁtable Good. If the need for the proﬁtable good
can be eliminated or reduced, cross subsidization is compromised because
the buyer will not purchase the proﬁtable good. For example, refurbishing
spare parts instead of buying new ones or increasing the life of consumable
items would have this effect.
Buyer Vertical Integration. The buyer purchases the base good but
integrates to produce the proﬁtable good internally. For example, service is
performed in-house, or the buyer fabricates or refurbishes its own spare
parts.
Specialist (Focused) Competitors. A specialist competitor sells the
proﬁtable good at lower prices. For example, independent service
companies are common in a number of industries which specialize in
servicing a particular brand of equipment, or in copying spare parts. They
target an industry leader, and perform relatively simple types of service or
copy the most frequently replaced parts. The equipment manufacturer’s
margins on parts and service are thus undermined, and it may increasingly
be left with only exotic repairs or low-volume parts. Sulzer Brothers, for
example, is the prime target of unlicensed parts suppliers in marine diesel
engines. The risk of entry by a specialist competitor is a function of the
tightness of the connection between the base good and proﬁtable good, and
the barriers to entry into the proﬁtable good.
Cross Subsidization and Industry Evolution


The appropriateness of cross subsidization often changes as an industry
matures. As in bundling, the tendency is for it to become less appropriate
over time, though this not always the case. Cross subsidization can become
less attractive for the following reasons:
The Strength of the Connection between the Base Good and Proﬁtable
Goods Falls. As the buyer becomes knowledgeable and more price-
sensitive, the perceived need to purchase the proﬁtable good from the same
ﬁrm that sells the base good often diminishes. The tie between the goods
may also weaken as diffusion of technology reduces switching costs, or
compatible imitations for the proﬁtable good become available.
Barriers to Entry into the Proﬁtable Good Fall. More available
technology and falling differentiation tend to reduce barriers to entry into
the proﬁtable good. One outcome may be buyer integration into the
proﬁtable good.
Substitution Possibilities for the Proﬁtable Good Increase. Substitutes
are sometimes discovered for the proﬁtable good as the industry matures.
For example, new technology for parts refurbishing appears (e.g., aircraft
engine parts), or methods of conserving consumables are discovered (e.g.,
reuse of dialysers in artiﬁcial kidney machines).
Strategic Implications of Cross Subsidization
Cross subsidization can be a way to signiﬁcantly improve performance if
the necessary conditions hold. Such well-known ﬁrms as Gillette, Kodak,
and Xerox have practiced the strategy successfully. However, the conditions
supporting cross subsidization can be ﬂeeting, and require active efforts to
sustain. Moreover, a ﬁrm must be sure that cross subsidization is intended
rather than unintended.
Some important strategic implications ﬂowing from cross subsidization
are as follows:
Create Barriers to Entry into the Proﬁtable Good. Sustaining a cross
subsidization strategy requires that a ﬁrm create or enhance barriers to entry


into proﬁtable goods. This implies, for example, that a ﬁrm must protect its
proprietary servicing procedures, parts fabrication technologies, and designs
for consumable supplies against imitators. Doing so may require aggressive
patenting, deliberately creating different consumables for use in different
models, and active marketing of the need to purchase proﬁtable goods from
the supplier of the base good. Many ﬁrms have squandered the advantages
of cross subsidization by not paying attention to such factors.
An example of a ﬁrm that has worked hard to protect its proﬁtable goods
is Xerox. Consumables are a major contributor to proﬁtability in copiers,
and Xerox has maintained specialized toners for different models and
actively marketed the beneﬁts of purchasing consumables from the
manufacturer to ensure highest quality.
Strengthen the Connection between the Base Good and Proﬁtable
Goods. Anything that tightens the connection between the base good and
proﬁtable goods will help defend a ﬁrm’s ability to cross-subsidize. Designs
that increase the competitor’s difﬁculty in achieving a compatible interface
are one such tactic. Another is Kodak’s tactic of advertising to consumers
about the desirability of ﬁnishing pictures on Kodak paper, attempting to
more closely tie the sales of machines and paper to photoﬁnishers.
Be Prepared to Modify Cross Subsidization as the Industry Evolves. A
ﬁrm must be prepared to modify cross subsidization if the supporting
conditions change. The relative margins on the base good and proﬁtable
goods should often be gradually equalized over time. A ﬁrm may also
beneﬁt from devising more complex pricing schemes over time that lower
the price of the proﬁtable good to those buyers most susceptible to
defection. A ﬁrm must avoid the tendency to provide an umbrella that
encourages entry by competitors into the proﬁtable good.
Encourage Entry into the Base Good to Boost Sales of the Proﬁtable
Good. If the proﬁtable good is proprietary, it may be desirable to encourage
entry into the base good to boost sales of the proﬁtable good with such
tactics as licensing.10 Kodak has encouraged entry into cameras that use its
ﬁlm formats, for example.


Avoid Unintended Cross Subsidization. A ﬁrm should cross-subsidize
only as a deliberate strategy and not because it fails to understand its true
costs. Failure to understand how costs differ by segment will almost
guarantee that cross subsidization is occurring. A good system for strategic
cost analysis, described in Chapter 3, is essential to effective cross
subsidization. Unintended cross subsidy is an invitation to cherry-picking
by competitors, as well as a way of attracting new entrants.
Complements and Competitive Strategy
Complements are pervasive in industries. A ﬁrm must know what
complementary products it depends on, and how they affect its competitive
advantage and the structure of the industry as a whole. A ﬁrm must decide
which complements it should produce itself, and how to package and price
them. Bundling and unbundling of complements is one of the ways in
which fundamental industry restructuring takes place. The challenge is to
make strategy towards complements an opportunity rather than a source of
competitive advantage for competitors.


IV
Implications 
for 
Offensive 
and 
Defensive
Competitive Strategy
