# Chapter 13: Industry Scenarios and Competitive Strategy under Uncertainty

often fail to consider—or underestimate the probability of—radical or
discontinuous changes that might be unlikely but would signiﬁcantly alter
industry structure or a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage.
A few ﬁrms construct contingency plans as part of the strategic planning
process, in an attempt to test strategies against major sources of uncertainty.
Contingency planning is rare in practice, however, and usually tests
strategies incrementally against only one or two key uncertainties such as
the inﬂation rate or the price of oil. Contingency plans seldom examine
alternative future industry structures, or compel managers to consider their
implications. When facing considerable uncertainty, ﬁrms tend to select
strategies that preserve ﬂexibility, despite the costs in terms of required
resources or diminished competitive position.
Scenarios as a Planning Tool
As the perceived need to address uncertainty explicitly in planning has
grown, a few ﬁrms have begun to use scenarios as tools to understand the
strategic implications of uncertainty more fully. A scenario is an internally
consistent view of what the future might turn out to be. By constructing
multiple scenarios, a ﬁrm can systematically explore the possible
consequences of uncertainty for its choice of strategies. The use of
scenarios started to become signiﬁcant after the 1973 oil crisis magniﬁed
certain forms of uncertainty.
The scenarios traditionally used in strategic planning have emphasized
macroeconomic and macropolitical factors—I refer to these types of
scenarios as macroscenarios. Scenario building has concentrated on
creating alternative views of the national or global economic and political
environment, including such things as the rate of economic growth,
inﬂation, protectionism, regulation, energy prices and interest rates. The use
of macroscenarios reﬂects the fact that oil, natural resources, and aerospace
companies were the early leaders in employing scenarios for planning, with
Royal 
Dutch/Shell 
widely 
recognized 
as 
a 
pioneer.1,2 
Global
macroeconomic and political events can have a profound effect on the
success of an international oil or natural resource company. Moreover,
scenarios have usually been developed at the corporate level in diversiﬁed


ﬁrms, hence the attention to variables that broadly impact many business
units.
Macroscenarios, despite their relevance, are too general to be sufﬁcient
for developing strategy in a particular industry. The implications of
macroscenarios for individual industries are often poorly understood.
Constructing macroscenarios requires the analysis of a broad and highly
subjective set of factors. Few aspects of the macroeconomic and political
environment have important strategic ramiﬁcations for all but the most basic
industries. Other uncertainties that macroscenarios leave out such as
technological change and competitor behavior can emerge as dominant
factors driving industry structural change in particular industries. As a
result, macroscenarios have encountered skepticism from many operating
managers, and have not become integral to strategic planning in a
widespread way.
Industry Scenarios
Scenarios are a powerful device for taking acount of uncertainty in
making strategic choices. They allow a ﬁrm to move away from dangerous,
single-point forecasts of the future in instances when the future cannot be
predicted. Scenarios can help encourage managers to make their implicit
assumptions about the future explicit, and to think beyond the conﬁnes of
existing conventional wisdom. A ﬁrm can then make well-informed choices
about how to take the competitive uncertainties it faces into account.
In competitive strategy, the appropriate unit for analysis of scenarios is
the industry—I term such scenarios industry scenarios. Industry scenarios
allow a ﬁrm to translate uncertainty into its strategic implications for a
particular industry. By focusing on the industry, macroeconomic, political,
technological, and other uncertainties are not analyzed for their own sake
but probed for their implications for competition. Industry scenarios also
explicitly include competitor behavior, a key source of uncertainty in the
choice of strategies.
This chapter describes how to construct industry scenarios, and how to
use them to guide the choice of competitive strategy. I begin by describing
how to identify the sources of uncertainty facing an industry and how to


translate them into the most meaningful industry scenarios. Next, I discuss
how to analyze scenarios, and how to identify those with the greatest
implications for industry structure and competitive advantage. I then show
how a ﬁrm can select the best strategy in light of the uncertainties
confronting it. The chapter concludes with a discussion of how industry
scenarios should ﬁt into a ﬁrm’s ongoing strategic planning process.
Constructing Industry Scenarios
An industry scenario is an internally consistent view of an industry’s
future structure. It is based on a set of plausible assumptions about the
important uncertainties that might inﬂuence industry structure, carried
through to the implications for creating and sustaining competitive
advantage. An industry scenario is not a forecast but one possible future
structure. A set of industry scenarios is carefully chosen to reﬂect the range
of possible (and credible) future industry structures with important
implications for competition. The entire set of scenarios, rather than the
most likely one, is then used to design a competitive strategy. The time
period used in industry scenarios should reﬂect the time horizon of the most
important investment decisions.
An industry typically faces many uncertainties about the future. The
important uncertainties are those that will inﬂuence industry structure, such
as technological breakthroughs, entry of new competitors, and interest rate
ﬂuctuations. External factors such as macroeconomic conditions and
government policy affect competition through, and not independently of,
industry structure. Structural change almost always requires adjustments in
strategy and creates the greatest opportunities for competitors to shift their
relative positions.
The ﬁve competitive forces described in Chapter 1 constitute the
conceptual foundation for constructing industry scenarios. Uncertainties
that affect any of the ﬁve competitive forces will have implications for
competition, and therefore must be considered in constructing scenarios.
Constructing industry scenarios begins by analyzing current industry
structure and identifying all the uncertainties that may affect it. These


uncertainties are then translated into a set of different future industry
structures. An overview of the process is shown in Figure 13–1.
The process shown in Figure 13–1 is deceptively simple. Constructing
industry scenarios requires several iterations and is a judgmental process. It
can be difﬁcult to determine fully what uncertainties are the most important
for strategy until a number of preliminary scenarios have been analyzed,
hence the feedback loops on Figure 13–1.
The process shown in Figure 13–1 postpones the introduction of
competitor behavior into each scenario until the industry structure and
requirements for competitive advantage have been developed, despite the
fact that competitor behavior can inﬂuence structure and is often a source of
uncertainty in its own right. However, predicting competitor behavior in a
scenario poses a nearly impossible task without some understanding of the
structural environment in which competitors will operate. Expected
behavior of competitors under a scenario may serve to modify industry
structure; uncertainty about competitor behavior may lead to additional
scenarios.


Figure 13–1. The Process of Constructing Industry Scenarios
I will use an extended example drawn from the U.S. chain saw industry
in describing how to construct industry scenarios. It is necessary to provide
some background on the U.S. chain saw industry so that the scenarios can
be better understood. The chain saw industry had enjoyed a stable and
proﬁtable structure for decades prior to the 1970s. In the early 1970s,
however, there were indications that the industry might be on the threshold
of a major structural change. It was believed that sales of small chain saws
to homeowners and other “casual users” might enter a period of explosive
growth. If this happened, a major structural change in the industry would be
triggered which could proceed in several directions.
In the early 1970s, the great majority of chain saws were sold to
professional users including loggers, farmers, and others for whom chain
saws were a primary tool of their trade. Professionals tended to use saws
heavily and valued durability, comfort and reliability. They purchased saws
primarily through chain saw dealers that also provided service and spare


parts. Dealers tended to carry the product lines of relatively few
manufacturers. Most chain saws were large, powerful gasoline saws
assembled by manufacturers from a combination of purchased and
manufactured parts. Suppliers of parts such as chains, bars, and sprockets
were high-volume producers that enjoyed scale economies and some
bargaining power. Electric saws were a potential substitute for gasoline
saws, but were inadequate for most professional applications.
The major competitors in the early 1970s were Homelite (a division of
Textron), McCulloch, and Stihl, followed by Roper, Remington and Beaird-
Poulan. Industry rivalry was moderate, centering on quality, features, dealer
network, and brand reputation. Homelite had the largest market share,
followed by McCulloch. Both pursued differentiation strategies. Stihl
competed by focusing on the premium-quality segment, and differentiated
itself on quality, durability, and service.
By 1973, some major uncertainties loomed. The initial spurt in demand
for chain saws by casual users had been brought on by the energy crisis, the
do-it-yourself movement, and other causes. Casual users were much less
sophisticated than professionals and used their saws less intensively for less
demanding applications. Casual users also did not necessarily purchase
saws from servicing dealers, and distribution channels for chain saws were
broadening to include hardware chains, catalog showrooms and department
stores, among others. This encouraged new entrants into the market. Black
& Decker acquired McCulloch, and Beaird-Poulan was acquired by
Emerson Electric. These acquisitions had created the potential for an
injection of resources into competitors that had previously been ﬁnancially
constrained. In the remainder of this chapter, I will construct a set of
industry scenarios for the chain saw industry while describing the principles
that underlie scenario building.
Identifying Industry Uncertainties
Identifying uncertainties with the most important ramiﬁcations for
competition lies at the heart of the industry scenario technique. Yet the
sources of uncertainty can be hard to recognize and managers may ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to detect discontinuous changes or shed their conventional wisdom.


To identify uncertainties each element of industry structure must be
examined and placed into one of three categories: constant, predetermined,
and uncertain. Constant elements of industry structure are those aspects of
structure that are very unlikely to change. Predetermined elements of
structure are areas where structure will change, but the change is largely
predictable. Predetermined trends may well proceed faster or slower
depending on the scenario. Often a variety of structural changes are
predetermined if a thoughtful industry analysis is done. Uncertain elements
of structure are those aspects of future structure which depend on
unresolvable uncertainties. Constant and predetermined structural variables
are part of each scenario, while uncertain structural variables actually
determine the different scenarios.
A way to begin determining which elements of industry structure fall
into each category is to list all apparent industry trends and any possible
major industry changes that have been discussed internally or mentioned by
industry observers. While only those uncertainties that might affect
structure will be important to scenario-building, it is important initially to
identify all the uncertainties to avoid omitting important variables.
Uncertainties with a low probability of occurrance but with a potentially
large impact on structure must also not be overlooked. Each trend or
possible change is then analyzed to determine whether it could have a
signiﬁcant impact on industry structure, and how uncertain or predictable its
impact is. Such a procedure will tend to produce a list of uncertainties that
mixes causes and effects.
By considering only apparent trends, however, important discontinuities
may be overlooked. Scenarios built only on apparent trends may reﬂect
conventional wisdom and may not provide insights into future structure not
available to competitors. One way to guard against overlooking
discontinuities is to uncover observers of the industry who might foresee
new possibilities. Soliciting opinions from outsiders new to the industry,
who can view it objectively, provides another mechanism for overcoming
conventional wisdom.
A wide range of environmental factors can lead to both predetermined
and unpredictable industry changes, including technological trends,
government policy shifts, social changes, and unstable economic conditions.
Environmental changes are not important for their own sake, but because of


their possible effect on industry structure. A number of underlying
evolutionary processes, at work in every industry, are shown in Table 13–1.3
These provide a census of the forces that drive industry structural change.
Each should be examined to see if and how it might affect the industry.
Sometimes the evolutionary processes will proceed in predictable ways,
while in other cases their speed and direction will be uncertain and lead to
uncertainty about some elements of structure.
TABLE 13–1 Evolutionary Forces
Driving Industry Structural Change
Long-run changes in growth
Changes in buyer segments served
Buyer learning
Reduction of uncertainty
Diffusion of proprietary knowledge
Accumulation of experience
Expansion (or contraction) in scale
Changes in input and currency costs
Product innovation
Marketing innovation
Process innovation
Structural change in adjacent industries
Government policy changes
Entries and exits
The possible industry changes that are most difﬁcult to anticipate are
frequently those that originate outside an industry. For example, many ﬁrms
in industries that had little or no previous contact with electronics were
taken by surprise by the development of microcomputers. New entrants also
have less predictable and often more profound impacts on industry structure
than do start-up competitors.
In some industries, therefore, scenarios are best constructed by starting
inside the industry and looking outward for additional sources of
uncertainty. In other industries, it is more appropriate to begin with
macroscenarios and then narrow the focus to the industry. Macroscenarios
can provide important insights into possible industry changes. They can
expose possible shifts in macroeconomic, political, or social variables that
are not foreseen in a more industry-centered view of the external
environment. Another way of identifying uncertainties is broadly based


technological forecasting. A systematic look at how any of the technologies
in the ﬁrm’s value chain (Chapter 5) might be affected by outside
developments can sometimes help to reveal changes unforeseen by
technical personnel inside a ﬁrm.
In constructing scenarios, it is important to try to identify one or more
major discontinuities that would have a signiﬁcant impact on structure, such
as a revolutionary technological change. If major discontinuities have a
material probability of occurring, they should be treated as one of the
important uncertainties in developing scenarios. If a major discontinuity
will have a fundamental impact on structure but is very remote, it is usually
best treated separately from the normal scenarios.
To illustrate the application of these ideas, Table 13–2 lists the uncertain
elements of structure in the chain saw industry in 1973. Signiﬁcant
uncertainties existed in all of the ﬁve forces except for suppliers. Since each
uncertain element of structure can serve as the basis for several scenarios
and the list of uncertainties can be quite long, as it is in the chain saw
industry, these sources of uncertainty must be distilled into the few
scenarios that will be truly important to strategy.
Independent Versus Dependent Uncertainties
Converting the list of uncertain structural elements into scenarios begins
by dividing them into independent and dependent uncertainties:
•  Independent uncertainties. Those elements of structure whose
uncertainty is independent of other elements of structure. The sources
of the uncertainty may be inside the industry (e.g., competitor
behavior) or outside the industry (e.g., oil prices).
•  Dependent uncertainties. Those elements of structure that will be
largely or completely determined by the independent uncertainties. In
chain saws, for example, the future level of advertising on television is
quite uncertain but will be primarily a function of the size of casual
user demand. Casual users are receptive to television advertising while
professional and farm buyers are best reached through specialized
magazines.


TABLE 13–2 Uncertain Elements of Structure in the U.S. Chain Saw
Industry
Entry Barriers
Will there be new proprietary product designs?
How high will future scale economies in manufacturing be?
How high will future scale economies in marketing (media mix and spending rates) be?
How difﬁcult will gaining access to each channel be?
What safety regulations will be enacted?
Buyers
What will casual user demand be?
What will professional/farm demand be?
What will be the mix of dealer versus nondealer sales?
How signiﬁcant will private labeling be outside of the servicing dealer channel?
Will distribution be direct or through distributors?
How price sensitive will buyers be?
Rivalry
What will be the shape of the casual user penetration curve?
How will traditional competitors behave?
How will newly acquired competitors behave?
Will additional foreign ﬁrms be attracted to the U.S. industry?
How high will ﬁxed costs be?
How committed is each competitor to chain saws?
Substitutes
How much will electric saws penetrate versus gas saws?
Suppliers
Relatively constant.
Independent uncertainties are the scenario variables on which scenarios
are based. Only independent uncertainties are an appropriate basis for
constructing scenarios because they are true sources of uncertainty.
Dependent uncertainties are resolved once assumptions about the
independent uncertainties have been made, and thus become part of each
scenario.
Independent and dependent uncertainties often differ only in degree,
because many industry structural characteristics will be determined in part
by independent uncertainties and partly inﬂuenced by other industry
characteristics. Industry concentration, for example, is largely based on the
height of entry barriers and hence dependent, but is also a function of
independent factors such as an unexpected acquisition or entry by a strong
competitor. Thus, as in all phases of scenario construction, one must


attempt to assess the most signiﬁcant factors inﬂuencing each uncertain
variable and use them to classify it as either dependent or as a true scenario
variable. It is often not apparent in the beginning of an analysis which
uncertainties are dependent. Once scenarios are analyzed, it may be
necessary to modify the way a particular element of structure is classiﬁed.
Separating uncertain elements of industry structure into those that are
scenario variables and those that are dependent requires that the causal
factors of uncertain elements of structure be identiﬁed. Causal factors
determine the future state of each uncertain structural element. For example,
the level of casual user demand in chain saws will be a function of such
causal factors as energy prices, the rate of household formation, how many
new houses are built with ﬁreplaces, and so on.
Practical considerations may dictate not going all the way back to the
most fundamental causal factors determining an uncertain variable since
they may be numerous and hard to measure. However, causality must be
traced back far enough to separate scenario variables from dependent
variables. Causal factors also are important in determining the appropriate
range of assumptions that should be made about each scenario variable. If
the level of casual user demand is strongly inﬂuenced by energy prices, for
example, then forecasting the range of possible energy prices is necessary to
understand the range of feasible levels of demand.
Table 13–3 identiﬁes the scenario variables in the chain saw industry
from the full list of uncertainties that were shown in Table 13–2 and ranks
them in terms of their importance to industry structure. The scenario
variables in the chain saw industry are relatively few, because many of the
uncertainties in the industry will be resolved once the demand for casual
user saws and the channels through which they are sold become clear.
Future safety regulations by government, for example, will probably be
introduced if casual user demand grows and the number of accidents
increases with the number of less sophisticated users. Marketing activity
will also increase sharply and shift toward television advertising if casual
user sales grow.
TABLE 13–3 Scenario Variables in Chain Saws
Most Important Scenario Variables
Level of casual user demand


Shape of casual user penetration curve
Mix of dealer versus non-dealer sales
Extent of private label versus branded sales through nondealers
Less Important Scenario Variables
Professional and farm demand
Penetration of electric saws
Table 13–4 shows the causal factors for the four important scenario
variables in the chain saw industry. Several causal factors underlie each
variable, as is typically the case. Causal factors reﬂect forces both within
and external to the industry. It is also apparent from Table 13–4 that some of
the causal factors reﬂect other aspects of industry structure or competitor
behavior. Casual user demand, for example, is partly determined by the
intensity of marketing activity and pricing behavior of competitors. The
future mix of channels will in turn be inﬂuenced by the level of casual user
demand, because casual users prefer different channels than professionals.
It is not uncommon for scenario variables to have some internal causes
along with external ones, and the analysis of scenarios must reﬂect such
interdependencies.
The uncertainty that surrounds the causal factors of each scenario
variable leads to scenarios. Assumptions about the scenario variables will
determine the outcome of dependent uncertainties. Predetermined and
constant elements of structure are then added to the scenario to complete
the proﬁle of the future structure of the industry, recognizing that the rate of
change of predetermined trends may be different under each scenario.
Figure 13–2 illustrates the process schematically.
Constructing a useful scenario involves developing a logic for how the
various elements of industry structure interrelate, separating true scenario
variables from dependent and predetermined industry changes. A scenario
must seek to expose second-order effects of structural changes that result
from one industry change affecting others. Such a logic for how various
aspects of industry structure interrelate is at the heart of the usefulness of
the scenario technique because it is usually important to understanding the
implications of scenarios for strategy.
TABLE 13–4 Causal Factors Determining the Uncertainties in Chain
Saws


SCENARIO VARIABLE
CAUSAL FACTORS
Level of casual user demand
External
Social trends
Energy costs
Woodburning stove and ﬁreplace installations
Number of households formed
Channels selling casual saws
Internal
Marketing activity of competitors
Product changes by competitors
Shape of the casual user penetration curve*
External
Economic conditions
Pattern of energy price changes
Pattern of social trends
Replacement rate for saws
Channel strategies regarding chain saws
Internal
Marketing activity by competitors
Mix of dealer versus nondealer sales
External
Channel product line policies
Consumer shopping habits for chain saws
Ability of channels to provide service
Usage patterns of casual saws (which determine
replacement behavior, spare parts usage and
service needs)
Internal
Channel policies of competitors
Extent of private label versus branded sales
through nondealers
External
Channel branding policies
Channel product policies
Internal
Channel policies of competitors
Branding policies of competitors
*The penetration curve is the growth in the number of households who own chain saws.
Identifying a Set of Scenarios
An industry scenario is based on a set of plausible assumptions about
each of the scenario variables, derived from the causal factors. The
consequences of this set of assumptions for industry structure ﬂows from


the process diagrammed in Figure 13–2. A scenario emerges as an
internally consistent view of the future industry structure under one set of
assumptions. The range of plausible assumptions about the potential
outcomes of scenario variables determines the appropriate set of scenarios
for analytical purposes.
Constructing a set of industry scenarios would be relatively simple once
the scenario variables had been determined if there was only one scenario
variable. If the only scenario variable in the chain saw industry was the
level of casual user demand, for example, then a manageable number of
scenarios could be constructed by making several plausible assumptions
about demand. However, the number of relevant scenario variables is
greater than one in most industries. The number of combinations generated
by differing assumptions about each scenario variable can multiply rapidly,
and with it the number of scenarios that might be analyzed. With four
scenario variables in chain saws, for example, dozens of scenarios could
easily be constructed.


Figure 13–2. Determinants of Future Industry Structure
There are two ways to limit the proliferation of scenarios—reducing the
number of scenario variables and reducing the number of assumptions made
about each one. The ﬁrst step is to ensure that the scenario variables are all
truly uncertain and independent. This test may lead to the elimination of
some variables. Another way to reduce the number of scenario variables is
to concentrate on only those with a signiﬁcant potential impact on structure.
While many factors will have some impact on future structure, fewer will
have an impact signiﬁcant enough to inﬂuence competitive strategy.
Sometimes the impact of a variable on structure only becomes clear once
the analysis of scenarios has begun. In the chain saw industry, however, all
four scenario variables are important.
The next step in determining the set of scenarios to analyze is to specify
the different assumptions to be made about each scenario variable. The
appropriate range of assumptions will depend on the extent to which its
causal factors could differ. Scenario variables can be discrete or continuous.
When a scenario variable is discrete (e.g., a regulation is either signed into
law or it is not), the choice of assumptions is relatively clear. When the
scenario variable is continuous (e.g., the level of casual user demand), a
question arises as to how to make the appropriate assumptions about its
value.
The choice of assumptions should be governed by four factors: the need
to bound the uncertainty, regularity of the impact on structure, managers’
beliefs, and practicality. Assumptions about a scenario variable should
bound the feasible range of values that variable could take, exposing the
important differences in possible industry structure. Since scenarios are not
meant to be forecasts, it is important that those with a low probability of
occurrence not be ignored. The use of extreme values can increase the
understanding of the directions in which industry structure could evolve.
Wide differences in the level of casual user demand, for example, will
strongly inﬂuence the path of evolution in the chain saw industry. However,
this does not mean that very unlikely values for a variable should be used in
constructing scenarios unless these very unlikely outcomes would lead to
industry structures that differ substantially from more likely outcomes. The


credibility of scenarios can be damaged if they are based on highly
implausible assumptions.
Having bounded the feasible range of uncertainty, the number of
assumptions in between about each variable must be selected. If changes in
the value of a scenario variable affect structure in a predictable way
between its extremes, the number of assumptions can be small. If this is not
the case, however, the range of assumptions must reﬂect major
discontinuities. In chain saws, for example, a medium level of casual user
demand is likely to have an impact on structure that is not simply between
that of very low and very high demand. A medium level of demand
provides room for only one or two new efﬁcient-scale manufacturing
facilities, and thus raises the possibility that several competitors will expand
simultaneously, leading to overcapacity. An even more striking case of
irregularity of impact is in the extent of sales through servicing dealers. It is
possible that the percentage of saws sold through dealers will fall rapidly as
casual user demand grows, but recover once ﬁrst-time chain saw buyers
trade up to larger saws and require service. This has quite different
structural implications from scenarios featuring low or high dealer share.
A third consideration in choosing what assumptions to make about each
scenario variable is the beliefs held by senior management. It is important
to build at least one scenario around assumptions that reﬂect their
commonly held beliefs. This lends credibility to the scenario building
process. Scenarios reﬂecting managers’ assumptions can also be useful in
exposing the differences in the assumptions of various senior managers, as
well as in testing the overall consistency of assumptions that managers have
made independently about each scenario variable. If the scenario that results
from combining these assumptions is implausible, managers’ thinking about
the future may be changed. All this is also important in demonstrating the
validity of employing multiple scenarios rather than a single scenario.
A ﬁnal consideration in choosing the number of assumptions about each
scenario variable is the practical limit on the number of scenarios that can
be meaningfully analyzed. A proliferation of scenarios beyond three or four
may make analysis so onerous that the strategic issues are obscured. Thus
compromises may well be necessary to reduce the number of assumptions
examined. Since scenarios can be added, eliminated, or combined later in
the analysis, it is important not to impose this constraint too strongly.


TABLE 13–5 Range of Assumptions in Chain Saw Industry Scenarios
SCENARIO VARIABLE
ASSUMPTIONS
Level of casual unit demand
Low
Medium
High
Shape of casual user penetration
curve
Steady
increase
Peaked
 
Mix of dealer versus non-dealer
sales
Dealers
dominate
High
nondealer
share
Short-term shift to nondealers, with
return to dealers in the long term
Extent of private label versus
branded sales through
nondealers
High
percent
branded
High percent
private
label
 
Table 13–5 shows the range of assumptions chosen for the scenario
variables in the chain saw industry. Except for the level of casual user
demand and mix of dealer versus nondealer sales, two assumptions about
each variable are sufﬁcient to expose the implications for industry structure.
The key distinction in the shape of the penetration curve is whether it rises
smoothly, or rises rapidly and then levels off (peaking). Peaking raises the
risk of excessive capital investment by competitors. The extent of private
label sales is important in determining the bargaining power of buyers and
the relative position of well-known brands such as McCulloch and Homelite
(manufacturers’ brands are clearly not as important in private label sales).
Each assumption shown in Table 13–5 can be quantiﬁed.
Consistency of Assumptions
A scenario should be an internally consistent view of what future
industry structure could be. Internal consistency is partly ensured by
separating the scenario variables from the dependent ones. Another critical
requirement, however, is the consistency of the assumptions made about
each scenario variable with each other.
Often scenario variables affect one another, and thus some combinations
of assumptions about them are not internally consistent. This can lead to the
elimination of some scenarios. Figure 13–3 and 13–4 illustrate the process


in the chain saw industry. Figure 13–3 compares the level of casual user
demand and the shape of the casual user penetration curve. It is unlikely
that the penetration curve will be peaked unless casual user demand is high.
Hence, two combinations of assumptions (cells in Figure 13–3) are
inconsistent. Figure 13–4 compares the four consistent combinations of
assumptions about demand and the shape of the penetration curve against
the mix of channels. Once again, some combinations of assumptions are not
mutually consistent and can be eliminated. Servicing dealers will dominate
only if casual user demand is not high. Nondealers will not gain a high
share of sales unless casual demand is medium or high. A short-term shift
to nondealers is likely only if demand for casual users is high and peaked,
leading to an increase in nondealer share followed by a fall-off in casual
demand and the migration of the more serious casual users to dealers. The
fourth scenario variable, the percentage of saws sold under private label
versus sold branded through nondealers, is not shown on Figure 13–4.
However, high private label penetration is clearly inconsistent with
domination by the dealer channel.
Figure 13–3. Consistency of Casual User Demand and the Penetration Curve in Chain Saws


Figure 13–4. Consistency of Demand and Mix of Channels in Chain Saws
Figure 13–5. Consistent Scenarios for the Chain Saw Industry
Thus we can reduce the number of consistent scenarios in the chain saw
industry to the ten shown in Figure 13–5. These ten combinations of
assumptions about the scenario variables are internally consistent and,
therefore, are candidates for further analysis. The process of determining
internally consistent assumptions is vitally important to constructing


industry scenarios, because consistency in viewing the future is one of the
principal beneﬁts of the scenario technique.
Analyzing Scenarios
The next step in scenario planning is to analyze the implications of each
scenario for competition. The analysis of a scenario involves the following:
• determining future industry structure under the scenario
•  developing the implications of the scenario for industry structural
attractiveness
•  identifying the implications of the scenario for the sources of
competitive advantage
To determine the implications of a scenario for future industry structure,
the process diagrammed in Figure 13–2 is carried out. Assumptions about
scenario variables determine the dependent elements of structure. These are
combined with the predetermined and constant elements of structure to
complete the scenario. Predetermined changes in structure may be speeded
up or slowed down for different scenarios. Each scenario will provide a
picture of the ﬁve forces representing the industry’s structure in the event
that the assumptions about the scenario variables come true.
This future structure will be more or less attractive in terms of
proﬁtability. The industry structure under each scenario will determine, and
possibly shift, the sources of competitive advantage. For example, a
scenario characterized by low casual user demand will imply very different
requirements for competitive advantage than a scenario where casual user
demand is high and the mix of channels shifts away from servicing dealers.
In the latter scenario, differentiation will be based more on advertising and
having light, compact saw designs rather than on traditional sources of
uniqueness such as excellent dealers and durable saws. The analysis of each
industry scenario must specify the resulting implications for competitive
advantage in the value chain.
Scenarios may differ in:


• the relative importance of value activities
• the appropriate conﬁguration of the value chain
• the drivers of cost or uniqueness
• the importance of interrelationships
• the sustainability of different sources of competitive advantage
• the choice of generic strategies
Table 13–6 illustrates the analysis of two of the chain saw industry
scenarios. Scenario 1 results in a structure quite similar to the current
industry structure, while Scenario 7 results in a very different structure with
quite different requirements for competitive advantage.
An important part of analyzing a scenario is determining when it will
become clear that the particular scenario has come to pass. Sometimes a
scenario emerges quickly. In chain saws, however, a year passed before the
uncertainty over the level of casual user demand was reduced. Several more
years went by before the peaking of casual user demand was known.
Competitors must choose between committing to a strategy early or waiting
until better information becomes available. Therefore, a ﬁrm must estimate
when uncertainties will be resolved in order to predict competitor behavior
and to set the ﬁrm’s own strategy.
TABLE 13–6 Analysis of Chain Saw Scenarios
 
SCENARIO 1 “Casual user market never
materializes”
SCENARIO 7 “Private label dominates”
Future Industry
Structure
Same as currently
Entry barriers shift toward scale
economies and absolute cost
advantages
Channels increase in power and price
sensitivity
Rivalry pressures increase
Electric saws become a major product
line
Structural
Attractiveness
High
Mediocre on average, though a leader
can be proﬁtable
Sources of
Basically unchanged
Market share of causal units


Competitive
Advantage
Low-cost product designs
Scale economies in advertising
Automated plants in low labor-cost
areas
or
Extreme strength in professional/farm
segment to insulate a ﬁrm from the
battle in the casual user segment
Introducing Competitor Behavior into Scenarios
If the ﬁrm has a dominant position in its industry or if competitor
behavior has little potential effect on structure, the analysis of each scenario
can stop at the industry level. In most industries, however, competitors can
affect industry structure and their strategies will inﬂuence a ﬁrm’s options
and likely success. Thus the analysis of scenarios must include competitors.
In industries where a few powerful competitors exist, competitor analysis
can be the most important part of analyzing each scenario.
The future industry structure under each scenario will usually have
different consequences for different competitors. Increased casual user
demand, for example, will greatly beneﬁt ﬁrms with existing casual user
models and representation in mass distribution channels compared to ﬁrms
that exclusively serve professionals. Competitors will respond to structural
change in ways that reﬂect their goals, assumptions, strategies, and
capabilities. For example, Beaird-Poulan’s response to growing casual user
demand is likely to be aggressive, conditioned by its parent company’s
(Emerson Electric) aggressive growth goals. The behavior of competitors
may, in turn, affect the speed and direction of structural changes in the
scenario through a feedback loop. In chain saw Scenario 7, for example,
aggressive investment in new capacity by Beaird-Poulan and McCulloch
would enhance rivalry compared to the situation where one or both chose a
conservative stance.
The full arsenal of competitor analysis tools should be brought to bear in
predicting how competitors will behave under different scenarios. Strategic
mapping is often a useful tool for integrating predictions of likely
competitor’s responses under a scenario.4 The axes of the map are chosen to


reﬂect the critical sources of sustainable competitive advantage implied by
the scenario. Since each scenario implies a different future industry
structure, the variables that will most inﬂuence the relative position of
competitors may vary. For example, since industry structure under chain
saw Scenario 7 will shift toward more price rivalry, manufacturing scale
will become an important source of competitive advantage though it is not
as important under Scenario 1.
Strategic mapping allows the simultaneous display of all competitors’
expected behavior under a scenario. It also facilitates the analysis of
interactions among competitors and their responses to each others’ moves.
If all competitors are forecast to move in one direction under a scenario, for
example, some may modify their strategies as the scenario unfolds to avoid
a head-on confrontation.
Often competitor behavior is difﬁcult to predict. If the behavior of one or
more important competitors under a scenario is both uncertain and likely to
have an important impact on competition, this introduces an additional
scenario variable into the scenario. Scenarios under which there are key
uncertainties about competitors must then be split into two or more
additional scenarios based on assumptions about how competitors’ behavior
will differ. This same approach may be necessary to deal with uncertainty
about the likelihood of potential new entrants with differing resources and
skills from existing competitors.
Figure 13–6 illustrates the most important competitor uncertainties in the
chain saw industry scenarios analyzed in Table 13–6. Under Scenario 1, the
major uncertainty is whether McCulloch and Beaird-Poulan will
aggressively invest in new capacity and advertising even though the casual
user market never fully materializes. Both have strong proclivities to be
aggressive given their new parent companies. Moreover, it will not be
immediately clear to either ﬁrm which scenario is coming to pass. Under
Scenario 7, Homelite’s strategy poses the key uncertainty because
McCulloch and Poulan’s actions are quite predictable. Homelite may
choose to pursue the entire casual user market despite the shift in strategy
implied, or remain in its traditional segments and earn high proﬁts at the
expense of share. While Homelite’s parent company may be prone to
demand high proﬁts, the opportunity for rapid growth could also inﬂuence
Homelite’s choice.


The Number of Scenarios To Analyze
Since the analysis of a scenario is often complex and time consuming,
scenarios should be analyzed in a sequence that yields the necessary insight
for the selection of a strategy without requiring full blown analysis of every
possible scenario. A good starting point is to analyze the polar, or most
widely separated, scenarios ﬁrst. The polar scenarios typically lead to the
most different industry structures and thus will help bound the range of
strategic options. The stark contrast between polar scenarios is often very
stimulating to strategic thinking. In the chain saw industry, Scenarios 1 and
7 were the polar scenarios on Figure 13–5.
Figure 13–6. Competitor Behavior under Chain Saw Scenarios
The next scenario analyzed after the polar scenarios should be one where
the structural outcome is expected to differ signiﬁcantly from the polar
scenarios. The scenario deemed most likely to occur should also be
analyzed. This process should continue until the way in which the scenario
variables determine future structure is understood. In addition, major
discontinuities with a low probability of occurring should be included as
special scenarios which are analyzed less extensively but factored into
strategic choices.
Figure 13–7 shows the analysis of an intermediate chain saw scenario,
Scenario 9. This is very different scenario from Scenarios 1 and 7, because
it assumes that casual user saws are a fad and private label sales will never
catch on. Thus Scenario 9 creates a dilemma for ﬁrms about how to


capitalize on the short-lived casual user boom without alienating dealers or
sacriﬁcing key competitive strengths. It is clear from Figure 13–7 that the
determinants of competitive advantage and likely competitor behavior will
be quite different under Scenario 9 than under the other two scenarios.
Briefer consideration of other chain saw scenarios suggests that these three
industry scenarios are representative of the impact of uncertainty on
competition.
The purpose of scenarios is to understand the different ways in which
industry and competitive conditions might change. Forecasts are frequently
not accurate, and scenarios attempt instead to illustrate the logical outcomes
of a range of forecasts. The scenarios actually analyzed will be but a few of
the almost inﬁnite number of possible futures that might occur in an
industry. However, well-chosen scenarios will illuminate the range of
futures germane to strategy formulation. Scenarios should be chosen to
communicate, educate, and stretch managers’ thinking about the future.
Attaching Probabilities to Scenarios
Rarely will each scenario be equally likely to occur. Industry scenarios
are not intended to cover all possible outcomes—they are devices for
exploring the strategic implications of possible future industry structures.
However, the strategic implications of scenarios are partly a function of
their likelihood of occurring. It is important to determine the relative
probabilities of outcomes that are broadly similar to each scenario. If the
scenarios analyzed are well chosen, they will represent the range of industry
outcomes that might occur. In chain saws, outcomes close to Scenario 1 are
the least likely to occur, while outcomes close to Scenarios 7 and 9 are
about equally likely.


Figure 13–7. Analysis of an Intermediate Chain Saw Industry Scenario
Attaching probabilities to scenarios is beset with problems of bias and
conventional wisdom. It is important to ﬁnd unbiased ways to assess the
probabilities of scenarios, based on the underlying causal factors of each
scenario variable. Managers’ own implicit probabilities should be identiﬁed
and confronted if they vary widely or contradict those indicated by industry
analysis.
Summary Characteristics of Industry Scenarios
A number of characteristics distinguish industry scenarios. Each scenario
is, in effect, a full analysis of industry structure, competitor behavior, and
the sources of competitive advantage under a particular set of assumptions


about the future. The whole range of techniques available for analyzing
industries and competitive advantage must be brought to bear; the scenario
tool is merely a framework for identifying the key uncertainties and
analyzing them, not an end in itself. The process of understanding how
uncertainty affects future industry structure is as important as the scenarios
that are actually constructed.
The successful analysis of industry scenarios hinges on judgment and
compromise. Constructing scenarios is a process of abstracting those
elements of uncertainty that will drive strategic choices. Selecting and
analyzing a few scenarios from the range of future industry structures
requires picking the most important cases and simplifying them. The
process is nearly always iterative, because the analyst will better understand
the relationship between the key uncertainties and industry structure as the
analysis proceeds.
Finally, it should be clear that a major purpose of industry scenarios is to
ensure internal consistency of a ﬁrm’s view of the future. A scenario aims to
create a view of future industry structure that recognizes the interactions
among variables and the need for consistency among assumptions about
different industry characteristics. Scenarios provide a way of linking
uncertain trends together into a number of alternate but consistent views of
the future. Thus scenarios emphasize the ways in which industry trends and
competitor behavior will interact or reinforce each other. Scenarios aim to
reduce the chances that actions taken to deal with one element of
uncertainty in an industry will unintentionally worsen a ﬁrm’s position vis-
à-vis other uncertainties.
Industry Scenarios and Competitive Strategy
Having developed and analyzed a set of industry scenarios, the next task
is to use them to formulate competitive strategy. Scenarios are not an end in
themselves. Many companies falter in translating scenarios into strategy.
The bulk of attention is often placed on developing scenarios and not on
determining their implications. There is also little guidance in the literature
on scenarios about how to use them to formulate strategy.


A ﬁrm’s optimal strategy would usually—though not always—be
different under each scenario if the ﬁrm knew the scenario would occur.
Each scenario involves a different industry structure, behaviors of key
competitors, and requirements for competitive advantage. Figure 13–8
illustrates this in the chain saw industry, where the strategy for a leading
ﬁrm is quite different under each scenario.
A ﬁrm does not know which scenario will occur, so it must choose the
best way to cope with uncertainty in selecting its strategy, given its
resources and initial position. The typical prescription for coping with
uncertainty is to choose a strategy that is “robust,” or viable regardless of
which scenario occurs.5 However, this is by no means the only option. A
ﬁrm might decide instead to prepare for one scenario despite the risk that it
will not occur. Conversely, a ﬁrm with massive resources may sometimes be
able to pursue the strategies necessary to cope with all scenarios
simultaneously and wait for events to unfold before focusing its efforts. If
there is uncertainty over the mix of channels, for example, a strong chain
saw competitor might develop its position in all likely channels.
A strategy built around one scenario is risky, while a strategy designed to
ensure success under all scenarios is expensive. Moreover, the strategies
implied by the different scenarios are often contradictory. For example,
developing nondealer channels for chain saws will run a high risk of
alienating dealers, and it is hard to pursue nondealers and dealers at the
same time. In such circumstances, positioning for several scenarios may
leave the ﬁrm “stuck in the middle” with no competitive advantage, a
blurred brand image, and a suboptimal organizational structure (see Chapter
1). The inconsistency of implied strategies under different scenarios often
raises a serious strategic dilemma. In chain saws, preparing for all three
scenarios would clearly lead to suboptimization, and thus chain saw
competitors will have to resolve some difﬁcult tradeoffs before selecting
their strategies. One of the important functions of scenarios is to reveal
elements of strategy for which a ﬁrm must make such choices.
Strategic Approaches Under Scenarios


There are ﬁve basic approaches to dealing with uncertainty in strategy
selection when a ﬁrm faces plausible scenarios with differing strategic
implications. The approaches can sometimes, though not always, be
employed sequentially or in combination.


Figure 13–8. Competitive Strategy Under Alternative Chain Saw Scenarios


1. Bet on the most probable scenario. In this approach, the ﬁrm designs
its strategy around the scenario (or range of scenarios) that is seen to be
most probable, accepting the risk that it may not occur. In chain saws, a ﬁrm
would bet on whichever of the three scenarios it believed to be the most
likely.
In practice, betting on the most probable scenario is a common approach
to strategy formulation under uncertainty though it is done implicitly.
Managers often base their strategies on implicit assumptions about the
future. Without becoming explicit, however, a scenario may be based on
ignorance and may fail the test of internal consistency so critical to good
planning under uncertainty.
The desirability of consciously designing strategy for the most probable
scenario depends on how likely it is that the most probable scenario will
occur, how adverse the consequences are if other scenarios in fact occur,
and how close the ﬁt is between the resources and initial position of the ﬁrm
and the strategy for dealing with the most probable scenario. The risk of
designing strategy around the most probable scenario is that other scenarios
will occur which make the strategy inappropriate, and it is difﬁcult to
modify the strategy mid-course.
2.  Bet on the “best” scenario. In this approach, a ﬁrm designs its
strategy for the scenario in which the ﬁrm can establish the most sustainable
long-run competitive advantage given its initial position and resources. This
approach seeks the highest upside potential by tuning the strategy to the
possible future industry structure that yields the best outcome for the ﬁrm.
The risk, of course, is that the best scenario does not occur and the chosen
strategy is thereby inappropriate.
3.  Hedge. In this approach, a ﬁrm chooses a strategy that produces
satisfactory results under all scenarios, or at least under all scenarios that
are deemed to have an appreciable probability of occurring. This is one
approach to designing a robust strategy. The idea is similar to the
“minimax” strategy in game theory, where a player makes the move that
minimizes his maximum loss. In chain saws, hedging might entail
developing a very wide model line, or entering nondealer channels with


slightly different models sold under a different brand name at the same time
as the ﬁrm continued to serve dealers.
Usually hedging will yield a strategy that is not optimal for any scenario.
The resulting sacriﬁce in strategic position is traded off in favor of a
reduction in risk. Moreover, hedging usually implies higher costs (or lower
revenues) than a betting strategy because it must prepare a ﬁrm for several
different possible competitive circumstances rather than one.
4.  Preserve ﬂexibility. Another approach to dealing with uncertain
scenarios is to choose a strategy that preserves ﬂexibility until it becomes
more apparent which scenario will actually occur. This is another way of
creating a robust strategy and illustrates that robustness must be carefully
deﬁned. The ﬁrm postpones resource commitments that lock it into a
particular strategy. Once the uncertainties begin to resolve themselves, a
strategy that ﬁts the scenario that appears to be occurring is chosen, taking
into account the ﬁrm’s resources and skills. In chain saws, ﬂexibility might
be preserved by maintaining the ﬁrm’s strategy in the professional segment
and sourcing casual user saws initially from another ﬁrm.
A ﬁrm preserving ﬂexibility often pays a price in strategic position
because of ﬁrst-mover advantages gained by ﬁrms that commit early. First-
mover advantages—e.g., reputation, a proprietary learning curve, and
ability to tie up the best retail channels—were discussed in detail in Chapter
5. In chain saws, the ﬁrm that moves into new channels ﬁrst may well get its
pick of the best ones. Preserving ﬂexibility sacriﬁces ﬁrst-mover advantages
in return for a reduction in risk. It is different from hedging because it
involves delaying commitment, rather than embarking on a strategy that
works reasonably well under all feasible scenarios. If a ﬁrm can recognize
early which scenario is going to occur, it can minimize the cost of
preserving ﬂexibility.
5.  Inﬂuence. In the ﬁnal approach to addressing uncertainty, a ﬁrm
attempts to use its resources to bring about a scenario that it considers
desirable. A ﬁrm seeks to raise the odds that a scenario will occur for which
it has a competitive advantage. Doing so requires that a ﬁrm try to inﬂuence
the causal factors behind the scenario variables. Since a causal factor in
casual user demand for chain saws is woodburning stove installations, for


example, a ﬁrm might try to inﬂuence stove demand. This might involve
coalitions with woodburning stove manufacturers, or advertising that
stressed the value of woodburning stoves at the same time that it advertised
chain saws. Technological changes, channel policies, government
regulation, and many other sources of uncertainty can sometimes be
inﬂuenced. The possibility for inﬂuence and its cost must be weighed
against the competitive advantage to be gained if a ﬁrm can raise the odds
that its preferred scenario will occur.
Combined and Sequenced Strategies
It is often possible and desirable to employ combined and sequential
strategies. Betting on the most probable or best scenario can be combined
with attempting to inﬂuence which scenario occurs. Similarly, the approach
of preserving ﬂexibility is logically part of a sequential strategy that
ultimately involves a bet on the most probable scenario. A ﬁrm can also
choose to hedge initially and then bet on a future industry structure as the
actual scenario becomes clearer, though this is usually more costly than
preserving ﬂexibility and then betting.
A ﬁrm may also be able to set policies in some activities in the value
chain to bet on a scenario, while hedging or preserving ﬂexibility in others.
In chain saws, for example, a ﬁrm might bet on high casual demand in its
manufacturing and technology development activities through building new
low-cost facilities and designing several inexpensive, lightweight models.
At the same time, though, it could hedge its bet by minimizing the level of
vertical integration in manufacturing to reduce capital investment and
thereby transfer some of the risk to suppliers. It could also hedge its bets by
spending heavily on marketing and sales activities to maintain dealer
relations and preserve market position in the professional and farm segment.
A ﬁrm may also choose to contain risk in another way, by committing
early to reversible actions (advertising) while postponing commitments on
irreversible investments (e.g., plants). Any form of avoiding commitments
or hedging will usually involve some sacriﬁce in competitive advantage,
though, and may also be confusing to both employees and outside observers
such as security analysts.


The Choice of Strategy Under Industry Scenarios
Each of the ways of coping with uncertain industry structural change has
its potential beneﬁts, costs, and risks in terms of competitive advantage. The
following factors are most important in choosing a ﬁrm’s approach:
First-mover Advantages. The size of ﬁrst-mover advantages (Chapter 5)
has a major inﬂuence on the attractiveness of betting versus postponing
commitments. Where the ﬁrst mover gains a signiﬁcant competitive
advantage, for example, the option of ﬂexibility may be ruled out. In chain
saws, gaining access to new channels may well involve signiﬁcant ﬁrst-
mover advantages, because many mass merchandisers are unlikely to carry
multiple lines of saws.
Initial Competitive Position. Scenarios will differ in their potential for a
ﬁrm given its initial competitive position. Designing a strategy for the
scenario that ﬁts a ﬁrm’s initial position may produce a signiﬁcantly better
outcome than designing a strategy around the most probable scenario. This
difference in performance may compensate for the risk of betting on a less
probable scenario. Inﬂuencing which scenario occurs is an attempt to shift
probabilities in the direction of the scenario where a ﬁrm has the most
advantages.
Cost or Resources Required. Hedging and inﬂuence tend to require
greater resources or imply higher costs than does betting on one scenario.
Preserving ﬂexibility is usually somewhere in between.
Risk. The risk of each approach is a function of a number of factors:
TIMING OF RESOURCE COMMITMENT. Early commitment is usually riskier
than later commitment. Preserving ﬂexibility minimizes risk by postponing
commitment, while hedging seeks to reduce risk in a different way. How
long the ﬁrm can delay its commitment depends on ﬁrst-mover advantages
and the lead time in making moves.
THE DEGREE OF INCONSISTENCY OF STRATEGIES FOR ALTERNATE SCENARIOS.
Risk is a function of how poorly a strategy will perform if the “wrong”


scenario occurs. Hedging minimizes this risk at the price of higher costs or
poorer position. The degree of inconsistency among strategies for alternate
scenarios is a function of how different industry structure and the sources of
competitive advantage are under each scenario.
RELATIVE PROBABILITY OF THE SCENARIOS. The choice of approaches
depends on the relative probability of the scenarios. Hedging is a way to
deal with risk by reducing the exposure of a ﬁrm to any scenario, while
inﬂuence seeks to reduce risk by shifting probabilities toward the desired
scenario. Betting on the most probable scenario is more risky than hedging,
while betting on the best scenario can be the most risky approach.
THE COST OF CHANGING STRATEGIES ONCE UNCERTAINTY IS RESOLVED. Risk
depends on the degree to which a ﬁrm is locked in once it commits to a
strategy by setting its product line, channels, advertising policies, facilities,
and so on. This will depend on the degree of irreversibility of the required
investments, which will differ from industry to industry and strategy to
strategy. Preserving ﬂexibility seeks to minimize the cost of changing
strategies.
Competitors’ Expected Choices. A ﬁrm’s choice of how to deal with
uncertainty must reﬂect the choices its competitors have made or are
expected to make. Competitor bets may preempt a ﬁrm from certain
strategies and open up others. Hedging or preserving ﬂexibility by
competitors usually raises the payoff to the ﬁrm that makes a bet that proves
correct.
The best way to deal with uncertainty is to make a conscious choice to
follow one or more approaches, rather than a choice based on inertia or an
implicit scenario. Weighing the factors involved in choosing an approach
described above requires a logic for each scenario that portrays the
interdependencies between various aspects of industry structure. The most
challenging part of dealing with uncertainty is to ﬁnd creative ways to
minimize the cost of preserving ﬂexibility or hedging, and to maximize the
advantages of betting correctly. Understanding the way in which each


activity in the value chain can contribute to competitive advantage under the
various scenarios may allow the ﬁrm to do so.
Scenario Variables and Market Intelligence
Which scenarios will occur is determined by the scenario variables.
Scenario variables are thus key indicators of the path of industry structural
change—they can become clear quickly or the uncertainty may persist for
long periods. Scenario variables and their causal factors should be the focal
point for gathering market intelligence. Changes affecting scenario
variables are warning signals of industry structural change. A ﬁrm
preserving ﬂexibility, for example, will want to closely monitor the state of
scenario variables to decide when to commit.
Early information about the future state of scenario variables has a high
strategic value. The earlier a ﬁrm can conﬁdently predict the occurrence of a
particular scenario, the sooner it can commit to a strategy with the
accompanying gains in position described above. Thus investments in
information gathering should concentrate on scenario variables rather than
on indiscriminate tracking of the myriad other changes that accompany
industry evolution.
Good information on scenario variables is also extremely valuable at the
time when industry scenarios are constructed. Since the scenario variables
are essential to structural change, understanding them may improve the set
of scenarios investigated or even turn what initially appear to be scenario
variables into predetermined elements of structure. In chain saws, for
example, good data about household formation, the number of dwellings
with ﬁreplaces and other causal factors could reduce the range of
assumptions that had to be made about casual user demand.
Scenarios and the Planning Process
Every plan is based on an industry scenario in one form or another,
though the process is frequently an implicit one. The use of explicit industry
scenarios brings the uncertainty in planning out into the open, and bases
strategy on a conscious and complete understanding of the likely


signiﬁcance of uncertainty for competition. The resistance to employing
scenarios will be greatly mitigated if they are seen in this light—as nothing
fundamentally new or arcane. Industry scenarios are a useful device for
getting a management team involved in thinking about the future
systematically, and modifying unrealistic assumptions in a nonthreatening
way because scenarios are not intended as forecasts.6
Industry scenarios are best developed by business unit managers, with
guidance and input from others in the ﬁrm as well as outsiders. This places
the task of understanding the effects of uncertainty in the hands of those
who must actually set competitive strategy, and ensures that scenarios are
truly relevant to the business unit. Industry scenarios should be constructed
well into the planning process, once basic industry, competitor, and value
chain analysis has been done. Industry scenarios will be ineffective without
a good base of knowledge, and probably should not be introduced into the
planning systems of ﬁrms without good basic planning skills. Scenarios are
best used to guide the choice of a strategy, rather than as a means of
conﬁrming one.
Scenarios are not needed every year for every business unit. They are
necessary only when signiﬁcant uncertainties are present in an industry.
However, constructing industry scenarios irregularly runs the risk that
managers will overlook key uncertainties in their industries. Scenarios force
a creative search for possible structural changes. How often scenarios are
constructed must depend in part on the conﬁdence of top management in
the objectivity and vision of business unit managers.
An important organizational issue in using industry scenarios is the
relationship between recognizing uncertainty and the level commitment of
management to a direction. Scenarios emphasize the uncertainty present in
an industry, while successful implementation of strategies is usually more
effective if there is widespread commitment to the chosen strategy within an
organization. This suggests that scenarios should be constructed by the
management team of a business unit, but only the chosen strategy should be
widely communicated in the organization. Organizations can only cope with
so much uncertainty and ambiguity.
Corporate Role in Constructing Industry Scenarios


A corporate planning group or other corporate level managers can play a
role in industry scenarios, even though industry scenarios should be
constructed at the business unit level.
Macroscenarios as an Input. A corporate group can provide
macroscenarios to business units, as a part of the environmental analysis
needed to construct industry scenarios. Macroscenarios can stretch
traditional modes of thinking by business unit managers in a way that is
difﬁcult if scenarios are purely business unit driven.
Technology Forecasting. A corporate group can conduct or sponsor
technological forecasting in core technologies areas or in technologies with
a potentially broad impact on many industries, a suggestion I made in
Chapter 5. Such research may help expand the horizons of business unit
managers about possible technological impacts on their industries, a key
source of uncertainty.
Training and Challenging. A corporate planning group can play an
important role in providing training and guidance in the use of the industry
scenario technique itself. Constructing scenarios is a complicated task that
gets much easier with experience, and experience can be shared within a
ﬁrm.
In addition to training, an outside perspective can often be useful in
identifying scenario variables, determining the most important ones,
assigning objective probabilities, probing ways of hedging or preserving
ﬂexibility at low cost, and devising ways to inﬂuence which scenario will
occur. Corporate, sector, or group managers can play a useful role through
participating in these ways in business unit scenario building efforts.
Corporate Risk Analysis. By analyzing each business unit’s industry
scenarios, higher-level managers can identify scenario variables that have
widespread importance for a diversiﬁed ﬁrm. The overall consequences to
the ﬁrm should a particular scenario variable turn out one way or another
can thus be assessed. In cases where corporate exposure to a particular
scenario variable is great, some business unit strategies may have to be
modiﬁed. At the same time, large investments may be justiﬁed in attempting


to inﬂuence a scenario variable if it affects a number of business units. This
approach to corporate risk analysis is based on well-informed assessments
of uncertainties by business units. Top-down approaches to corporate risk
analysis in many ﬁrms tend to be based on aggregate and oversimpliﬁed
assessments of risks in each business unit by outsiders.
Industry Scenarios and Creativity
Most strategic plans are based on single-point estimates about the future,
usually the best guess of the managers involved. Rarely are managers able
to perceive fundamental shifts in their competitive environment ahead of
time, and ﬁnd imaginative ways of dealing with them. Industry scenarios
are a systematic tool for examining the impact of uncertainty on
competition by explicitly identifying the key uncertainties—the scenario
variables. Scenarios aim to stretch thinking about the future and widen the
range of alternatives considered. Scenarios provide a mechanism for
improving the chances that views of the future are consistent. Having
identiﬁed industry scenarios, a ﬁrm can then either mitigate uncertainty
through its choice of strategy (inﬂuence, hedging, preserve ﬂexibility) or
make a bet on the future mindful of the risk involved. Industry scenarios
also illuminate the consequences of mistaken forecasts about the future, and
the key information to be acquired in forecasting efforts. Thus industry
scenarios are fundamentally a tool to improve the creativity of strategic
planning. They cannot insure creativity, but they can signiﬁcantly raise the
odds.
The industry scenario tool is not sufﬁcient for strategy formulation in
and of itself. Rather, scenarios provide a framework for formulating strategy
under conditions of uncertainty. When combined with substantive
conceptual tools for understanding industry structure, competitor behavior,
and competitive advantage, the scenario tool can be an important part of the
strategist’s arsenal.


14
Defensive Strategy
Every ﬁrm is vulnerable to attack by competitors. Attacks come from two
types of competitors—new entrants into the industry and established
competitors seeking to reposition themselves. I will use the term
“challenger” to describe either type. A well implemented offensive strategy
constitutes the single best defense against attack by a challenger. A ﬁrm that
continuously invests to gain competitive advantage by improving its relative
cost position and differentiation will be difﬁcult to challenge successfully.
Even with a vigorous offensive strategy, however, an important role remains
for defensive strategy. A ﬁrm can make it harder for challengers to attack it
through the way it chooses to compete.
Defensive strategy aims to lower the probability of attack, divert attacks
to less threatening avenues, or lessen their intensity. Instead of increasing
competitive advantage per se, defensive strategy makes a ﬁrm’s competitive
advantage more sustainable. Almost all effective defensive strategies
require investment—a ﬁrm foregoes some short term proﬁtability to
enhance sustainability. The most successful competitive strategies combine
offensive and defensive components.
This chapter describes the principles of defensive strategy. Defensive
strategy rests on inﬂuencing competitors’ decision-making processes in
order to make an attack on a ﬁrm’s position less desirable from the
challenger’s perspective. This is done by reducing the inducement for a
competitor to challenge the ﬁrm, or raising barriers to entry and mobility to
make a challenge more difﬁcult. Since an attack by any challenger changes
character over time, appropriate defensive steps will change at different
