# Chapter 14: Defensive Strategy

stages of the process. I will describe how defensive strategy should evolve,
and the range of defensive tactics a ﬁrm can employ as well as some of their
important characteristics. I will then show how a ﬁrm can identify the most
effective defensive tactics in a particular industry. These considerations are
drawn together to show how ﬁrms can formulate an overall defensive
strategy. Finally, I describe the circumstances in which a ﬁrm should
consider disinvesting in an industry rather than investing heavily in defense.
The Process of Entry or Repositioning
Defensive strategy rests on an acute understanding of how a challenger
views the ﬁrm and on the perceived proﬁtability of the challenger’s various
options for improving position. The formulation of defensive strategy must
begin by recognizing that an attack by either a new or an established
competitor is a time-phased sequence of decisions and actions. Appropriate
defensive strategy must be formulated in the context of the entire assault,
and not just one move. The appropriate modes of defense will change at
different stages because of the challenger’s differing levels of commitment
and investment as the process proceeds.
The process of entry or repositioning consists of four periods. I will
discuss them ﬁrst for the case of a new entrant, and later show how the same
process applies to an established competitor seeking to reposition itself.
Preentry. This is the period before an entrant has commenced its entry,
during which it examines the industry as an entry target. Investments by an
entrant during this period typically are limited to market studies, product
and process technology development, contacts with investment bankers
regarding acquisitions, and the like. This is the hardest stage to detect,
because the entrant’s intentions regarding entry are frequently not known
with certainty. At the conclusion of the preentry period many potential
entrants decide not to enter.
Entering. During this period an entrant invests in establishing a base
position in the industry. This period involves such activities as continued
product and process technology development, test markets, national rollout,
assembling a sales force, and plant construction. The entrant hopes to have


gained a viable position in the industry at the end of this period. The
entering period can last a few months or several years, depending on the
lead times involved in the activities necessary for establishing an initial
position. In a service business, such as a restaurant, the period might only
be a few months; in a natural resources industry it could be ﬁve years or
more.
Sequencing. This is the period during which an entrant’s strategy evolves
from its entry strategy to its long-run target strategy. This period does not
occur in every entry, but reﬂects the beneﬁts of a sequenced entry strategy
in many industries.1 Procter & Gamble’s entry into the consumer paper
products industry provides an example. P&G acquired Charmin Paper, a
regional ﬁrm with little brand identity, and then repositioned its strategy by
going national, investing heavily in advertising, and improving products.
During the sequencing period, an entrant may take such actions as
broadening its product line, vertically integrating, or widening its
geographic coverage. These activities involve continued investment in the
industry beyond the investment necessary to gain a foothold position.
Postentry. This is the period after entry has fully occurred. At this stage
in the entry process, investment by the entrant has shifted to that needed to
maintain or defend its position within the industry.
The process of repositioning by an existing competitor involves the same
stages. A competitor ﬁrst contemplates repositioning, then actually begins
to invest in repositioning, and ultimately reaches or fails to reach its sought-
after position. An established competitor may also reposition itself through
a sequence of steps. Therefore, the initial moves a challenger makes in
repositioning often do not reliably indicate its ultimate target strategy.
The stages in the entry or repositioning process are important to
defensive strategy for a number of reasons. First, a challenger’s level of
commitment to its strategy may well differ in the various stages. Generally,
a challenger’s commitment increases as it progresses in the process if some
success is achieved. The initial level of commitment to an entry or
repositioning strategy will vary, reﬂecting the unanimity of management
opinion about the appropriateness of the decision in the ﬁrst place and the


attractiveness of other opportunities available to the challenger. However,
commitment will tend to rise as decisions are made, resources are
committed, time passes, and the strategy progresses. The level of
commitment of a challenger is crucial to defensive strategy, since it mirrors
the difﬁculty of forestalling or limiting a challenger’s objectives.
Exit and shrinkage barriers will also tend to rise as the process
proceeds.2 The presence of high exit or shrinkage barriers make it difﬁcult
to dislodge a challenger or force it to limit or scale down its objectives. Exit
and shrinkage barriers increase as the challenger commits to specialized
assets, long-term contracts, horizontal strategies with sister business units,
and investments in product or process development. In some industries,
establishing even a foothold position implies the creation of signiﬁcant exit
barriers. In other industries, a challenger may be able to postpone the risk of
increasing exit barriers until late in the entry process.3 Developing an
understanding of the height of a challenger’s exit and shrinkage barriers and
how they will change over time is essential to defensive strategy.
Defense becomes more difﬁcult the greater are a challenger’s
commitment and exit barriers. Since commitment and exit barriers usually
rise, often in discrete steps as investment commitments are made, the timing
of defensive moves is critical. Defensive actions taken just before a
challenger must decide whether to take steps that will raise exit or shrinkage
barriers may cast a shadow over the challenger’s internal decision-making
process.4 Critical junctures for a challenger can be predicted by identifying
costly or risky investments necessary in conﬁguring the value chain. An
important principle of defensive strategy, then, is to take defensive action
before exit barriers have risen.
A challenger learns continuously as its entry or repositioning process
proceeds. Assumptions were made in its initial decision that experience will
verify or contradict. Its experience will also shape its future assumptions,
and a challenger may modify its strategy based on events early in the
process. This presents the defender with an important opportunity to shape
a challenger’s information and assumptions. Often a ﬁrm will know more
about the industry than the challenger, and may be able to predict better
than the challenger where the challenger’s strategy will lead. This may
allow a ﬁrm to inﬂuence the direction of a challenger’s strategy in such a
way as to minimize its negative impact.


A defender must also try to prevent a challenger’s commitment from
building. When considering risky and uncertain moves into new territory, a
challenger’s management may be particularly sensitive to setbacks or signs
of early success or failure. A skillful defender seeks to prevent a challenger
from meeting its initial targets and attempts to change industry competition
in such a way as to cause the challenger to question its original assumptions
about the attractiveness of the industry or a particular position.
As the entry or repositioning proceeds, uncertainty about the intentions
of the challenger diminishes. This also has important implications for
defensive strategy. Before entry or repositioning begins, a ﬁrm can only
speculate about the identity of potential entrants or of competitors intending
to launch an attack. Once entry or repositioning begins, however, the
identity of the challenger becomes known. The challenger’s strategy and
long-term intentions may still not be clear at ﬁrst. However, they will
emerge more clearly as the process proceeds. A challenger’s ultimate
strategy will not be known until well into the sequencing stage when
signiﬁcant investments have been made.
A ﬁrm cannot defend against attacks of any conceivable type, mounted
by every conceivable competitor or potential competitor. Therefore, defense
before a challenger appears must be more generalized, and effective defense
of this type can be very costly. Once a challenge is under way, defensive
strategy can be tailored to meet the threat posed by a speciﬁc challenger. A
principle that emerges is that there is a high payout to anticipating which
ﬁrms represent the most likely challengers and what their logical avenues of
attack might be. This will allow defense to be more cost-effective, by
focusing defensive investments where they are most needed.
Defensive Tactics
Defensive strategy aims to inﬂuence a challenger’s calculation of the
expected return from entry or repositioning, causing the challenger to
conclude that the move is unattractive or to opt for a strategy that is less
threatening. To do this, a defender invests in defensive tactics. Most
defensive tactics are costly and reduce short-term proﬁtability in order to
raise the longer-term sustainability of a ﬁrm’s position. However, most


ﬁrms cannot eliminate the threat of attack completely, except at prohibitive
costs. Hence a defender should invest to reduce the threat of attack to an
acceptable level, balancing the risk of attack against the cost of defense.
Three types of defensive tactics underlie any defensive strategy:
• raising structural barriers
• increasing expected retaliation
• lowering the inducement for attack
Structural barriers to entry/mobility are sources of disadvantage for a
challenger relative to the ﬁrm (see Chapter 1). The presence of structural
barriers worsens the challenger’s expected proﬁt from a move. For example,
General Foods’ Maxwell House Coffee brand enjoys scale economies in
marketing that will force a challenger to bear higher than proportional
marketing costs relative to General Foods until it reaches proximity in
market share. These higher costs will reduce the challenger’s projected
proﬁt from entry below that of General Foods, and therefore reduce the
likelihood of a challenge.
The second type of defensive tactic is those that increase the threat of
retaliation perceived by challengers. Expected retaliation by the ﬁrm will
lower a challenger’s revenues or raise its costs, and thus erode the
challenger’s expected proﬁtability. Raising structural barriers and increasing
expected retaliation both seek to worsen a challenger’s position vis-a-vis
cost drivers or drivers of uniqueness, thereby eroding its relative position.
A third type of defensive tactic involves lowering the inducement for
challengers to attack. While raising barriers and expected retaliation is
aimed at reducing a challenger’s expected proﬁt, lowering the inducement
requires that a ﬁrm accept lower proﬁts. If a ﬁrm reduces prices or takes
proﬁts in an interrelated business unit instead of in the industry, for
example, a challenger will see less to gain if an attack is successful.
All three types of tactics can be employed both before a challenge has
occurred and once it has begun. Once a challenge has begun, however, a
ﬁrm must consider not only its position toward the challenger but also how
its behavior toward the challenger might discourage or encourage others.
Investments in defensive tactics cannot and should not be measured against
conventional short-term proﬁtability targets. This ignores their purpose.


Actions that deter challengers deliberately reduce short-term proﬁtability to
ensure long-term proﬁtability.
Raising Structural Barriers
Chapter 1 summarized the types of structural barriers to entry/mobility
that may be present in an industry. Every type of barrier can be inﬂuenced
by a defender. In some industries, the levels of spending on advertising,
sales force, plant capacity, and other activities that is necessary for doing
business (ignoring defensive considerations) creates high barriers as a by-
product. If the barriers naturally created by ongoing activities are very high,
a ﬁrm is in the happy position of not having to make further defensive
investments in barriers. However, in the long run it may be proﬁtable to
invest in building barriers even higher than natural barriers.
While offensive moves to enhance competitive advantage in the value
chain can raise structural barriers, I concentrate here on defensive moves to
raise barriers. Defensive tactics that raise structural barriers are actions that
block logical avenues of attack for challengers. Some of the most important
are the following:
Fill Product or Positioning Gaps. Barriers are increased when a ﬁrm ﬁlls
gaps in its product line or preempts alternative marketing themes that a
challenger might logically employ. Such moves force a challenger to take
the defender head-on instead of being able to gain an unopposed beachhead,
or command premium prices that can be used to offset higher costs. Filling
gaps can take a number of forms:
• Broadening the product line to close off possible product niches. Seiko
acquired the Pulsar watch brand to block attacks at the low end by
Citizen and Timex.
•  Introducing brands that match the product characteristics or brand
positionings the challenger has or could use. These blocking or
ﬁghting brands raise barriers without undermining the position of the
principal brand.


•  Foreclosing alternative marketing themes by using such themes on
secondary product lines or in secondary marketing campaigns.
•  Defensive low pricing of product varieties adjacent to competitors’
lines in order to discourage competitor line extensions (Chapter 7).
•  Encouraging good competitors (Chapter 6) that ﬁll gaps without
threatening the ﬁrm.
Defensive product varieties and marketing activities should not be
expected to be as proﬁtable as a ﬁrm’s core business, and prices must reﬂect
their defensive value.5 However, the defensive value of such products or
marketing activities does not necessarily require that a ﬁrm spend heavily
on them. Even if gap-ﬁlling products are not pushed aggressively, their
mere presence acts as a deterrent because of the threat that they will be
activated if a challenger threatens. Raising barriers may thus at the same
time lead a challenger to expect greater retaliation.
Block Channel Access. When a ﬁrm makes it more difﬁcult for a
challenger to gain access to distribution channels it raises a major structural
barrier. Defensive strategy should be directed not only toward a ﬁrm’s own
channels but also toward blocking access to other channels that may be a
substitute channel or a springboard for the challenger’s entry in the ﬁrm’s
channels. For example, challengers often gain incremental volume and
experience by using private label channels.
Channel-blocking tactics include the following:
• Exclusive agreements with channels.
•  Filling product line gaps in order to offer the channel a full line.
Competitors then have a harder time getting established.
• Expanding the product line to include all possible sizes and forms of a
product, in order to clog the channels’ shelf or warehouse space.
•  Bundling or unbundling as appropriate to reduce vulnerability to
challengers (Chapter 12).
• Aggressive volume discounts or discounts based on the channels total
purchases to discourage experimentation with new suppliers.


• Attractive after-sales service support of a ﬁrm’s products that prompts
channels to forgo their own investment in after-sales support personnel
and facilities.
•  Willingness to supply private label sellers in order to preempt a
challenger’s access to volume.
•  Encouraging good competitors, who ﬁll up channels without
threatening the ﬁrm.
Raise Buyer Switching Costs. The ﬁrm can raise barriers by raising the
switching cost of buyers. I have described the ways to increase switching
costs in Chapters 4 and 8. Some common approaches in defensive strategy
include:
• Free or low-cost training of buyer personnel in the use or maintenance
of a ﬁrm’s product, or in specialized procedures such as record keeping
that are only compatible with purchasing from the ﬁrm. Johns
Manville has employed buyer training effectively to raise the switching
costs of rooﬁng contractors in buying rooﬁng products.
• Participating in joint product development with buyers, or providing
applications engineering assistance to them to help integrate a ﬁrm’s
product into the buyer’s product or process.
• Establishing ties to the buyer through the use of dedicated computer
terminals to allow direct ordering or inquiries, or through maintaining
buyer data bases on the ﬁrm’s computer.
• Ownership of on-premise storage facilities or equipment that is used at
the buyer’s location. In motor oil, for example, leading suppliers own
tanks for bulk storage located on the garage or repair shop’s premises.
Raise the Cost of Gaining Trial. If a challenger faces high costs of
getting buyers to try its product, it faces a considerable barrier. Raising this
barrier requires that a ﬁrm understand those product varieties that are
purchased ﬁrst, as well as the types of buyers that are most likely to be early
experimenters and purchasers of a challenger’s product. Steps to close off
these avenues of trial for competitors include:


•  Selective price reduction on items in the line most likely to be
purchased ﬁrst.
•  High levels of couponing or sampling of buyers most prone to
experiment.
•  Discounting or deals that increase the inventory held by the buyer,
lengthen the time between orders, or lengthen the period of contracts.
All these impede a challenger’s access to orders.
• Announcing or leaking information about impending new products or
price changes that cause buyers to postpone purchases.
Defensively Increase Scale Economies. Barriers increase if economies of
scale grow. It is often possible to increase scale economies in areas such as
advertising and technology development, where scale thresholds are
competitively determined. By boosting its spending rate on technology
development and hence increasing the rate of new product development, for
example, a ﬁrm can increase the challenger’s required technology
development investment, which is amortized over a smaller base of sales. A
ﬁrm can increase scale economies most effectively in value activities where
minimum scale is determined by competitive spending levels rather than
determined by technology (see Chapter 3). Often this implies differentiating
in ways where the ﬁrm has a cost advantage in differentiation (Chapter 4).
Scale thresholds are often increased defensively in a number of ways:
• Increased advertising spending.
• Increased spending to boost the rate of technological change.
• Shorter model life cycles, where models require ﬁxed or quasi-ﬁxed
development costs.
• Increased sales force or service coverage.
Defensively Increase Capital Requirements. If a ﬁrm can raise the
amount of capital needed to compete with it, a challenger may be
discouraged. While many defensive tactics in effect raise a challenger’s
capital requirements by increasing start-up costs, a number of defensive
moves have a particular impact on capital requirements:


• Raising the amount of ﬁnancing provided to dealers or buyers.
• Increasing warranty coverage or liberalizing policy toward returns.
•  Reducing delivery time for products or spare parts, implying an
increase in the amount of inventory required or the need for excess
manufacturing capacity.
Foreclose Alternative Technologies. If a ﬁrm can foreclose alternative
technologies a challenger might employ, it blocks this avenue of attack.
Some tactics for foreclosing technologies are:
•  Patenting the feasible alternative technologies in the product or
process, as Xerox did effectively in the early phases of the copier
industry.
•  Maintaining a participation in alternative technologies, through
purchasing licenses, maintaining pilot plants employing alternative
technologies, forming coalitions with other ﬁrms with expertise in
alternative technologies, or actually producing products using an
alternate technology. All these tactics let a challenger know that the
ﬁrm has access to the alternative technologies if it needs them.
•  Licensing or encouraging good competitors to employ alternative
technologies (see Chapter 6).
• Discrediting alternative technologies through signaling.
Invest in Protecting Proprietary Know-how. If a ﬁrm can protect its
proprietary know-how in products, processes, or other activities in the value
chain, it raises barriers. Firms often have no systematic program in place to
limit the diffusion of their know-how. Building on the discussion in Chapter
5, some elements of such a program include:
• Strictly limiting access to facilities and personnel.
• Fabricating or modifying production equipment in-house.
• Vertical integration into key components to avoid passing know-how to
suppliers. Michelin practices this aggressively in tires.
• Human resource policies to minimize personnel turnover and prevent
disclosures.


• Aggressive patenting of inventions.
• Litigation against all infringers. Litigation may delay investments by
challengers until the uncertainties are resolved, even if the possibility
of success in the litigation is low.
Tie Up Suppliers. Barriers increase if a ﬁrm can foreclose or limit a
challenger’s access to the best sources of raw materials, labor, or other
inputs. Some representative tactics are as follows:
• Exclusive contracts with the best suppliers.
• Backward integration or partial or complete ownership of suppliers to
foreclose sources of supply.
• Purchasing key locations (mines, forest lands, etc.) in excess of needs
to preempt them from competitors.
• Encouraging suppliers to customize their value chains to meet a ﬁrm’s
needs, raising supplier switching costs to serving new competitors.
•  Signing long-term purchasing contracts to tie up supplier capacity.
Coca-Cola reportedly pursued this strategy in sourcing high-fructose
corn syrup, a low cost substitute for sugar.
Raise Competitors’ Input Costs. If a ﬁrm can raise a challenger’s relative
input costs, it raises barriers. Most opportunities to do so rest on differences
in competitors’ (or potential competitors’) cost structures, so that a given
input price change has a greater impact on them than on the ﬁrm. Some
common tactics are as follows:
• Avoiding suppliers that also serve competitors or potential competitors,
raising these suppliers’ costs and avoiding the transfer of some of the
ﬁrm’s scale economies to competitors through the suppliers.
•  Bidding up the price of labor or raw materials if they represent a
higher percentage of costs for competitors. This tactic may well have
been used by large beer companies against smaller ﬁrms with less
automated plants.


Defensively Pursue Interrelationships. A ﬁrm can often reduce its costs
or enhance differentiation by harnessing interrelationships that competitors
cannot match (Chapter 9). At the same time, pursuit of interrelationships by
competitors that a ﬁrm cannot match are threats that must be defended
against. Defensive considerations may suggest that a ﬁrm pursue particular
interrelationships, including entering some new businesses, to enhance its
defensive posture.
Encourage Government Policies That Raise Barriers. Government
policies can become major structural barriers in areas such as product or
plant safety, product testing and pollution control. Policies such as these can
increase economies of scale, capital requirements, and other potential
barriers. A ﬁrm can often shape the character of government policies in
ways that are favorable to defending its position. It can:
• Encourage stringent safety and pollution standards.
•  Challenge competitors’ products or practices in regulatory
proceedings.
• Support requirements for extensive product testing.
• Lobby for trade ﬁnancing or other favorable trade policies to deal with
foreign competitors.
Form Coalitions To Raise Barriers or Coopt Challengers. Coalitions
with other ﬁrms can raise barriers in many of the ways described above,
such as foreclosing alternative technologies or ﬁlling product gaps. At the
same time, coalitions with likely challengers may be a way to convert a
threat into an opportunity.
Increasing Expected Retaliation
A second type of defensive tactic is an action that increases the threat of
retaliation perceived by challengers. The threat of retaliation hinges on both
the perceived probability of retaliation and its expected severity. A range of
tactics are available to a defender to signal its intentions to retaliate against
potential challengers. For example, Dow Chemical has built capacity in


advance of demand in magnesium for many years, indicating its
commitment to defending its share. Had Dow been continually constrained
for capacity, challengers might have been more tempted to enter.
Expected retaliation can be increased by tactics that indicate that a ﬁrm
intends to vigorously defend its position, that create conditions making it
inevitable that the ﬁrm must retaliate, or that indicate it has the resources to
do so. The threat of retaliation perceived by potential challengers is
continually being inﬂuenced by a ﬁrm’s behavior. A ﬁrm’s reputation for
retaliation is strongly inﬂuenced by its history, particularly its response to
past challengers. The ﬁrm must carefully manage the image it projects to
actual and potential competitors. Some of the most important ways of
increasing a ﬁrm’s perceived threat of retaliation include:6
Signal Commitment To Defend. A ﬁrm increases expected retaliation if it
consistently signals its intention to defend its position:
• Announced intentions by management to defend market share in the
industry.
• Corporate pronouncements of the importance of a business unit to the
ﬁrm.
• Announced intention to build adequate capacity ahead of demand.
Such signaling can and should be carried out consistently via all the
available channels, such as public statements, trade press, distributors, and
buyers, in order to have the greatest defensive impact.
Signal Incipient Barriers. Most tactics that raise effective structural
barriers require the ﬁrm to make a signiﬁcant investment. However, a ﬁrm
may sometimes be able to achieve the same effect through market signaling
or partial investment. Market signaling of planned moves or partial
investment has the purpose of increasing expected retaliation by the ﬁrm in
the future. For example, a ﬁrm might announce or leak information about a
new product generation, a ﬁghting brand or new process technology, raising
the risk perceived by a challenger that the actual move will be forthcoming.
Such market signaling can cause challengers to postpone future
commitments until more information can be gained to learn if the signals


are credible. IBM frequently announces new product generations well in
advance, for example.
Establish Blocking Positions. A ﬁrm can provide a lever for retaliation
by maintaining blocking or defensive positions in other countries or
industries occupied by competitors or potential competitors (see Chapter 9).
Blocking positions in business units where competitors generate a
disproportionate share of their cash ﬂow or proﬁtability become the basis
for particularly effective retaliation.
Their value rests on the principle that price cutting and other retaliatory
tactics may be less costly in industries or countries where a ﬁrm has a small
position than in a ﬁrm’s key industries. Blocking positions may also be a
less risky form of retaliation than direct retaliation, which has a greater
propensity to trigger escalation and to spill over to damage good
competitors.
Match Guarantees. A ﬁrm raises the expectation of retaliation if it
commits itself to match or better prices or other terms offered by
competitors (“We will not be undersold”). A public stance that it will do so
often deters challengers from attempting to gain position through
discounting, particularly if a ﬁrm backs its claim once or twice in a
publicized way. Of course the ﬁrm must be capable of supporting such a
claim in the eyes of challengers.
Raise the Penalty of Exit or Lost Share. Anything that increases the
economic need for a ﬁrm to maintain its market share (raises its shrinkage
barriers) is often a convincing way to demonstrate seriousness about
retaliation:
• Constructing capacity well ahead of demand.
• Entering into long-term supply contracts for ﬁxed quantities of inputs.
• Increasing vertical integration.
• Investing in specialized facilities.
• Publicized contractual relationships that raise the ﬁxed cost of exit.


• Interrelationships with other business units in the ﬁrm that demonstrate
an overall corporate commitment to succeeding in the industry.
Raising the penalty of lost share or exit surely introduces the risk that a
ﬁrm will actually have to pay that penalty. However, this and most other
effective defensive tactics raise cost or risk in order to enhance the
sustainability of position.
Accumulate Retaliatory Resources. The threat of retaliation is increased
if a ﬁrm has the resources in place needed to retaliate effectively. Some
ways of demonstrating the capacity to retaliate include:
• Maintaining excess cash reserves or liquidity (a “war chest”).
• Holding new models or product generations in reserve, though leaking
their existence.
Encourage Good Competitors. Good competitors increase the threat of
retaliation in many industries by serving as a ﬁrst line of defense against
challengers (see Chapter 6). The presence of the right competitors may also
divert attacks in their direction.
Set Examples. A ﬁrm affects its image for retaliation through its behavior
toward competitors that may not be real threats as well as through its
behavior in response to threatening challengers. Defensive value is often
reaped from using moves against nonthreatening challengers to demonstrate
how tough the ﬁrm is in responding to real challengers. A very vigorous
response to one challenger sends a message to others.
Establish Defensive Coalitions. Coalitions with other ﬁrms may increase
the threat of retaliation by affecting many of the factors described above. A
coalition, for example, may provide blocking positions or retaliatory
resources a ﬁrm itself does not have.
Many of the ways to increase the perceived threat of retaliation force the
ﬁrm to increase its level of risk. Indeed, by raising the ﬁrm’s risk the tactics


become signiﬁcant to competitors. Thus a ﬁrm must be prepared to invest if
it wants to improve the sustainability of its position in this way.
RETALIATION DURING ATTACK
So far I have discussed the steps a ﬁrm can take to increase the perceived
threat of retaliation and prevent an attack. The period immediately after a
move has begun is a particularly delicate one for a challenger, however,
during which it is hungry for information on its progress and is sensitive to
early successes or setbacks. Challengers have a tendency to read a great
deal into early results, often using them as a basis for longer-term
projections. Hence, even if a defender’s retaliation is unsustainable for long,
it may serve to shape a challenger’s expectations. As a general rule, quick
and vigorous retaliation is necessary to limit an attack.
A number of additional tactics become possible once an attack has been
mounted, because a ﬁrm then knows the identity of the challenger and
something about its strategy.
Disruption of Test Markets or Introductory Markets. A wide range of
actions can disrupt market introductions and cloud the interpretation of
early results. Procter & Gamble is a tenacious rival in competitor test
markets, for example. Such actions can raise a challenger’s level of
uncertainty about its position or cause it to adopt a more pessimistic view of
future prospects. Typical disruptive tactics include:
• High but erratic levels of advertising, couponing, or sampling.
• Low-cost service, warranties, or trade-ins.
Leapfrogging. If a ﬁrm can introduce a new product or process during a
challenger’s attack, this can be very discouraging to the challenger. This is
particularly true if such a move forces the challenger to make further
investments to stay in the game just after it has expended considerable
resources.
Litigation. Litigation can raise the risks or costs of further investment by
a challenger, thereby delaying its progress. Forms of litigation that can be


used in retaliation are as follows:
•  Patent suits that raise uncertainty about the future of a challenger’s
product or process.
•  Antitrust suits that contest any aggressive tactics used by the
challenger.
• Suits that dispute product performance claims by challengers.
Lowering the Inducement for Attack
A third type of defensive tactic is actions that lower the inducement for
attack instead of raise its cost. Broadly, proﬁt serves as the inducement for a
challenger to attack a ﬁrm. The proﬁts expected by a challenger if it
succeeds are a function of a ﬁrm’s own proﬁt targets as well as the
assumptions held by potential challengers about future market conditions.
Reducing Proﬁt Targets. The proﬁts earned by a ﬁrm are a highly visible
indication of the attractiveness of its position. An essential part of any
defensive strategy, then, is to decide what current price and proﬁt levels are
sustainable. Many ﬁrms have invited attack by being too greedy. A ﬁrm can
deliberately choose to forgo current proﬁts to reduce the inducement for
attack. This may imply lowering prices, raising discounts, and so on.
There must be a balance between structural entry/mobility barriers and
threat of retaliation on the one hand, and a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability on the other.7
If a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability is very high, challengers will attempt to cross even
high barriers or combat strong retaliation. The high historical proﬁtability in
oil ﬁeld services and pharmaceuticals industries, for example, attracted
many ﬁrms to invest heavily in entry despite the presence of high entry
barriers and entrenched competitors. For example, TRW has moved into oil
ﬁeld services while Procter & Gamble has entered pharmaceuticals. Many
entrants attracted by high proﬁtability fail to consider carefully the costs of
entry, and often underestimate them. Similarly, high temporary proﬁts in a
cyclical industry are frequently misread as a long-term opportunity. The
effect of being too greedy is thus to begin an implicit or explicit harvesting
strategy as challengers erode the ﬁrm’s position.


Managing Competitor Assumptions. A challenger’s assumptions about
future industry prospects may lead it to attack a ﬁrm. If challengers believe
that an industry possesses explosive growth potential, for example, they
may attack a ﬁrm despite high barriers. Managing competitor assumptions
was discussed in general terms in Chapter 6. While a ﬁrm cannot credibly
cause potential competitors to dismiss realistic assumptions about the
industry, defensive strategy should attempt to make potential challengers’
assumptions more realistic. Some options include:
• Making realistic internal growth forecasts public.
• Discussing realistic interpretations of industry events in public forums.
•  Sponsoring independent studies that will question unrealistic
assumptions held by competitors.
Defensive strategy can be viewed in a broad sense as inﬂuencing
competitor assumptions, including their assumptions about retaliation and
the height of barriers. Inﬂuencing competitor assumptions about future
industry conditions is an important part of the task.
Evaluating Defensive Tactics
The defensive tactics described above differ greatly in their
characteristics and in their appropriateness for a ﬁrm. A ﬁrm must decide
which tactics will be most effective in its industry in view of the potential
challengers it faces. A number of important tests can be used to assess
defensive tactics:
Value to Buyers. A ﬁrm should select those defensive tactics which are
valuable to buyers (Chapter 4). Many defensive tactics involve investments
in such things as advertising, ﬁghting brands, and price reductions on
certain product varieties. A tactic directed toward buyers will not be
effective for defensive purposes unless the buyer values it. If increased
advertising leads to no increase in buyer awareness or loyalty, for example,
then higher advertising spending will have no defensive value because a
challenger need not match it. If buyers are highly sensitive to credit, on the


other hand, then offering more credit will force a challenger to provide
comparable credit or face a disadvantage.
A defensive tactic that enhances differentiation at the same time as it
increases the sustainability of the ﬁrm’s competitive position partly pays for
itself. The buyer response to a defensive tactic need not pay for its entire
cost, however, but only enough to place a challenger that fails to match the
defensive tactic at a disadvantage. The defensive value of an advertising
increase should not be measured only by whether the ads pay for
themselves in increased sales, for example, but also whether they also force
any challenger to spend at higher levels to attack the ﬁrm’s position.
Cost Asymmetry. A ﬁrm should choose defensive tactics that place
potential challengers at the greatest relative cost disadvantage. The
effectiveness of a defensive tactic is a function of the asymmetry between
the cost of the tactic to the ﬁrm and the cost imposed on the challenger. For
example, an increase in national network TV advertising by a large share
ﬁrm usually imposes proportionally greater spending requirements on a
challenger with smaller share, because national network TV advertising is
subject to economies of scale driven by national market share. Introducing a
new product generation may also raise a challenger’s cost proportionally
more than the ﬁrm’s, since new-product development costs are largely ﬁxed
and the challenger must amortize them over a much smaller initial volume.
Conversely, a price cut may cost a ﬁrm the same or even more than it costs a
challenger. Any fool can cut the price, goes the old maxim, and a ﬁrm often
hurts itself more than the challenger in defending in this way.
Cost asymmetry stems from differences in the ﬁrm’s and challenger’s
position vis-à-vis cost drivers such as scale, learning, location, or
interrelationships. The ﬁrm should select defensive tactics which elevate its
cost position less than they elevate challengers’—frequently these are
differentiating factors where the ﬁrm has a cost advantage in differentiating
(Chapter 4). In some industries boosting advertising will put challengers at
the greatest disadvantage, while in other industries it may be increasing the
size of a sales force. The analysis of cost behavior described in Chapter 3
provides the starting point for identifying such asymmetries.
Cost asymmetry in a defensive tactic is strongly inﬂuenced by whether
the tactic can be targeted at likely avenues of attack or threatening


challengers, or whether it is more generalized. Tactics that must apply
across the board (e.g., a cut in list price) are generally more expensive than
those that can be targeted. For example, the ability to cut price only on
products that are likely initial purchases by new buyers is clearly much less
costly than a price reduction on the entire line. Good defensive strategy
requires that defensive investment be targeted as much as possible towards
the most serious threats.
The cost asymmetry of defensive tactics is also clearly a function of the
speciﬁc challenger involved. For example, an increase in national
advertising is one thing if challengers are start-up ﬁrms, but quite another
thing if the challenger is a large and successful consumer goods ﬁrm. Cost
asymmetry in defensive tactics, then, is relative and not absolute.
Sustainability of Effect. A ﬁrm should select defensive tactics that have a
lasting effect. The cost effectiveness of any defensive tactic is a function of
the need to reinvest to maintain its defensive value. An increase in
advertising has some effect beyond the current period, for example, but a
ﬁrm must continually reinvest in advertising in order to maintain the barrier.
An investment in a new production process, however, may not decay as a
barrier as rapidly. Similarly, investing in foreclosing access to suppliers may
yield a long-lasting barrier requiring little reinvestment. If a ﬁrm is unable
to create lasting barriers or a credible long-term threat of retaliation, then
little or no defensive investment in them is justiﬁed. A ﬁrm should invest
instead in lowering the inducement to enter or it should harvest its position.
Clarity of the Message. A ﬁrm should select defensive tactics it is
conﬁdent that potential challengers will detect as well as understand their
implications. Competitors often differ in their understanding of industry
economics and in their ability to perceive signals. Signals can be missed
and the signiﬁcance of some tactics misunderstood. Generally, tactics
involving price, credit, advertising, sales force, and new products are
particularly visible, while those involving indirect signals (e.g., announced
capacity expansion), process changes, or raising exit and shrinkage barriers
are often less visible.
The likelihood of a defensive tactic’s being noticed and understood is a
function not only of the tactic but also of the likely challengers.


Competitors without a good cost system may not understand the impact of a
defensive tactic on their cost positions. In addition, challengers’
assumptions about the industry and about the ﬁrm will inﬂuence their
interpretation of the ﬁrm’s behavior.
Credibility. A ﬁrm should select defensive tactics that will be credible.
Defensive tactics differ greatly in the degree to which a challenger will take
them seriously. A defensive tactic that raises barriers will not be credible
unless challengers view it as a permanent or long-lasting feature of
competition. The credibility of a threat of retaliation rests on having
resources to carry it out and a communicated resolve to do so.
Impact on Competitors’ Goals. A ﬁrm should pick defensive tactics that
have a measurable impact on the particular goals of its potential
challengers. Since challengers’ goals may vary, not all tactics may be
equally effective. Defensive tactics that are effective against a competitor
with a similar ownership structure to the ﬁrm, for example, may not be at all
effective against a state-owned competitor. Similarly, challengers will differ
in their sensitivity to start-up losses and shortterm proﬁts. Managers
sometimes complain that they are attacked even though it is not “rational”
to do so. Seemingly irrational attacks are often the result of a challenger
having different goals. Defensive tactics should reﬂect challengers’ goals,
and not the ﬁrm’s.
Other Structural Effects. A ﬁrm should select defensive tactics that have
a positive or neutral inﬂuence on other elements of industry structure, and
avoid those tactics that permanently erode industry structure. A new product
generation that raises switching costs and encourages substitution, for
example, is a better defensive tactic than a price cut that has the effect of
increasing long-term buyer price sensitivity. Tactics that increase the
perceived threat of retaliation sometimes have the undesirable side effect of
creating rivalry pressures in an industry. Raising exit barriers, for example,
can increase the risk of warfare among incumbents if they choose to follow.
Leaders are particularly likely to inﬂuence industry structure through their
defensive moves.


Defensive tactics may also hurt good competitors. Increases in
advertising spending or price cuts can worsen the relative position of good
competitors and compromise their ability to play the beneﬁcial roles
described in Chapter 6. Good competitors must perceive that defensive
moves are not directed at them but at other challengers. Defensive strategy
must not be set in a vacuum, then, but recognize its other structural effects.
Matching by Other Incumbents. Defensive tactics will usually have their
greatest impact in defending against new entrants if they are imitated by
other incumbents. Matching by other incumbents implies that a potential
entrant cannot avoid the barriers created in defensive investments by
attacking others in the industry. Smaller competitors may underinvest in
defense and accept a free ride from the leaders, however. Efforts to prod
other incumbents into matching a defensive move may well have a strategic
advantage in industries where new entrants pose a greater threat than attacks
by incumbents.
Defensive Strategy
Combined with an offensive strategy to increase a ﬁrm’s competitive
advantage, an explicit defensive strategy can raise the sustainability of
whatever competitive advantages a ﬁrm possesses. The ideal of defensive
strategy is usually deterrence—preventing a challenger from initiating a
move in the ﬁrst place or deﬂecting it to become less threatening. The other
type of defensive strategy, response, is one in which the ﬁrm reacts to
challenges as they occur. Response seeks to lower the challenger’s
objectives for a move once begun, or lead the challenger to rescind it
altogether. In both deterrence and response, the principle is to alter a
challenger’s assessment of the attractiveness of a move.
Deterrence
The cost of deterrence is often less than the cost of ﬁghting battles once a
challenge has begun. A ﬁrm cannot deter challengers, however, unless it
understands the nature of the threat. A maxim of defense in military


strategy is that it is extremely costly to defend an entire perimeter against
attack from any direction where the challenger may employ any weapon.
The same principle applies in competitive strategy. A ﬁrm must determine
which competitors and potential competitors are most dangerous, and the
ways in which they might choose to behave. Only then can the appropriate
defensive tactics be marshaled. Scenarios (Chapter 13) can be a useful
device for examining the possibilities.
The important steps in deterrence can be summarized as follows:
1. Thoroughly understand existing barriers. A ﬁrm must have a clear
understanding of what entry and mobility barriers it currently possesses,
their speciﬁc sources, and how they might change. Is the ﬁrm protected by
economies of scale? Where do these stem from in the value chain? Is access
to channels difﬁcult? What underlies this difﬁculty? What are the value
activities that lead to differentiation? How sustainable are the sources of the
ﬁrm’s cost position and differentiation (Chapters 3 and 4)?
The height of existing barriers shapes the extent of the threat to a ﬁrm’s
position. If barriers are falling, for example, they must be rebuilt or replaced
if the ﬁrm is to preserve proﬁtability. The speciﬁc barriers present will also
determine the types of strategies that challengers will employ, and the areas
in which defensive tactics might prove most effective. A ﬁrm protected by
high barriers to channel access, for example, is more likely to face
competitors’ attempts to create new channels than invasions of the existing
ones. Conversely, a ﬁrm without scale or other sustainable cost barriers may
be vulnerable to small, low-overhead competitors that are satisﬁed with
what for the ﬁrm would be a poor return on investment. Challengers will
usually try to ﬁnd ways to sidestep existing barriers or somehow nullify
them (see Chapter 15).
A ﬁrm must have precise knowledge of the speciﬁc sources of each
barrier if it is to exploit them effectively. In residential rooﬁng products, for
example, a ﬁrm must recognize that economies of scale are driven primarily
by regional scale due to high transport costs, the economics of production
and sales force utilization, and regional differences in product mix. If a
rooﬁng products ﬁrm is satisﬁed in attributing its barriers only to scale but
does not understand the speciﬁc sources of its scale barriers, it may mount
the wrong defensive strategy.


2.  Anticipate the likely challengers. A ﬁrm must anticipate the most
likely challengers, whether they be potential entrants or competitors
attempting to reposition themselves. Knowing who the likely challengers
are is essential to focus and target defensive investments. The height of
barriers and the impact of retaliation are also relative to who the likely
challengers are, and not absolute. In motor oil, for example, the likely
potential entrants facing Castrol, Quaker State, and other competitors are
the oil majors. Given the resources of the majors, barriers such as capital
and scale become less important than they would be if likely entrants were
independents.
There are three questions to answer in anticipating likely challengers:
Which existing competitors are not satisﬁed? The most likely challengers
will be existing competitors that are not satisﬁed with their current position.
Competitors that consistently fail to meet their goals will be prone to
attempt to reposition themselves. An assessment of competitors’
assumptions, strategies, and capabilities should illuminate whether they are
likely to reposition themselves in a way that threatens the ﬁrm. Good
competitors (Chapter 6) pose a less serious threat of repositioning than bad
competitors. Often the acquisition of a competitor by another ﬁrm will alter
the competitor’s goals, and may create a would-be challenger. In beer, for
example, Miller’s acquisition by Philip Morris was a precursor of an
aggressive challenge of Anheuser-Busch.
Who are the most likely potential entrants? Determining the existing
competitors that are most likely to reposition themselves is not easy, but
anticipating likely potential entrants is often even more difﬁcult. A way to
identify potential entrants is to isolate those ﬁrms for which entry into the
industry would represent a logical extension of their existing activities. The
most common potential entrants tend to fall into the following categories:
• Regional competitors in other regions.
• Foreign ﬁrms not now operating in a country.
•  Firms for which the industry would be backward or forward
integration.


•  Firms that can achieve tangible interrelationships, intangible
interrelationships, or create blocking positions by entering the industry
(see Chapter 9).
Regional ﬁrms often enter other regions or go national. This has been a
popular strategy recently in the food industry. A number of major food
companies such as Consolidated Foods and H. J. Heinz have acquired
regional companies in order to take them national. Foreign entry into a
country is also common as industries globalize—a contemporary example is
the attack on Upjohn in the U.S. antiarthritic drug market by Boots
Company, headquartered in Britain.
There are many forms of tangible interrelationships among businesses
that represent a path for diversiﬁcation into an industry, described in
Chapter 9. The potential interrelationships leading to an industry should be
traced to identify logical entrants. For example, entry into copiers was a
logical extension of Kodak’s chemical and optical expertise, and of
Matsushita’s ofﬁce automation strategy.
The major challenge in identifying potential entrants is to avoid being
trapped by conventional wisdom. Many companies overlook serious
potential competitors such as foreign ﬁrms or related diversiﬁers by
focusing too closely on traditional sources of new competitors such as
regional ﬁrms or spinoffs. The list of most likely potential entrants may also
shift as an industry evolves.8
Are there substitute competitors? In some industries, substitutes may be
the most dangerous competitors, and thus should be the appropriate focal
point for defensive strategy. Chapter 8 describes how to identify substitutes,
and how threatening substitutes can be deterred.
3.  Forecast likely avenues of attack. The third step in formulating a
strategy for deterrence is forecasting the likely avenues of attack. A ﬁrm
must determine the best ways in which its position might be attacked so that
it can focus its defensive investments on the most vulnerable areas. Every
management team should ask itself the question, “Given what I know, how
would I attack this ﬁrm if I were a competitor?”


The likely avenues of attack will be a function of the barriers to entry or
mobility that are present, and how they might be changing. In the mustard
industry, for example, Grey Poupon has increased advertising spending
dramatically and attacked French’s with a differentiation strategy. This was
much more logical than a head-on price battle given French’s scale-related
advantages. The same sort of logic would suggest that SCM’s portable
typewriters were vulnerable to private labeling by Brother combined with
new electronics technology, given SCM’s channel and brand loyalty. U.S.
farm equipment ﬁrms were more vulnerable in small tractors than in large
tractors, where their U.S. base gave them volume advantages over Japanese
ﬁrms.
The likely avenue of attack will also reﬂect the assumptions, strategies,
and capabilities of likely challengers. Miller Beer stressed heavy advertising
and market segmentation in the beer industry. This was not surprising given
the intangible interrelationships present involving its parent, Philip Morris.
Texas Instruments’ ill-fated price cutting in personal computers was
similarly predictable, given its traditional posture in semiconductors.
Acquisition of second-tier competitors is a common way for potential
entrants to challenge a ﬁrm, and this possibility must always be considered.
In the truck business, for example, Daimler Benz acquired Freightliner
(number six in the industry), Volvo acquired the truck operations of White
Motor (number seven), and Renault formed a coalition with Mack.
4.  Choose defensive tactics to block the likely avenues of attack.
Effective deterrence requires that a ﬁrm block the challenger’s likely
avenues of attack. This requires choosing defensive tactics that raise
structural barriers or increase expected retaliation that will be most cost-
effective from those described. The appropriate mix of defensive tactics will
vary from ﬁrm to ﬁrm, and must meet the tests outlined above. If a ﬁrm is
most vulnerable to private labeling, for example, it may have to invest in a
special private label model and signal its willingness to price-compete. In
addition, the defensive tactics chosen must be targeted against the most
likely challengers. It is particularly important that defensive tactics reﬂect
the actual goals of likely challengers and that they be noticed.


5. Manage the ﬁrm’s image as a tough defender. In addition to investing
in defense, a ﬁrm must clearly communicate its intentions to defend. A ﬁrm
is continuously sending signals about its commitment to defend and must
carefully manage the image it projects. Every public statement and every
action in the marketplace must be weighed to determine the signals that will
be sent. Ideally, a ﬁrm can achieve the image that Procter & Gamble (P&G)
has. A poll of almost any group of managers, in and out of consumer goods,
will show overwhelmingly that P&G is viewed as totally committed to
defending share in its business. The fact that P&G has this image is not an
accident, but the result of statements and actions over a long period of time.
6. Set realistic proﬁt expectations. No defensive strategy can be effective
unless a ﬁrm has realistic proﬁt expectations. A ﬁrm’s proﬁt expectations
must reﬂect the barriers it possesses and those that can be created through
defensive investments. Often reducing proﬁtability today will allow the ﬁrm
to earn superior proﬁts in the future.
Response
If deterrence fails, a ﬁrm must decide how to react to a challenger once
an attack is under way. Deterrence cannot and should not try to reduce the
chance of attack to zero. Doing so is usually too expensive and every
possible challenge can rarely be anticipated. Hence responding to attacks
effectively and in a timely way is an important part of defensive strategy.
Effective response is based on shifting a challenger’s expectations. The
whole arsenal of defensive tactics I have described can be employed to
accomplish this, matched to the goals, assumptions, and capabilities of the
particular challenger. For example, General Foods’ Maxwell House has
mounted a tough and effective defense against P&G, and no doubt caused
P&G to reconsider its targets in the coffee industry. Aggressive pricing,
advertising, and ﬁghting brands have been employed to hold position and
demonstrate General Foods’ commitment. The vigor of the defense has
meant that P&G is believed to be earning little return on its investment in
the coffee business.
A number of important principles should guide response:


Respond in Some Way as Early as Possible. A ﬁrm must respond in some
way to an attack as early as possible, because a challenger’s exit barriers
and commitment will grow as it meets its early targets and makes
incremental investments. While a ﬁrm is often not in a position right away
to completely counter an attack, making some immediate response is still
important to holding the challenger’s expectations in check. Even an
inadequate holding action, such as increased advertising, may be necessary
to keep a competitor from meeting its initial targets and thereby gaining the
conﬁdence necessary to increase its capital investment and raise its goals.
Invest in Early Discovery of Actual Moves. Given the advantages of
responding early in the entry or repositioning process, the ﬁrm can gain
substantial advantages in detecting actual moves of challengers very early.
This can be facilitated through activities such as:
• Regular contact with raw material suppliers, equipment suppliers, and
engineering ﬁrms to learn of orders or interest.
• Close contact with advertising media to detect purchases of advertising
space.
• Monitoring of attendance at trade shows.
• Regular contact with the most adventurous buyers in the industry, who
might be approached ﬁrst by a new competitor or most prone to be
seeking alternative sources.
• Monitoring of technical conferences, schools, and other places when
technical people might be recruited.
Base the Response on the Reasons for the Attack. A ﬁrm must attempt to
understand why a challenger is attacking, what its goals are, and what long-
term strategy it has adopted. An attack based on desperation should be
responded to differently than one emanating from parent company pressure
on a business unit for growth. A challenger’s goals and timetable must also
be assessed, because good response requires that they be disrupted and
ultimately modiﬁed. A good response also recognizes how one move by a
challenger might ﬁt into a longer term strategy.


Deﬂect Challengers in Addition to Trying to Stop Them. Part of the
purpose of response is to make a move less threatening even if it cannot be
stopped. It is often easier to get a challenger to focus or redirect its strategy
than to withdraw it. A ﬁrm must identify ways in which a challenger’s goals
could be partially or completely met in less threatening ways and respond
accordingly.
Take Every Challenger Seriously Enough. There is no such thing as a
challenge that can be ignored. Every challenger must be analyzed for its
motivations and capabilities. Even weak challengers have the potential of
disrupting industry structure or damaging good competitors. Moreover, the
response to less threatening competitors sends signals to more threatening
ones. At the same time, however, a ﬁrm must avoid the tendency to
overreact to a challenger. Response is costly, and must be directed at real
and not imagined threats.
View Response as a Way to Gain Position. Response can often be used to
gain position rather than just to stop a competitor. A battle between strong
competitors often hurts weaker competitors more than the strong
competitors hurt each other, as has been the case in soft drinks and beer.
Moreover, an attack by a competitor in one segment may open that
competitor to vulnerabilities in another segment that can be exploited.
Response to Price Cutting
Price cutting is among the most difﬁcult forms of attack to counter, due
to its rapid effect on proﬁtability and the risk of an irreversible downward
price spiral. Thus a ﬁrm must be particularly careful in how it responds to
price cutting. Some additional issues may be useful to consider in
responding to a price cut in addition to those discussed above:
Reasons for Competitor Price Cutting. A competitor may be price-
cutting out of necessity to raise cash in the short term, or as part of a long-
term campaign to increase share. It might also be price-cutting because it
does not understand its costs and thinks it is pricing to achieve a fair return.
Worse yet, the competitor may be price-cutting because it enjoys


signiﬁcantly lower costs. The correct response to price cutting will be very
different depending on the reason underlying it. Therefore, the reason must
be diagnosed as rapidly and accurately as possible.
Willingness To Do Battle. Price cutting by a competitor often rests on the
assumption that a ﬁrm will not react aggressively, but will maintain a price
umbrella in the hope of preserving proﬁts. Early and vigorous response is
thus often necessary if price cutting is to be contained. The response need
not always be a corresponding price cut, but it must be something besides
hoping the price cutter will go away. A ﬁrm must convince a price cutter
that mixed motives will not paralyze it.
Localized Response. Often the response to price cutting can and should
be localized to particularly vulnerable buyers, or to product varieties where
differentiation is lowest, and not involve across-the-board actions.
Localizing the response reduces its cost.
Cross Parry. Price cutting may be contained or eliminated if the ﬁrm
immediately attacks (with price and other moves) the price cutter’s key
buyers or product lines. Similarly, price cutting can sometimes be stopped if
blocking positions in other industries are employed to respond. The
principle is to demonstrate that the price cutter has more to lose from
initiating a price war than it is likely to gain.
Cut Price in Other Ways. Sometimes prices can be effectively reduced to
respond to a price cutter through providing free service, discounting
ancillary equipment, or other means that are easier to reverse than a price
cut itself. Also, indirect price cuts may be more susceptible to localization,
and less easy for competitors to match. Failing indirect price cuts, rebates or
other special discounts may be less difﬁcult to reverse later than reductions
in list prices.
Create or Employ “Special” Products. Price cutting can sometimes be
met more effectively with ﬁghting brands or stripped-down products (e.g.
no free service), than by lowering the price of the primary product line. The


buyer can be offered a low price on special products, but reminded that they
are inferior to the ﬁrm’s normal offering.
Defense or Disinvest
In many industries, defensive investments yield a high return. However, a
ﬁrm should optimize rather than maximize its investment in defense. In
some industries, defensive investment is not appropriate at all, or is only
appropriate as a temporary delaying action. This is true where a ﬁrm’s
position is not ultimately sustainable. In such industries, the best defensive
strategy is to “take the money and run.” This means that the ﬁrm generates
as much cash as possible, knowing that entry or repositioning will
ultimately erode its position. Part of such a strategy may sometimes be to
encourage the entry of competitors to boost the growth rate of the market
while harvesting takes place.
The conditions that suggest that disinvestment is preferable to investing
in defense are as follows:
• low barriers, or falling barriers as the industry evolves
• little opportunity to create barriers
• potential entrants and existing competitors with superior resources
•  competitors with low return-on-investment targets or other
characteristics of a bad competitor
Pitfalls in Defense
There are many pitfalls in defending position. Even strongly positioned
leaders are regularly attacked successfully because they make errors in
defensive strategy. The single biggest pitfall in defense is a narrow concern
with short-term proﬁtability, which conﬂicts with the reality that defense
requires investment. Internal decision-making processes in many ﬁrms are
biased against defensive investments. They reward short-term proﬁtability,
and fail to reward the reduction of risk that defensive strategy seeks. The
beneﬁts of a successful defensive strategy are often hard to measure, since a
successful defense means that nothing happens.


The second largest pitfall in defensive strategy is complacency. Firms
often do not examine their environment for potential challengers, or
seriously consider the possibility that challenge will occur. As a result, it is
striking how often ﬁrms fail to make simple and inexpensive defensive
moves. Moreover, ﬁrms often actually invite competitors into their industry
by earning unsustainable margins or by ignoring buyer needs. A number of
the other pitfalls in defensive strategy will become apparent when I discuss
the principles of gaining competitive position in the next chapter.


15
Attacking an Industry Leader
When is a leader vulnerable? The market share and proﬁtability of leaders
can be inviting to a ﬁrm contemplating entry or repositioning in an industry.
Yet industry leaders usually enjoy some advantages in defending
themselves, such as reputation, economies of scale, cumulative learning,
and preferred access to suppliers or channels. Moreover, most leaders are
committed to their industry and possess the resources for protracted and
damaging retaliation against challengers. A ﬁrm thus confronts a
formidable and risky task in seeking to gain market position against a
leader.
However, leaders are often vulnerable. NIKE deposed ADIDAS in
athletic shoes. Stouffer’s overcame Banquet and Swanson in frozen dinners.
While successful strategies differ widely from industry to industry, a
common thread runs through them. They all seek to nullify the competitive
advantages of the leader, while avoiding full-scale retaliation. Though
industry structural change sometimes is what makes a leader vulnerable, a
follower or potential entrant that can understand the existing structure better
may be able to overtake a leader as well.
This chapter draws on the entire book to present a framework for
identifying vulnerable industry leaders, and for developing strategies to
attack leaders successfully. I take the point of view of a challenger—a
follower in the leader’s industry or a ﬁrm contemplating entry. The chapter
identiﬁes the stringent conditions that must be satisﬁed in order for a
challenger to attack a leader successfully. Next, I describe the types of
strategies that challengers can employ against leaders, ranging from those
