# Chapter 15: Attacking an Industry Leader

that attempt to shift the basis of competition to those that exploit a leader’s
inﬂexibility. I also describe the characteristics of industries and leaders that
signal a leader’s vulnerability. The chapter concludes with a discussion of
some common pitfalls in attacking leaders.
While every chapter in this book has provided suggestions for offensive
strategy, the difﬁcult task of attacking a leader successfully is a way of
drawing them together. Though the chapter is framed in terms of attacking
leaders, the same principles apply in choosing an offensive strategy against
any competitor. Moreover, industry leaders can employ these same concepts
to understand their own vulnerabilities and to develop defensive strategies
more effectively.
Conditions for Attacking a Leader
The cardinal rule in offensive strategy is not to attack head-on with an
imitative strategy, regardless of the challenger’s resources or staying power.
The built-in advantages inherent in a leader’s position will usually
overcome such a challenge and the leader will in all likelihood retaliate
vigorously. The ensuing battle will almost inevitably exhaust the
challenger’s resources before those of the leader.
Procter & Gamble (P&G) has violated this rule in the coffee industry in
challenging General Foods’ Maxwell House brand. In coffee, unlike many
of its other products, P&G’s Folger’s has little or no product superiority
over Maxwell House. P&G also produces and markets Folger’s using the
same value chain as General Foods. Maxwell House has retaliated
vigorously with a broad array of defensive tactics, beneﬁtting from its large
market share and favorable cost position. Folger’s has gained some share,
primarily at the expense of smaller competitors, but has yet to achieve
acceptable proﬁtability. Maxwell House, conversely, has maintained its
proﬁtability and continues to resist Folger’s attempt to gain share
successfully.
Coca-Cola’s sale of its wine operations, called the Wine Spectrum, to
Seagrams is still another manifestation of violating the rules for attacking
leaders. While Coke gained market share against second-tier competitors in
the wine industry, it faced a substantial cost disadvantage to Gallo (see


Chapter 3) and had no innovative approach in product or marketing to
counteract it, only heavy spending. Gallo’s strong resistance to Coke meant
that Coke never earned acceptable proﬁts in wine. IBM has faced similar
difﬁculties in copiers. It has achieved little differentiation or cost advantage
and faces stiff resistance from Xerox and Kodak in medium-and high-
volume copiers.
Successfully attacking a leader requires that a challenger meet three
basic conditions:
1.  A sustainable competitive advantage. A challenger must possess a
clear and sustainable competitive advantage over the leader, in either cost or
differentiation. If the advantage is low cost, the ﬁrm can cut price to gain
position against a leader, or earn higher margins at industry average prices
to allow reinvestment in marketing or technology development. Both will
allow a challenger to gain share. Alternatively, if the ﬁrm achieves
differentiation, it will allow premium prices and/or minimize the cost of
marketing or gaining trial against the leader. Either source of competitive
advantage the challenger possesses must be sustainable, using the criteria
for sustainability in Chapters 3 and 4. Sustainability ensures that the
challenger will have a sufﬁciently long period to close the market share gap
before the leader can imitate.
2. Proximity in other activities. A challenger must have some way of
partly or wholly neutralizing the leader’s other inherent advantages. If the
challenger employs a differentiation strategy, it must also partially offset the
leader’s natural cost advantage due to scale, ﬁrst mover advantages, or other
causes. Unless a challenger maintains cost proximity, the leader will use its
cost advantage to neutralize (or leapfrog) the challenger’s differentiation.
Similarly, if the challenger bases its attack on a cost advantage, it must
create an acceptable amount of value for the buyer. Otherwise, the leader
will be able to sustain a price premium over the challenger, yielding the
leader the gross margin needed to retaliate vigorously.
3. Some impediment to leader retaliation. A challenger must also possess
some means for blunting the leader’s retaliation. The leader must be
disinclined or constrained from protracted retaliation against the challenger,


either because of the leader’s own circumstances or because of the strategy
chosen by the challenger. Without some impediment to retaliation, an attack
will trigger a response by the leader that can overwhelm a challenger
despite its competitive advantage. A committed leader with resources and
an entrenched position can, through aggressive retaliation, force a
challenger to bear unacceptable economic and organizational costs.
The three conditions for successfully attacking a leader ﬂow directly
from the principles of competitive advantage described in Chapter 1. The
odds of success in gaining position increase with the challenger’s ability to
meet each condition. P&G’s Folger’s coffee, Coca Cola’s Wine Spectrum,
and IBM copiers did not decisively meet any of the conditions, and this
explains their disappointing experiences.
The difﬁculty of meeting the three conditions hinges largely on a leader’s
strategy and its aggressiveness. If a leader is “stuck in the middle” with no
competitive advantage, a challenger can often achieve a competitive
advantage in either cost or differentiation quite easily. In these instances, a
challenger need only recognize the leader’s vulnerability and implement a
strategy that exploits it. On the other hand, attacking a leader that is
aggressively pursuing a cost leadership or differentiation strategy will
usually require that a challenger conceive of a major strategic innovation,
such as developing a new value chain, if it is to mount a successful
challenge.
An example of an industry in which challengers met all three conditions
was corn wet milling. Cargill and Archer-Daniels-Midland (ADM)
successfully entered against CPC International, A. E. Staley, and Standard
Brands, the traditional industry leaders. Cargill and ADM entered the
industry with new continuous process plants that embodied recent changes
in process technology. They also restricted themselves to a narrow product
line, consisting only of higher-volume items, and reduced overhead through
streamlined sales forces. These choices allowed Cargill and ADM to gain a
signiﬁcant cost advantage over traditional producers. At the same time,
Cargill and ADM achieved parity or proximity in differentiation, despite the
efforts at differentiation by the industry leaders. The product itself is a
commodity and many buyers did not value extensive service. In addition,
several factors impeded retaliation by the traditional industry leaders. They


preferred not to retaliate against the challengers for fear of upsetting the
industry equilibrium, where rivalry in the industry had traditionally been
characterized as a gentlemen’s club. At the same time, CPC (the number
one ﬁrm) and Standard Brands had embarked on diversiﬁcation programs,
diverting attention and resources from corn milling.
While the corn milling example illustrates a situation where challengers
met all three conditions, meeting one condition very well can offset a
challenger’s inability to meet another. The successful entry of “no frills”
airlines such as People Express and Southwest provides a case where
challengers met two conditions strongly enough to offset barely meeting the
third. Chapter 3 has described how the no-frills carriers achieved a
signiﬁcant cost advantage over the trunks by employing a different value
chain. At the same time, many passengers perceived the no-frills carriers’
product as similar to that offered by trunks, since differentiation in airline
transportation is difﬁcult. However, the no-frills carriers faced a major
threat of retaliation by the trunks as the trunks sought to defend their market
share. Though the trunks hesitated to retaliate because of the high cost of
cutting prices and the fear of eroding their quality images, the threat posed
by the no-frills carriers was so great that retaliation eventually occurred.
Though the no-frills carriers enjoyed only a relatively short period free of
retaliation, their signiﬁcant cost advantage greatly increased the cost of
retaliation for the trunks. Many trunks never attempted to match the prices
of the no-frills carriers.
Federal Express’s successful entry against Emery Air Freight provides
another illustration of a challenger using a strong advantage in one area to
offset a leader’s lingering strengths. Federal Express’s unique delivery
system, utilizing its own planes and a Memphis hub, quickly gave it
differentiation in overnight delivery of small packages. It achieved higher
reliability as well as other forms of differentiation, described in Chapter 4.
While Federal Express would ultimately achieve cost parity or even a cost
advantage, however, the greater scale sensitivity of its value chain meant
that its initial cost position was high relative to Emery’s. This cost
disadvantage and Federal’s heavy debt load made it initially very vulnerable
to retaliation. Emery, however, did not take Federal Express seriously. It
chose not to retaliate until Federal Express had gained enough share to
establish cost proximity. As the Federal Express example illustrates, slow


retaliation by the leader buys a challenger time (and resources) to overcome
disadvantages in cost or differentiation. The principle of responding
quickly, described in Chapter 14, proves once again important in
determining a leader’s ability to defend position.
Avenues for Attacking Leaders
Successfully attacking a leader always requires some kind of strategic
insight. A challenger must usually ﬁnd a different strategy in order to
neutralize the leader’s natural advantages, and recognize or create
impediments to leader retaliation. While the strategies that have succeeded
against leaders differ widely from industry to industry, three avenues of
attack emerge as possible:
•  Reconﬁguration. A challenger innovates in the way it performs
activities in the value chain or in the conﬁguration of the entire chain.
• Redeﬁnition. A challenger redeﬁnes its competitive scope compared to
the leader.
•  Pure spending. A challenger buys market position through superior
resources or greater willingness to invest, out of which competitive
advantage grows.
Each of the three avenues changes the rules of competition in an industry
to offset a leader’s advantages and allow the challenger to gain a cost or
differentiation advantage of its own. The three avenues are not mutually
exclusive and have been successfully pursued in tandem. Redeﬁnition of
scope usually requires parallel reconﬁguration of the value chain, for
example. Employing more than one of these avenues of attack generally
raises the odds of success in attacking a leader. The three avenues are
displayed in Figure 15–1.
The avenues of attacking a leader differ along two important dimensions
that are represented in Figure 15–1: the conﬁguration of the challenger’s
value chain compared to the leader and the competitive scope of the
challenger compared to the leader’s. A challenger can employ the same
value chain or one in which it has reconﬁgured individual activities or the


entire chain. At the same time, a challenger may compete with the same
scope of activities as the leader or for a wider or narrower scope. As
described in Chapter 2, scope encompasses segment scope within the
industry, degree of integration, geographic scope and industry scope, or the
range of industries in which the ﬁrm competes with a coordinated strategy.
Figure 15–1. Avenues for Attacking Leaders
Pure reconﬁguration involves reconﬁgured activities or ultimately a
signiﬁcantly different value chain, though with the same scope as the leader.
Pure redeﬁnition involves a different scope but the same basic value chain
for competing. Reconﬁguration and redeﬁnition combines both a new chain
and a different scope. Pure spending neither reconﬁgures the value chain
nor redeﬁnes scope, but relies on greater investment by the challenger to
lead to competitive advantage.
Reconﬁguration
Reconﬁguration allows a challenger to compete differently though it is
competing with the same scope of activities as the leader. The challenger
performs individual value activities differently or reconﬁgures the entire
chain to either lower cost or enhance differentiation. Reconﬁguration of the
value chain must be sustainable against imitation if it is to serve as the basis


for attacking leaders. Sustainability comes from ﬁrst-mover advantages and
the other sources described in Chapters 3 and 4.1
The ways in which reconﬁguration leads to competitive advantage have
been discussed throughout this book, and can involve any activity in the
value chain. Chapters 3 and 4 described in detail how reconﬁguring the
value chain can lead to cost advantage or differentiation. In wine, for
example, Chapter 3 described how Gallo was able to achieve a signiﬁcant
cost advantage through reconﬁguring value activities in procurement,
blending, bottling, logistics and marketing compared to competitors. In
frozen entrees, similarly, Chapter 4 described how Stouffer’s reconﬁgured
marketing, technology developments, procurements, and broker relations to
achieve and sustain differentiation.
The more value activities that can be reconﬁgured, the greater the
possibility will usually be that the challenger’s competitive advantage over
the leader is sustainable. Reconﬁguring the entire chain, as in the no-frills
airline and Iowa Beef examples described earlier in the book, is usually the
most potent source of advantage against leaders who are often highly
committed to the traditional industry value chain.
Some illustrative examples of reconﬁgurations that have been the basis
of successful attacks on leaders are the following:
Product Changes. A challenger can attack a leader through changing the
product.
SUPERIOR PRODUCT PERFORMANCE OR FEATURES. Products with attributes
that are valuable to buyers grow out of an understanding of the buyer’s
value chain (Chapter 4). P&G’s Charmin bathroom tissue was softer and
more absorbent than Scott Paper’s product, which allowed P&G to emerge
as a leader. Similarly, CooperVision’s and Barnes-Hind/Hydrocurve’s (a
Revlon division) extended-wear soft contact lenses provided the vehicle for
attacking Bausch and Lomb.
LOW-COST PRODUCT DESIGN. Chapter 3 describes how product design can
affect relative cost position. Canon’s NP200 copier, using toner projection
development technology, required many fewer parts than competitors’


machines. This low-cost design allowed Canon to improve position
signiﬁcantly in small plain paper copiers.
Outbound Logistics and Service Changes. A challenger can attack a
leader through changing such things as product support, after-sale service,
order processing, or physical distribution.
MORE 
EFFICIENT 
LOGISTICAL 
SYSTEM. Chapter 3 described how
opportunities to improve relative cost position in the logistical system can
be analyzed. Relative cost position can sometimes be signiﬁcantly reduced
by reconﬁguring its value activities as Federal Express did.
MORE RESPONSIVE AFTER-SALE SUPPORT. Chapter 4 showed how to assess
the parameters of service that are most valuable to buyers. A challenger can
create differentiation if it reconﬁgures the value chain to make it more
responsive in terms of response to buyer inquiries, documentation, etc.
Vetco, for example, a division of Combustion Engineering that sells
offshore oil drilling equipment, has gained position signiﬁcantly through
providing excellent training materials and other after-sale support to help its
buyers master the complex underwater drilling task.
ENHANCED ORDER PROCESSING. Chapter 4 described how possible
enhancements to the delivery system can be identiﬁed and evaluated, and
create differentiation. Enhancements include such things as performing new
functions like controlling buyer inventory—this, in effect, takes over
activities in the buyer’s value chain. Several wholesaling ﬁrms, for example,
have created differentiation by allowing online ordering to take over
inventory management for their retail customers. McKesson, for example,
has substantially improved its position through its 3PM order processing
system for distributing pharmaceuticals. The system allows pharmacists to
order directly and provides them other valuable information.
Marketing Changes. Challengers have employed innovations in
marketing value activities to launch successful attacks against leaders in
many industries. Some of the most common innovations include:


INCREASED SPENDING IN AN UNDERMARKETED INDUSTRY. Challengers can
attack a leader by escalating marketing spending. In mustard, frozen
entrees, and frozen potatoes, for example, Grey Poupon, Stouffer’s, and
Ore-Ida respectively have succeeded or are now undertaking to raise the
traditional rates of advertising spending. Higher spending levels allow ﬁrms
to signal value better, gaining high levels of brand recognition and premium
prices.
NEW POSITIONING. A challenger can conceive of a new way to position a
product in order to attack a leader. Stouffer’s repositioning of frozen entrees
as a gourmet item was one of the key elements of its ascendancy, as
discussed in Chapter 4.
NEW TYPE OF SALES ORGANIZATION. A new type of sales organization,
perhaps with a different type of salesperson, can sometimes be the basis of a
successful attack on a leader. Crown Cork and Seal’s technically proﬁcient
sales force, reorganized to sell the complete line of Crown’s cans, bottle
caps, and packaging machinery to canners, was one of the reasons for
Crown’s success against American Can and Continental Can.
Operations Changes. Changes in operation’s value activities that lower
costs or enhance differentiation have provided the basis for many successful
attacks on leaders. As was discussed in Chapter 3, Iowa Beef pioneered an
entirely new value chain in meat packing. Cargill and ADM employed new
continuous process plants to enter corn wet milling. A modiﬁed production
process that enhanced quality also contributed to Ore-Ida’s success in
frozen potatoes. Sometimes entirely new technologies emerge that change
the process, or a subtechnology changes that allows an old process
technology to be reinvigorated (Chapter 5).
Downstream Reconﬁguration. Employing channels neglected by the
leader or preemptively concentrating on emerging channels have served as
avenues of attack against industry leaders. Some examples of downstream
innovations include:


PIONEER A NEW CHANNEL. Timex opened up the drug store and mass
merchandisers as channels for watches in the 1950s, allowing it to gain a
leadership position in the industry despite the entrenched position of Bulova
and the Swiss watchmakers. The traditional leaders had employed the
jewelry store channel.
PREEMPT AN EMERGING CHANNEL. Richardson-Vicks pioneered the sale of
quality skin care products in supermarkets with its Oil of Olay product line.
Supermarkets were an emerging channel for this type of product, and
Richardson-Vicks gained substantial ﬁrst-mover advantages that have
allowed Oil of Olay to remain a leader.
GO DIRECT. YKK, the Japanese zipper company, took on Talon
successfully by bypassing wholesalers and selling directly to apparel
companies.
The most successful attacks on leaders often involve more than one
innovation in the value chain. Stouffer’s combined a product change with
several signiﬁcant marketing innovations. Cargill and ADM combined a
process change with product line and marketing changes. Timex combined
a new channel with low-cost manufacturing technology and unprecedented
TV advertising. Competitive advantage that is sustainable usually stems
from multiple sources, as Chapters 3 and 4 have illustrated.
Structural changes often create the opportunity for reconﬁguring of the
value chain. Timex’s attack on the Swiss exploited the emergence of TV
and mass distribution channels, in addition to wartime improvements in
manufacturing technology. At the same time, growth in buyer income and
shifting attitudes made a watch a product purchased for everyday use. In
many industries, however, reconﬁguration hinges on rethinking what has
been done rather than exploiting external changes. Ultimately, however,
reconﬁguring the value chain is a creative act that is difﬁcult to achieve
routinely or predictably. Industry analysis, value chain analysis, technology
analysis, industry scenarios, and other concepts in this book can help
identify possibilities for reconﬁguration.


Redeﬁnition
The second broad avenue for attacking a leader rests on redeﬁning the
scope of competition. Broadening scope may allow the achievement of
interrelationships or the beneﬁts of integration, while narrowing scope can
allow the tailoring of the value chain to a particular target. As I have
discussed extensively in earlier chapters, particularly Chapters 2, 7, 9, and
12, the scope of a ﬁrm’s activities can greatly inﬂuence competitive
advantage. A challenger can change competitive scope in four ways which
reﬂect the four types of scope. These four modes of redeﬁnition are not
mutually exclusive:
•  Focus within the Industry. Narrowing the basis of competition to a
segment rather than across the board.
•  Integration or De-integration. Widening or narrowing the range of
activities performed in-house.
• Geographic Redeﬁnition. Broadening the basis of competition from a
region or country to worldwide, or vice versa.
• Horizontal Strategy. Broadening the basis of competition from a single
industry to related industries.
FOCUS
Successful focus strategies against leaders have taken all the forms
described in Chapter 7:
• Buyer focus. Motel ﬁrms such as La Quinta have focused on middle-
level business travellers and created a new low-cost value chain to
meet their particular needs.
• Product focus. Canon, Ricoh, and Savin focused on small, plain paper
copiers to challenge Xerox.
• Channel focus. Stihl focused on serving buyers only through servicing
dealers to succeed against Homelite and McCulloch in chain saws.
A focus strategy often has the advantage of being difﬁcult for a leader to
retaliate against without compromising its own strategy. This delays leader


retaliation until the challenger has gained a secure foothold in the industry.
In addition, focus strategies to attack leaders can serve as part of sequencing
strategies.2 In a sequencing strategy, the challenger initially attacks a leader
through focus, and then broadens its scope over time to compete across-the-
board with the leader. Japanese producers have employed this strategy in
such industries as TV sets and motorcycles. In each instance, they began at
the low end of the product range and gradually broadened their lines. NIKE
also used this approach against ADIDAS in running shoes, beginning with a
focus on the premium segment and then leveraging the reputation gained
there to broaden its line downward. Sequencing strategies rest on the
presence of segment interrelationships (Chapter 7) that allow a ﬁrm in one
segment to gain competitive advantages in others. Sequencing has the added
advantage of not provoking the leader to retaliate early in the process.
INTEGRATION OR DE-INTEGRATION
A challenger may employ integration or deintegration as a means of
attacking a leader. Backward or forward integration can sometimes lower
cost or enhance differentiation.3 In the wine industry, for example, Gallo’s
integration in bottles is an important part of its cost advantage. Migros, the
leading Swiss food retailer, owes a part of its dramatic ascendancy in its
industry to backward integration into products and packaging. Changing
circumstances may also make deintegration a means of gaining competitive
advantage against a leader who is integrated.
GEOGRAPHIC REDEFINITION
A leader operating in one or a few countries may sometimes be attacked
successfully with a regional or global strategy.4 The challenger widens the
geographic boundaries of the market to gain cost or differentiation
advantages through geographic interrelationships. A global strategy, that
integrates and coordinates value activities in many countries, may allow
economies of scale in production or product development, create the ability
to serve worldwide buyers better, and other advantages I have described
elsewhere. Globalization of an industry has been an important part of
successful strategies of challengers in such industries as autos (Toyota and


Nissan versus General Motors), motorcycles, lift trucks, TV sets, and
various types of medical equipment.
Where an industry is multidomestic, however, local country differences
imply that a global strategy is counterproductive. Here a leader with a
global strategy is vulnerable to a challenger who tailors its strategy on a
country-by-country basis. Castrol has been successful in automotive motor
oil with such an approach. Even within global industries there may also be
segments where a country-centered strategy can be sustainable though other
segments require a global strategy. In both cases, de-globalization can be
the route to attacking a leader.
In many industries, ﬁrms have concentrated on a particular city or area of
a country to succeed against national or even global competitors. Where
competitors are local, however, competitive advantage may come from
taking a national approach. Gannett’s USA Today is attempting this in
newspapers.
HORIZONTAL STRATEGY
Challengers may exploit interrelationships among business units as
another means of broadening the scope of competition. As Chapters 9 and
10 discussed in detail, interrelationships may lead to a competitive
advantage for a ﬁrm operating in related industries. A challenger with a
horizontal strategy encompassing related industries may successfully attack
a leader operating in a narrower or different range of industries. In personal
computers, for example, IBM exploited interrelationships with its other
business units to overwhelm early leaders such as Apple and Tandy.
Interrelationships also serve as a possible substitute for market share in any
one industry and neutralize a leader’s competitive advantage.
A particular form of interrelationship, complementary products, has been
discussed in Chapter 12. Bundling can create competitive advantage in
some industries, while unbundling can do so in others. Merrill Lynch’s
CMA, a bundled product combining previously separate ﬁnancial services,
allowed Merrill to gain signiﬁcantly vis-à-vis other broad line ﬁnancial
services ﬁrms.
MULTIPLE REDEFINITIONS


The four modes of redeﬁnition are not mutually exclusive. A challenger
can globalize its strategy and pursue interrelationships at the same time, as
Matsushita has done in consumer electronics. Matsushita employs shared
manufacturing, distribution channels, and other value activities across its
many consumer electronics products. It also integrates and coordinates its
strategy worldwide. The strategy has overwhelmed single-product, single-
country competitors.
A challenger can also combine narrow scope in one dimension with
broad scope in another. A challenger can attack a leader by focusing on a
segment (scope within an industry) at the same time as it competes globally
(geographic scope). A ﬁrm may also focus within an industry but exploit
interrelationships with related industries, another example of combining
broad and narrow scope. Redeﬁning competitive scope simultaneously in
several ways has proven to be a powerful source of competitive advantage,
because the competitive advantage from each redeﬁnition cumulates.
The scope diagrams in Figure 15–2 illustrate several dimensions of
scope schematically. They suggest how challengers should examine each
dimension of scope to see if it might be a means of attacking a leader. A
leader’s scope is plotted, and then alternative redeﬁnitions (narrower or
broader or both) are probed to see if they might create a signiﬁcant
competitive advantage for a challenger. The top diagram, for example,
represents the situation in automobiles in the 1970’s. General Motors (GM)
competed with a broadly targeted strategy involving a full range of models.
While GM competed internationally as well as in the U.S., its strategy was
essentially country-centered and global coordination was minimal. Toyota
and Nissan chose to focus instead on small cars, and employed coordinated
global strategies. They gained a substantial competitive advantage over GM
in the process.


Figure 15–2. Alternate Scope of Leader and Challenger Strategies
Figure 15–3 uses the scope diagram to illustrate the pattern of
competition in the U.S. newspaper industry. The traditional strategy in the
industry has been to serve a single city with a broad range of news, even
though a number of city papers might be part of the same chain. The Wall
Street Journal and to a lesser extent the New York Times have adopted
national strategies aimed at segments of the market. The Wall Street Journal
has recently embarked on a partial global strategy involving European and
Asian editions. At the same time, USA Today is an attempt to sell a broad-
based daily newspaper nationwide, appealing to national advertisers. Both
USA Today and the Wall Street Journal’s strategies have been made possible
by modern communications and computer typesetting and printing


technology. In the newspaper industry, then, redeﬁning scope has been a
vital element in gaining competitive position.
Figure 15–3. Alternative Scope in Newspapers
Many of the examples of redeﬁnition that have been described illustrate
how redeﬁnition and reconﬁguration usually go together. The Wall Street
Journal would not have been so successful if it had not adapted its value
chain to a national and then global strategy. Thus a ﬁrm must view
redeﬁnition and reconﬁguration as complementary ways to attack an
industry leader.
Pure Spending
The ﬁnal and riskiest way to attack a leader is through pure spending,
without reconﬁguration or redeﬁnition. Pure spending involves investment
to buy market share, cumulative volume, or brand identiﬁcation through low
pricing, heavy advertising, and so on. By making sufﬁcient investment, a
challenger seeks to gain enough market share, volume, or reputation to take
the lead in relative cost position or differentiation. The challenger does not
do anything differently or better than the leader, but simply overwhelms the
leader with resources or with a greater willingness to invest.


This approach to offsetting a leader’s advantage is often costly and
frequently fails. Leaders typically have sufﬁcient ﬁnancial resources to
counteract such a strategy, when coupled with their advantages in cost or
differentiation. Leaders also are usually commited enough to be willing to
spend heavily to defend position. A particularly vivid example of the risks
of pure spending is the diversiﬁcation of oil companies into fertilizer and
chemicals. Despite enormous ﬁnancial resources, their lack of a competitive
advantage gained through reconﬁguration or redeﬁnition has led to a
generally dismal track record.
The success of pure spending rests on superior access to ﬁnancial
resources by the challenger, or on unwillingness by the leader to invest in
the industry. Even a well-ﬁnanced leader may be complacent, have a higher
hurdle rate, have other priorities, or be under corporate pressure to generate
cash. Pure spending has proven most successful in industries where leaders
are small and undercapitalized. These leaders may not be able to afford to
mount sufﬁcient retaliation to discourage the challenger, despite possessing
a competitive advantage.
Pure spending, by itself, remains the least preferred approach for
attacking leaders. However, superior willingness to invest is often an
important supplement to strategies based on reconﬁguration or redeﬁnition.
In cans, for example, Crown Cork invested heavily while American and
Continental were harvesting, accelerating the process by which Crown
gained a cost advantage through having more modern equipment.
Alliances To Attack Leaders
A challenger may need to form an alliance to obtain the necessary
resources, technology, market access, or other strengths to attack an
industry leader. Alliances can be a means of achieving reconﬁguration,
redeﬁnition or pure spending, though in-and-of-themselves they are no
guarantee of success. Alliances of various types have played important roles
in many successful attacks against leaders. The two broad forms of alliances
are the following:


• Acquisition. A ﬁrm either acquires another ﬁrm (or ﬁrms) or is itself
acquired.
•  Coalitions. A ﬁrm joins forces with another ﬁrm without outright
merger, through such means as licensing, joint ventures, and supply
agreements.5
Acquisitions provide a way to broaden a ﬁrm’s scope through adding
positions in new segments, positions in new geographic areas, greater
integration, or a beachhead in a new related industry. IVECO, which
merged a number of European truck builders, has produced a greatly
strengthened competitor. Acquisitions can also play a key role in
reconﬁguration or pure spending strategies. Acquisitions can allow two
organizations to combine resources and skills in such a way that
reconﬁguration or pure spending is possible.
Coalitions also bring together skills and resources of ﬁrms in ways that
may allow reconﬁguration, redeﬁnition, or pure spending. Japanese TV set
producers licensed RCA’s color TV technology, providing an important
starting point for their own product and process innovations, for example.
Similarly, the coalition that led to Airbus Industries has made a world-class
competitor out of a group of struggling national ﬁrms. Coalitions are also
frequently pursued in tandem with a ﬁrm’s own activities to broaden scope.
In the valve industry, for example, WKM sells only in the U.S. and uses
licensees elsewhere in the world.
Coalitions can also play a more subtle role in attacking leaders.
Challengers sometimes form coalitions with leaders that later provide the
basis for attacking the leader, as discussed in Chapter 5. Licensing
technology from a leader, or joint ventures in marketing or manufacturing,
may allow a challenger to learn a leader’s strengths, making it possible to
leapfrog. A number of Japanese ﬁrms have licensed foreign technology
from leaders which they later improved.
Acquisitions and coalitions are not without their problems, however.
Acquisitions are difﬁcult to integrate, and coordination among coalition
partners can prove troublesome. In copiers, for example, Canon has
beneﬁtted from the problems Xerox has had in coordinating with its joint
venture partners Rank Xerox and, through Rank Xerox, Fuji Xerox.


Canon’s greater global coordination leads to some of its competitive
advantages.
Impediments to Leader Retaliation
A successful challenger must also discover or create impediments to
leader retaliation. This serves to blunt the natural advantages of the leader
and reduces the cost of mounting an attack. A variety of factors can inhibit
a leader’s retaliation to a challenger:6
Mixed Motives. If a challenger’s strategy creates mixed motives for a
leader, it will inhibit the leader’s ability to retaliate. A leader that must
undermine its past strategy to match or respond to the challenger faces
mixed motives. A leader that has built its competitive advantage on service,
for example, will invalidate its hard-won reputation by responding to a
challenger’s strategy that makes service unnecessary. The leader may
choose instead to maintain its past strategy and suffer a market share loss.
Another case is provided by the introduction of the low-priced, throw-away
pen by BIC Corporation, which created mixed motives for Gillette’s
Papermate division. Papermate had patiently developed a brand image of
quality. Matching the BIC strategy would undermine this image, and
Papermate ultimately had to introduce an entirely new brand (Write
Brothers) to counter BIC.
Any interrelationships between the leader and other business units in its
parent company may also serve as the basis for mixed motives, because
interrelationships can involve a cost of inﬂexibility (Chapter 9).
Interrelationships can constrain the way a leader can respond without
hurting its sister business units. Mixed motives can also arise when a leader
is employing a bundled strategy, as described in Chapter 12. A leader may
allow a challenger to gain a modest share rather than unbundle and thereby
cause the entire industry to unbundle.
High Leader Response Costs. A leader may refrain from retaliation if the
challenger’s strategy inﬂicts high response costs on the leader. A leader’s
large market share may inhibit it from costly retaliatory actions such as
across-the-board price cuts and warranty increases, for example. Response


costs can also be high when a leader has inappropriate or outdated facilities,
equipment, or labor contracts. Chapter 14 has discussed how the cost of
defensive tactics can be assessed.
Different Financial Priorities. A leader with different ﬁnancial priorities
may not respond to a challenger’s attack. A leader emphasizing short-term
proﬁts, for example, will give up share to a challenger willing to forgo
them. Similarly, a leader desiring high cash ﬂow may not retaliate if
retaliation demands heavy reinvestment. Tampax provides an example of a
leader whose different ﬁnancial priorities invited attack. Maintaining
extraordinary returns in feminine hygiene products seems to have become a
preoccupation inside Tampax, and caused it to respond very little to
repeated attacks until recently. Differences in ﬁnancial priorities also
underlie the success of many foreign ﬁrms against U.S. leaders.
Portfolio Constraints. A leader may not retaliate if its commitment or
attention is directed to other industries. Corporate parents can constrain a
business unit’s resources or dictate its goals. For example, a leader treated
as a cash generator by its parent company may not get the resources to fend
off a challenger’s attack. Similarly, a leader actively pursuing diversiﬁcation
may be diverted from closely monitoring and defending its core industry.
Crown Cork and Seal’s success against American Can and Continental Can,
for example, is partly due to these two leaders’ attempts to diversify into
other forms of packaging.
Regulatory Pressure. A leader may not retaliate if it believes itself to be
constrained from taking actions because of regulatory pressure. Antitrust
scrutiny, safety standards, pollution regulations, and many other types of
regulation can constrain leader responses. Some observers believe that
pressures on the franchise bottler system emanating from Washington
distracted Coca-Cola from responding to Pepsi’s challenge, and that
regulatory fears are inhibiting ATT as it faces new competition today.
Blind Spots. A leader can suffer from faulty assumptions, or blind spots,
in interpreting industry conditions. If a leader has false perceptions of the
true needs of buyers or the signiﬁcance of an industry change, for example,


a challenger may gain position by moving before the leader does. Moreover,
the leader may well perceive the actions of the challenger as inappropriate
and nonthreatening, until the challenger has gained enough market position
to become established.
Blind spots have been important to the success of many challengers.
Harley Davidson misperceived the need for a small motorcycle and watched
while Honda became established. Xerox seems to have misunderstood the
importance of small copiers, and Zenith clung to handcrafted TV sets
despite improvements in design and automated production technology.
Careful analysis of competitor assumptions can reveal such blind spots.
Incorrect Pricing. A leader may set prices based on average cost, rather
than on the cost of delivering a given product to a given buyer. If a
challenger targets the overpriced products/buyers and offers lower prices,
the leader may well be slow to recognize its true costs and be unwilling to
reduce its gross margins. Leaders often respond to such strategies by
retreating from one segment after another until the challenger emerges as
the leader.
Part of a Gentlemen’s Game. A leader may respond slowly if rivalry in
its industry has been a gentlemen’s game. A leader in such industries often
feels constrained from retaliating against a challenger for fear of upsetting
its relationship with other rivals. Coca-Cola’s long history as a statesman in
the soft drink industry, where ﬁrms followed established rules, seems to
have contributed to its less-than-vigorous retaliation against Pepsi until
recently.
The impediments to leader retaliation result from a variety of different
underlying causes. Some impediments rest on tangible factors such as
mixed motives or resource allocation priorities, while others rest on
perceptual errors by the leader, as in the case of blind spots and incorrect
pricing. A challenger’s odds of success are greatest when tangible
impediments to leader retaliation exist. Multiple impediments compound
the leader’s problem. In responding to Timex, for example, Swiss watch
ﬁrms had a blind spot about the saleability of Timex’s disposable, everyday
watch. They also had high response costs in matching Timex’s automated


facilities given the labor intensity of Swiss watch factories, as well as mixed
motives in alienating jewelers if they followed Timex into the drug store
channel.
Reconﬁguration 
and 
redeﬁnition 
strategies 
frequently 
exploit
impediments to leader retaliation. They often create mixed motives, high
response costs, or are incorrectly perceived by leaders. One of the
difﬁculties with the pure spending strategy, however, is that it is less likely
to be associated with impediments to leader retaliation than the other two
avenues of attack. Pure spending works best where a leader has different
ﬁnancial priorities and is unwilling to match the challenger’s investment.
Signals of Leader Vulnerability
The preceding discussion suggests a variety of signals that can indicate
that a leader is vulnerable. These fall into two groups—industry signals and
signals based on leader traits.
Industry Signals
Structural change provides perhaps the strongest signal that an industry
leader might be vulnerable. Structural change emanating from outside an
industry is a particularly strong indication of leader vulnerability, since
entrenched leaders often misinterpret it.
Some important industry signals of leader vulnerability include:
Discontinuous Technological Change. Discontinuous technological
change raises the possibility that a leader’s competitive advantage can be
circumvented, as discussed in Chapter 5. In tires, for example, the radial tire
provided the discontinuity that allowed Michelin to challenge Goodyear and
Firestone. In typewriters, electronics proved the undoing of Underwood and
is threatening SCM. It is more likely that the leader will be favorably
positioned to respond to continuous technological change than the
challenger, because of its scale economies or cumulative learning.


Buyer Changes. Any changes in the buyer’s value chain, for whatever
reason, may signal new opportunities for differentiation, new channels,
unbundling, or other opportunities. An increasing number of women in the
workforce, for example, created opportunities to challenge leaders in many
industries producing women’s or household products. New buyer segments
are also a sign of opportunity because the leader may not be well placed to
serve them.
Changing Channels. The emergence of new channels provides a
potential opportunity to attack a leader dominant in existing channels. The
shift of sales of many consumer goods toward supermarkets, for example,
has created the conditions for attacking a number of leaders.
Shifting Input Costs or Quality. Shifts in the quality or cost of signiﬁcant
inputs may signal an opportunity for a challenger to gain a cost advantage
through a new production process, locking up new sources of raw materials,
or reengineering product designs to reduce or alter material content. The
dramatic rise in power costs, for example, is providing opportunities for
repositioning in aluminum smelting.
Gentlemen’s Game. As discussed earlier, an industry with a long history
of stability may signal that a leader has played the role of statesman and
may retaliate slowly.
Leader Signals
The following traits of industry leaders are signs of possible
vulnerability:
Stuck in the Middle. A leader that has become stuck in the middle
(lacking cost leadership or differentiation vis-à-vis other incumbents)
provides an inviting target. The challenger may ﬁnd it easy to meet the three
conditions outlined at the beginning of this chapter.
Unhappy Buyers. A leader with unhappy buyers is often vulnerable.
Unhappy buyers suggest that the leader has exercised its bargaining power


or that leader personnel have developed an attitude of arrogance based on
past success. Unhappy buyers may actively encourage and support a
challenger.
Pioneer of Current Industry Technology. A leader who pioneered the
current generation of industry technology may be reluctant to embrace the
next one and may also be inﬂexible because of its investment in the current
technology. Ford seems to have suffered from this problem in the early
years of the auto industry.
Very High Proﬁtability. A leader making extraordinary proﬁts may
provide an umbrella for a challenger, if high proﬁts more than offset the
costs of attack. Very proﬁtable leaders can also be reluctant to diminish
their proﬁts to retaliate. Moreover, extraordinary returns may also signal
that a leader might yield share in less proﬁtable parts of the product line,
providing opportunities for focus by challengers.
History of Regulatory Problems. A leader with a history of regulatory
problems, such as antitrust, may be actually constrained from vigorous
retaliation or believe itself to be.
Weak Performer in the Parent Company Portfolio. A leader perceived as
a weak performer by its parent company may well not get the capital to
keep up with the latest technological change, or have sufﬁcient discretion
over proﬁtability to retaliate vigorously against challengers.
Attacking Leaders and Industry Structure
A ﬁnal test for attacking a leader is to weigh the effect on overall
industry structure. A challenger’s attack on a leader is unwise if it destroys
industry structure. Challengers must ﬁnd a new way of competing
compared to the leader’s to succeed. However, the new way of competing,
in some cases, may undercut possibilities for differentiation, lower entry
barriers, or have other adverse structural effects as described in Chapter 1.
A closely related risk is where a challenger gains market share but does not
gain a clear advantage over the leader, and the leader and the challenger are


thus relatively balanced in competitive position. This may guarantee a long
period of instability in the industry. The resulting war can be protracted and
expensive for both sides, creating a situation where no ﬁrm has any
competitive advantage.
It is also important to recognize that some leaders are “good” leaders, as
was discussed in Chapter 6. Attacking a good leader may worsen, not
improve, a challenger’s proﬁtability if the umbrella provided by the good
leader is lost in the process. In such cases a challenger should refrain from
attacking the leader at all. Instead, it should choose another industry as a
vehicle for growth.


About the Author
MICHAEL E. PORTER, one of the world’s leading authorities on competitive
strategy and international competitiveness, is the C. Roland Christensen
Professor of Business Administration at the Harvard Business School. In
1983, Professor Porter was appointed to President Reagan’s Commission on
Industrial Competitiveness, the initiative that triggered the competitiveness
debate in America. He serves as an advisor to heads of state, governors,
mayors, and CEOs throughout the world. The recipient of the Wells Prize in
Economics, the Adam Smith Award, three McKinsey Awards, and honorary
doctorates from the Stockholm School of Economics and six other
universities, Porter is the author of fourteen books, among them
Competitive Strategy, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, and Cases in
Competitive Strategy, all published by The Free Press. He lives in
Brookline, Massachusetts.
