# Endnotes

 
1Many strategic planning concepts have ignored industry attractiveness and stressed the pursuit of
market share, often a recipe for pyrrhic victories. The winner in a ﬁght for share in an unattractive
industry may not be proﬁtable, and the ﬁght itself may make industry structure worse or erode the
winner’s proﬁtability. Other planning concepts associate stalemates, or inability to get ahead of
competitors, with unattractive proﬁts. In fact, stalemates can be quite proﬁtable in attractive
industries.
2These concepts apply equally to products and services. I will use the term “product” in the generic
sense throughout this book to refer to both product and service industries.
3Industry structure is discussed in detail in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 1.
4Generic products pose the same risks to many consumer good industries.
5Without a sustainable competitive advantage, above-average performance is usually a sign of
harvesting.
6Parity implies either an identical product offering to competitors, or a different combination of
product attributes that is equally preferred by buyers.
7While the cost leader will be the most proﬁtable, it is not necessary to be the cost leader to sustain
above-average returns in commodity industries where there are limited opportunities to build
efﬁcient capacity. A ﬁrm that is in the lowest quartile of costs though not the cost leader will usually
still be an above-average performer. Such a situation exists in the aluminum industry, where the
ability to add low-cost capacity is limited by access to low-cost power, bauxite, and infrastructure.
8Overall differentiation and differentiation focus are perhaps the most often confused strategies in
practice. The difference is that the overall differentiator bases its strategy on widely valued
attributes (e.g., IBM in computers), while the differentiation focuser looks for segments with special
needs and meets them better (e.g., Cray Research in computers).
9This example is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
10Competitive Strategy, Chapter 8, describes the processes that drive industry structural change.
11A more detailed review of the differing skills required by each generic strategy is given in
Competitive Strategy, Chapter 2, pp. 40–41.


 
1The business system concept, developed by McKinsey and Company, captures the idea that a ﬁrm is
a series of functions (e.g., R&D, manufacturing, marketing, channels), and that analyzing how each
is performed relative to competitors can provide useful insights. McKinsey also stresses the power
of redeﬁning the business system to gain competitive advantage, an important idea. The business
system concept addresses broad functions rather than activities, however, and does not distinguish
among types of activities or show how they are related. The concept is also not linked speciﬁcally to
competitive advantage nor to competitive scope. The most complete descriptions of the business
system concept are Gluck (1980) and Bauron (1981). See also Bower (1973).
2The notion of a strategic business unit as the relevant entity for strategy formulation is well
accepted, and grows out of work by many scholars and consultants. Business units are often poorly
deﬁned, however, a problem exposed by value chain analysis to which I will return below.
3Economists have characterized the ﬁrm as having a production function that deﬁnes how inputs are
converted into outputs. The value chain is a theory of the ﬁrm that views the ﬁrm as being a
collection of discrete but related production functions, if production functions are deﬁned as
activities. The value chain formulation focuses on how these activities create value and what
determines their cost, giving the ﬁrm considerable latitude in determining how activities are
conﬁgured and combined.
4There may also be infrastructure activities at the group or sector level.
5For a discussion of some of the structural issues see Competitive Strategy, Chapters 1 and 6.
6Unlike a ﬁrm, which can measure value in terms of price or proﬁt, a consumer’s measure of value is
complex and relates to the satisfaction of needs. See Chapter 4.
7The same principles that determine a ﬁrm’s differentiation also can be used to analyze the threat of
substitution, as I discuss in Chapter 8.
8The term scope of the ﬁrm is used in economic theory to reﬂect the boundary between the activities
a ﬁrm performs internally and those it obtains in market transactions—e.g., vertical integration (see,
for example, Coase [1937, 1972]). Some recent work has begun to examine the extent of a ﬁrm’s
diversiﬁcation as an issue in scope (see Teece [1980]). Competitive scope is used here to refer to a
broader conception of the scope of a ﬁrm’s activities, encompassing industry segment coverage,
integration, geographic markets served, and coordinated competition in related industries.
9Interrelationships among value chains serving different segments, geographic areas and related
industries are analytically the same. See Chapters 7 and 9.
10See Porter (1985).
11Sorter, op. cit. See also Porter, Fuller, and Rawlinson (1984).
12For the seminal work see Lawrence and Lorsch (1967).


 
1Including when a competitor shares the activity with related business units and the ﬁrm does not.
See Chapter 9.
2If assets are assigned by some measure of asset value, a capital charge will still be required to
evaluate any tradeoffs with operating costs that are present.
3Scale is not the same as market share. Depending on the relevant measure of scale, the appropriate
deﬁnition of market share that will serve as a proxy for scale will differ markedly.
4The term “experience” is often used to describe cost reduction over time, reﬂecting the wide
possibilities for learning. The “experience curve” mixes both learning and economies of scale,
however, which are very different cost drivers. I use the term learning to encompass all types of cost
reduction that result from improving know-how and procedures independent of scale.
5A 15 percent reduction in costs with a doubling of cumulative volume represents the median of a
large number of academic studies. This average masks a wide variation in learning rates among
activities, however. For an insightful treatment of learning, see Pankaj Ghemawat (1984).
6Even if learning cannot be kept proprietary, however, there may be ﬁrst-mover advantages to
pioneering certain types of learning. See below and Chapter 5.
7The popular measure of the rate of learning, cumulative ﬁrm volume, has the beneﬁt of simplicity.
However, this measure obscures differential rates of learning in value activities and is not an
appropriate proxy for the rate of learning in many activities.
8I have described the relationship between integration and competitive advantage in detail in
Competitive Strategy, Chapter 14.
9Bundling of complementary products is discussed in detail in Chapter 12.
10For a description of the industry structural factors see Chapter 1 and Competitive Strategy, Chapter
6.
11The same principles apply to assessing the costs of potential competitors.
12The use of competitors to reduce volume ﬂuctuation as well as for other strategic purposes is
discussed in Chapter 6.
13Chapter 5 describes in some detail how technology can affect competition.
14For a general description of Iowa Beef, see Stuart (1981).
15See Chapter 14, which discusses defensive strategy.
16Deliberate cross subsidy can be strategically justiﬁed in some industries. See Chapter 12.
17Opportunities for exploiting cross subsidy to attack market leaders will be discussed in Chapter 15.


 
1Hereafter I will use the term price premium to refer to all of these beneﬁts of differentiation.
2The stream of research in demand theory pioneered by Lancaster sees a product as a bundle of
attributes that the buyer desires. See Lancaster (1979) for a recent summary. This chapter shows
how valuable attributes grow out of a buyer’s value chain, how product attributes actually create
buyer value, and how valuable attributes relate to the activities performed by a ﬁrm.
3In identifying new or better products, the literature in marketing tends to focus on the physical
product and assume the attributes of the product that are desired are known (for a survey see
Shocker and Srinivasan [1979]). I focus here on what makes attributes valuable to buyers, and how
the ﬁrm’s total activities can create value.
4This same analysis determines the relative value of a substitute product, discussed in Chapter 8. See
Chapter 8 for further examples of how ﬁrms actually lower buyer costs or raise buyer performance.
5Lowering buyer risk of failure is equivalent to lowering buyer cost.
6The ways to lower the buyer’s costs are discussed further in Chapter 8, in the parallel case of one
product substituting for another. Forbis and Mehta (1979) also contains a useful discussion of some
of the issues in lowering buyer cost.
7Such a strategy presupposes that the ﬁrm can perform such activities more cheaply than the buyer
can.
8A persistent price in excess of buyer value is usually possible only when a ﬁrm and its product’s
effect on buyer cost or performance are very intangible and hard to measure.
9For a description see Steinway and Sons (1981).
10For an interesting discussion of this issue with further examples, see Levitt (1981).
11Even intangible use criteria such as styling can often be quantiﬁed—e.g., ratings in industry surveys.
12Some quantitative techniques for ranking product attributes have been developed in the marketing
literature, though they are based principally on the use of competitive product sales data and
customer polling and not on calculating value directly. For a survey, see Shocker and Srinivasan
(1979).
13See Competitive Strategy, Chapters 1 and 6, for descriptions of the sources of switching costs.
Switching costs are also discussed in Chapter 8.


 
1Hence the label “technology development” in the generic value chain instead of the more limited
phrase “research and development.”
2See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 13, and Porter (1985).
3The same ideas can be generalized to evaluate pioneering of any kind, such as pioneering in
marketing or in the approach to procurement.
4Some of these advantages also accrue to other early movers besides the ﬁrst.
5The costs of pioneering are discussed in the context of an emerging industry in Competitive Strategy,
Chapter 10.
6Another possible form of coalition is joint technology development with another ﬁrm. Joint
development involves many of the same issues as licensing.
7See Abernathy and Utterback (1978).
8Abernathy, Clark, and Kantrow (1983).
9See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 8, for a broader discussion of industry evolution and its causes.
1Price discrimination is the sale of identical products to different buyers at different prices.
2I will have more to say about this below. The vulnerabilities of leaders resulting from this and other
practices are discussed in Chapter 14.
3In the particular case of rate-of-return regulation, allowable rates are often determined by average
costs of competitors. Hence having competitors may allow an efﬁcient producer to be more
proﬁtable.
4For further examples of the effect of antitrust considerations on leader behavior, see Bloom and
Kotler (1975).
5Strategies such as this that link complementary products are described more fully in Chapter 12.
6The problems of launching an emerging industry are discussed in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 10.
7Chapter 15 describes how market leaders can be successfully attacked with focus strategies.
8The effect of product proliferation in breakfast cereals on entry is analyzed by Schmalensee (1978).
9Competitor analysis is described in detail in Competitive Strategy, Chapters 3 through 5.
10See Chapter 14 for a fuller discussion of defensive strategy.
11See Chapter 14.
12The undesirability of a 100 percent share is also recognized by Bloom and Kotler (1975), based on
valid reasons. Bloom and Kotler cite the antitrust problems of high share, the possible effect of high
share in attracting entry, and risks faced by high-share companies of the attack by consumerist or
public interest organizations.
13For an empirical study supporting some of these factors, see Caves, Fortunato, and Ghemawat
(1981).
14Industry growth interacts with scale economies to determine the optimal share. In a rapid-growth
industry, scale economies yield less of an entry barrier and cost advantage than in a slow-growth
industry.
15See Bloom and Kotler (1975).
16Evidence from examining a cross section of industries suggests that a signiﬁcant difference in share
among competitors is associated with greater stability. Buzzell’s (1981) statistical test suggested
that stable market share patterns often follow a semilogarithmic distribution, where each
competitor’s share is a constant proportion of the next higher-ranking ﬁrm’s. Boston Consulting
Group (1976) has also hypothesized that a stable market share distribution will have only three
signiﬁcant competitors with market shares in the proportion 4:2:1. This is a special case of the


semilogarithmic distribution. Such generalizations can be misleading, however, because they do not
reﬂect other industry and competitor characteristics besides share. BCG’s hypothesis, for example,
will not hold in all industries, but is most likely to hold in commodity industries where there are bad
competitors.


 
1Focus strategies are described in Chapter 1.
2Throughout this book the term “product” has been used to describe both products and services. In
most industries producing products there are some services that are part of the offering, and these
are important to segmentation. The principles of analyzing both products and services for
segmentation purposes are the same.
3Chapter 12 describes the strategic issues in bundling together physically distinct products and selling
them as a package, something that many companies do without knowing it.
4As we will see, industry segmentation ﬂows from the intrinsic characteristics of an industry’s
products and buyers, irrespective of ﬁrms’ existing strategies. Strategic groups (Competitive
Strategy, Chapter 7) are the result of differences in ﬁrms’ strategies, one dimension of which may
be the different segments they serve. Thus industry segmentation is a building block for analyzing
strategic groups.
5The threat of substitution and the threat of entry tend to be greater for segments than for an industry
as a whole, because other product varieties are often substitutes for a product variety and
competitors operating in other segments are often well-placed potential entrants to a segment.
6Geographic buyer location reﬂects the importance of geographic scope, deﬁned in Chapter 2. For
practical reasons, scope within the industry and geographic scope are best treated together in
segmentation.
7Chapter 12 describes the strategic issues involved in bundling in some detail.
8For a good survey, see Moriarty (1983). Bonoma and Shapiro (1984) present a very useful analysis
of industrial market segmentation and its implications for marketing strategy.
9Marketers have proposed a number of other related ways of segmenting consumers, such as
personality and loyalty. For a survey, see Kotler (1980).
10The strength of interrelationships within an industry and between industries determine the
boundaries of strategically distinct industries.
11It may also be illuminating to distinguish among strong and weak positions in each segment.
12There is no need for strategies that combine segments to be horizontal or vertical on the
segmentation matrix. However, focus strategies are often horizontal or vertical because product,
buyer, channel, or geographic focus strategies are common.


 
1See Levitt (1960) for the classic statement of the need to think functionally.
2Chapter 12 describes the strategic issues raised by complementary products in more detail.
Differential cost and quality of complementary products are rarely issues in differentiation among
brands.
3“General Cinema Corporation,” 1976.
4The costs of switching suppliers are described in Competitive Strategy, Chapters 1 and 6.
5The discussion of industry evolution in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 8, provides tools for
forecasting structural changes in the substitute and threatened industries; the analysis of emerging
industries in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 10, is also often applicable to substitute industries
because they are frequently new industries.
6Margins can be negative, and sometimes are for a substitute that is beginning its penetration.
7Chapter 8 in Competitive Strategy describes how the product life cycle is a poor generalization about
industry structural change. The S-shaped path of sales growth, though by no means universal, is
among the most commonly occurring predictions that grow out of life cycle theory.
8The path of substitution is analogous to the diffusion of an innovation. Diffusion research has
emphasized the information and attitudinal factors that affect the diffusion process. See Robertson
(1971) for a survey.
9Falling cost of the substitute, like most of these reasons for increasing penetration, should not be
treated as inevitable as noted earlier.
10Diffusion models have been widely used in forecasting the growth of new brands and in forecasting
the rate of diffusion of technology. Important diffusion models are those of Mansﬁeld (1961), Bass
(1969), and Fisher and Pry (1971). The logistic model described here is similar to Fisher and Pry’s.
11The logistic function produces an inﬂection point of the S-curve at 50 percent substitution. A related
function, known as the Gompertz function, has its inﬂection point at 37 percent penetration. While
both functions have received empirical support, the logistic function is easier to use in practice. For
a survey of diffusion models, see Mahajan and Muller (1979).
12Penetration rates must be adjusted if there were capacity constraints in supplying the substitute.
13Logistic curves have often been misused by both managers and their advisors. Decisions have been
made with too little diagnosis of the underlying economics of substitution.
14The strategic role of complementary goods is discussed in more detail in Chapter 12.
15These concepts are important in declining industries. See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 12, which
also discusses harvest strategies.
16See Chapter 9.
17For a discussion, see World Business Weekly (1981).
1In a recent article, Haspeslagh (1982) found evidence that portfolio planning techniques were in use
in someway by over 300 of the Fortune 1000.
2Recent work on stock market valuation has identiﬁed a conglomerate discount, where unrelated
business units in a ﬁrm are worth less than if they were stand-alone units. Without a horizontal
strategy that actually exploits interrelationships, a conglomerate discount is often justiﬁed.
3For a treatment of geographic interrelationships, see Porter (1985).
4Some of the same forces are leading to the globalization of industries.
5While the availability of cheap computing power may be reducing the need to share computers in
some applications, a stronger trend seems to be for the technology to spawn new opportunities for
sharing.


6John R. Wells (1984) has done an important study on interrelationships that provides evidence of
how portfolio membership has affected business units in a sample of diversiﬁed ﬁrms.
7Economists have begun to use the term “economies of scope” to refer to economies available to
multiproduct ﬁrms (see Baumol, Panzar, and Willig, 1982). The sources of economies of scope have
not been operationalized, nor have the conditions that nullify them.
8Sharing can increase the rate of learning in an activity by increasing its throughput. Intangible
interrelationships are also a form of learning, but one in which knowledge gained in one business
unit is transferred to another though each business unit has separate activities.
9Terms such as shared experience or shared resources are sometimes used to reﬂect the possibility
that activities can be shared. Such terms are not well deﬁned, however; nor do they grow out of a
framework that speciﬁes the potential competitive advantages of sharing and its costs.
10The important scale differences among business units are those in the value activity being shared,
which is not necessarily the same as the overall scale of the business unit. A small business unit
may utilize logistics very intensively, for example.
11The cost of coordination is clearly dependent on a ﬁrm’s organizational practices. See Chapter 11.
12See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 1, for a discussion of exit barriers.
13For a summary discussion of the ways of gaining competitive position in an industry see Chapter 15.
14See Wells (1984).
15John R. Wells’s (1984) study contains important work on intangible interrelationships that provides
further insight into when and how they arise.
16There may be a ﬁne line in some cases between transferring know-how and sharing technology
development. The basis for separating tangible and intangible interrelationships is whether an
activity is shared in some way on an ongoing basis, or whether know-how is transferred between
essentially separate activities.
17The analysis of multipoint competitors in both related and unrelated industries has strong parallels to
the analysis of competitors in local or regional industries, as well as to competitive analysis in
global competition. In a regional industry such as airlines, for example, ﬁrms compete with each
other in a number of overlapping routes. Internationally, ﬁrms often compete in a number of country
markets. The principles described here can be applied in all of these settings (see Porter 1985).
18For a deﬁnition and discussion of focal points, see Thomas Schelling (1960) and Competitive
Strategy, Chapter 5.


 
1Other examples of coordinated pricing are discussed in Chapter 12.
2See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 16, for the basic strategic logic of entry into a new business.


 
1The literature on organizational behavior contains some useful insights into the problems of
achieving interrelationships among business units, but little research that treats the subject directly.
Most literature in organizational behavior examines the organizational problems of coordination
within business units, or how to divisionalize. Lorsch and Allen (1973) and Galbraith (1973)
contain the most useful ideas for cross-business unit coordination, but have not treated
interrelationships as a major theme.
2Thus this book on strategy must contain an unexpected chapter on organization.
3If a diversiﬁed ﬁrm does not have a well functioning decentralized organization, in fact, it may need
to decentralize further before it begins to overlay a horizontal organization across its business units.
4In economists’ terms, the perceived transaction costs of dealing externally are lower than those of
dealing internally.
5For a discussion of the Brunswick example see Stengrevics (1981).
6Entrepreneurship is viewed as so important in some ﬁrms that business units are even encouraged to
compete among themselves.
7Leading works include Lorsch and Allen (1973), Galbraith (1973), Lawrence and Lorsch (1967),
and Kotter (1982).
8The sector executive’s role is analogous to the role of the group executive and equally important to
horizontal strategy.
9There has been little research on the role of the group executive, surprising given the prevalence of
group structures. Stengrevics’ (1981) work is the only known comprehensive study, and provides
many useful insights into the group executive’s role and job satisfaction.
10For a supporting view, see Stengrevics (forthcoming).
11Galbraith (1973) provides a useful description of a number of such “lateral” organizations and
conditions their success. His and other discussions are primarily oriented to within business unit
rather than cross-business unit efforts, however.
12Eccles (1985) provides an excellent discussion of transfer pricing that reﬂects many of these issues.
13See Stengrevics (1981). No transfer pricing scheme is ever perfect, but arms-length schemes are
almost always ﬂawed where there are signiﬁcant interrelationships.
14Lorsch and Allen (1973) provide an illustration of this role of incentives in a vertically integrated
ﬁrm.
15For a study supporting the need for subjective incentives when interrelationships are high, see Gupta
and Govindarajan (1983).
16It may be valuable, for example, to switch business managers or other executives in two business
units involved in an interrelationship.
17Acquiring a toehold in an industry through a smaller acquisition, and then building it, resembles
internal development more than acquisition in this respect.
18American Express Company, Annual Report, 1982.
19This new organizational form is more complex than Williamson’s (1973) M-form, which is
distinguished by a pattern of top management control of divisions in which top management is not
involved in operating affairs. The importance of interrelationships suggests that divisionalization in
its traditional sense is no longer appropriate in many ﬁrms.
1Signaling criteria are described in Chapter 4.
2The cost of complements is hence part of the comparison between a product and substitutes. See
Chapter 8.


3For a discussion of quasi-integration, see Competitive Strategy, Chapter 14.
4For a discussion of the problems of emerging industries, including the role of complementary
products, see Competitive Strategy, Chapter 10.
5For a demonstration of this in the case of a monopolist, see Adams and Yellen (1976).
6Unbundling is one important variant of the focus strategy which involves performing fewer
functions for the buyer. See Chapter 7.
7See Chapter 9.
8Chapter 5 discusses how the pattern of technological change in an industry evolves over time,
important to these changes.
9Protecting the bundle is sometimes part of defensive strategy. See Chapter 14.
10This is one of a series of reasons why having competitors can be beneﬁcial (see Chapter 6).


 
1A survey in 1979 estimated that between 8 and 22 percent of the Fortune 1000 had made some use
of scenarios. The users were concentrated in process industries and aerospace ﬁrms (Klein and
Linneman [1979]). A more recent survey of European companies by Malaska et al. (1983) showed a
higher percentage of users. However, in interpreting data such as these, it is important to recognize
that the deﬁnition of scenarios varies widely and that the way scenarios are used can and does vary
widely.
2The approach to scenario planning pioneered by Shell is described in “Shell’s Multiple Scenario
Planning” (1980), Mandell (1982), and Wack (1984).
3The evolutionary forces are discussed in detail in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 8.
4See Competitive Strategy, Chapters 3–5 for a description of competitor analysis techniques.
Competitive Strategy, Chapter 7, describes strategic mapping.
5For example, see Hamilton (1981).
6For a fascinating discussion of the process of changing management thinking at Royal Dutch Shell
through scenarios see Wack (1984).


 
1A ﬁrm may enter an industry without a sequenced entry strategy in mind, but initial success may
lead to sequencing nonetheless. See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 16, for a discussion of the
motivations for a sequenced entry strategy.
2Shrinkage barriers, discussed in Chapter 6, are barriers to reducing sales volume. They are closely
related to exit barriers.
3Postponing of risk is one of the important motivations for a sequenced entry strategy.
4Much research by economists on entry does not recognize that entry is an extended investment
process, and hence concludes that many entry-deterring investments are irrational once an initial
entry investment has been made. For example, see A. Dixit (1980). An example would be a ﬁrm
that attempts to deter entry by building excess capacity as a threat to potential entrants that a price
war will be triggered if they enter. Once the entrant has come into the industry, however, it has been
argued that it is no longer rational to carry out the threat. This, of course, makes excess capacity less
effective as a threat in the ﬁrst place.
The ﬂaw in the argument is that the commencing of entry does not mean that resources have
been fully committed to the industry, or that the entrant should be viewed as an incumbent. Thus a
price war during the entering or sequencing phases may well be effective if it causes the entrant to
conclude that its ultimate target strategy cannot be achieved at acceptable cost. Entry may thus be
terminated or a less ambitious target set, an outcome that has occurred in many industries such as
video games and semiconductors. Entry deterrence also rests heavily on shaping potential
competitor assumptions, and thus on the lack of complete information by potential competitors.
5New brands and new positionings can be offensive opportunities. I focus here on situations where
they are not attractive enough to be offensive opportunities, but yet have high defensive value
because they block a likely avenue of attack.
6Some conditions for achieving credible commitment to retaliate are described in Competitive
Strategy, Chapter 5.
7At the industry level, this balance is reﬂected in the concept of the entry-deterring price discussed in
Competitive Strategy, Chapter 1.
8See Competitive Strategy Chapters 8 and 16, for further discussion of potential entrants and how
they can change.


 
1Yip’s (1982) discussion of how ﬁrms can ﬁnd “gateways” to entry shows how leaders can be
vulnerable. Yip describes how innovations in technology development and marketing can allow
entrants to overcome incumbents.
2Sequenced entry strategies are described in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 16. Sequenced
repositioning employs the same principles.
3See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 14.
4The competitive advantages of a global strategy and the circumstances where global strategies are
appropriate are discussed in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 13, and in Porter (1985).
5See the chapter on coalitions in Porter (1985).
6Diagnosing impediments requires a competitor analysis of the leader. See Competitive Strategy,
Chapter 3, for a framework plus a discussion of concepts such as mixed motives and blind spots
employed here.


Bibliography
ABERNATHY, WILLIAM J., AND JAMES M. UTTERBACK. “Patterns of Industrial
Innovation,” Technology Review, Vol. 80, No. 7 (June-July 1978).
ABERNATHY, WILLIAM J., KIM B. CLARK, AND ALAN M. KANTROW. Industrial
Renaissance. New York: Basic Books, 1983.
ADAMS, WILLIAM J., AND JANET L. YELLEN. “Commodity Bundling and the
Burden of Monopoly,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. SC (August
1976), pp. 475–498.
AMERICAN EXPRESS COMPANY, 1982 Annual Report.
BASS, FRANK M. “A New Product Growth Model for Consumer Durables,”
Management Science, Vol. 15 (January 1969), pp. 215–227.
BAUMOL, WILLIAM J., JOHN C. PANZAR, AND ROBERT D. WILLIG, with
contributions by Elizabeth E. Bailey, Dietrich Fischer, and Herman C.
Quirmbach, Contestable Markets and The Theory of Industry Structure,
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1982.
BLOOM, PAUL N., AND PHILIP KOTLER. “Strategies for High Market Share
Companies,” Harvard Business Review (November-December 1975), pp.
62–72.
BONOMA, THOMAS V., AND BENSON P. SHAPIRO. Segmenting the Industrial
Market. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1983.
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUP. “The Rule of Three and Four,” Perspectives
No. 187 (1976).
BOWER, JOSEPH, L., “Simple Economic Tools For Strategic Analysis,”
Harvard Business School Case Study, No. 9–373–094.
BUARON, ROBERTO, “New-Game Stategies,” The McKinsey Quarterly
(Spring, 1981), pp. 24–40.
