# Help! My Ocean Is Turning Red

The stories they contain are fascinating. There are articles from small
business owners and individuals across the globe that discuss how the book
fundamentally changed their perspectives on life and took their professional
successes to all new levels. In other articles, executives speak of how blue
ocean strategy provided the insight to take their business out of the red
ocean and create all new demand. And yet other articles detail how
government leaders have applied blue ocean strategy to achieve high impact
at low cost with rapid execution in areas of social importance ranging from
enhancing the quality of rural and urban lives, to strengthening internal and
external securities, to breaking down ministerial and regional silos.1
As we have reached out to organizations that have applied the ideas and
have worked with many directly since the publication of the original edition
of Blue Ocean Strategy, we have learned a lot by watching the journey
people have made with these ideas. Their most pressing questions in
executing their blue ocean strategies are: How do we align all of our
activities around our blue ocean strategy? What do we do when our blue
ocean has become red? How can we avoid the strong gravitational pulls of
“red ocean thinking”—we call them “red ocean traps”—even as we’re
pursuing a blue ocean strategy? These are the very questions that have
motivated this expanded edition. In this new preface, we first outline what’s
new here. We then briefly summarize the key points that define and
distinguish blue ocean strategy and address why we believe blue ocean
strategy is more needed and relevant than ever before.
OceanofPDF.com


What’s New in This Expanded Edition?
This edition adds two new chapters and expands a third. Here are the
highlights that show the gist of managers’ key challenges and trouble spots
and how we address them.
Alignment: What it means, why it’s essential, and how to achieve it. A
challenge we have been told about and have seen organizations struggle
with is how they can align their system of activities—including a potential
web of external partners—to create a sustainable blue ocean strategy in
practice. Is there a simple yet comprehensive method to ensure that the key
components of an organization, from value to profit to people, are aligned
to support the strategic shift blue ocean strategy requires? This is important
as companies all too often focus on certain dimensions of their
organizations, paying less heed to other dimensions that must support the
strategy to make it a sustainable success. In recognition, this expanded
edition expressly explores the issue of alignment in the context of blue
oceans. We present cases of success and failure in alignment to show not
only how it is achieved in action but also how it can be missed. Chapter 9
addresses this alignment challenge.
Renewal: When and how to renew blue oceans over time. All
companies rise and fall based on the strategic moves they make or don’t
make. A challenge organizations face is how to renew blue oceans over
time, as every blue ocean will eventually be imitated and turn red.
Understanding the process of renewal is key to ensure that the creation of
blue oceans is not a one-off occurrence but can be institutionalized as a
repeatable process in an organization. In this expanded edition, we tackle
how leaders can turn the creation of blue oceans from a static achievement
into a dynamic renewal process both at the business level and at the
corporate level for multibusiness firms. Here we articulate the dynamic
renewal process for creating sustainable economic performance both for a
single business that has reached for a blue ocean and for a multibusiness
organization that has to balance both red and blue ocean initiatives. In so
doing, we also highlight the complementary roles that red and blue ocean
strategies play in managing a company’s profit for today while building


strong growth and brand value for tomorrow. Chapter 10 addresses this
renewal challenge.
Red Ocean Traps: What they are and why they should be avoided.
Lastly, we show the ten most-common red ocean traps we see companies
fall into as they put blue ocean strategy into practice. These traps keep
companies anchored in the red even as they attempt to set sail for the blue.
Addressing these traps is critical to getting people’s framing right to create
blue oceans. With the proper grasp of the concept, one can avoid the traps
and apply its associated tools and methodologies with accuracy so that right
strategic actions can be produced to sail toward clear blue waters. Chapter
11 addresses the challenge of red ocean traps.
OceanofPDF.com


What Are the Main Points of Distinction?
The aim of blue ocean strategy was straightforward: to allow any
organization—large or small, new or incumbent—to step up to the
challenge of creating blue oceans in an opportunity-maximizing, risk-
minimizing way. The book challenges several long-held beliefs in the field
of strategy. If we had to zoom in on five key points of distinction that make
the book worthy of consideration, it would be these.
Competition should not occupy the center of strategic thinking. Too
many companies let competition drive their strategies. What blue ocean
strategy brings to life, however, is that this focus on the competition all too
often keeps companies anchored in the red ocean. It puts the competition,
not the customer, at the core of strategy. As a result, companies’ time and
attention get focused on benchmarking rivals and responding to their
strategic moves, rather than on understanding how to deliver a leap in value
to buyers—which is not the same thing.
Blue ocean strategy breaks from the stranglehold of competition. At the
book’s core is the notion of a shift from competing to creating new market
space and hence making the competition irrelevant. We first made this point
all the way back in 1997 in “Value Innovation,” the first of our series of
Harvard Business Review articles that form the basis of this book.2 We
observed that companies that break away from the competition pay little
heed to matching or beating rivals or carving out a favorable competitive
position. Their aim was not to outperform competitors. It was to offer a
quantum leap in value that made the competition irrelevant. The focus on
innovating at value, not positioning against competitors, drives companies
to challenge all the factors an industry competes on and to not assume that
just because the competition is doing something means it is connected to
buyer value.
In this way, blue ocean strategy makes sense of the strategic paradox
many organizations face: the more they focus on coping with the
competition, and striving to match and beat their advantages, the more they
ironically tend to look like the competition. To which blue ocean strategy
would respond, stop looking to the competition. Value-innovate and let the
competition worry about you.


Industry structure is not given; it can be shaped. The field of strategy
has long assumed that industry structure is given. With industry structure
seen as fixed, firms are driven to build their strategies based on it. And so
strategy, as is commonly practiced, tees off with industry analysis—think
five forces or its distant precursor SWOT analysis—where strategy is about
matching a company’s strengths and weaknesses to the opportunities and
threats present in the existing industry. Here strategy perforce becomes a
zero-sum game where one company’s gain is another company’s loss, as
firms are bound by existing market space.
Blue ocean strategy, by contrast, shows how strategy can shape structure
in an organization’s favor to create new market space. It is based on the
view that market boundaries and industry structure are not given and can be
reconstructed by the actions and beliefs of industry players. As industry
history shows, new market spaces are being created every day and are fluid
with imagination. Buyers prove that as they trade across alternative
industries, refusing to see or be constrained by the cognitive boundaries
industries impose upon themselves. And firms prove that as they invent and
reinvent industries, collapsing, altering, and going beyond existing market
boundaries to create all new demand. In this way, strategy moves from a
zero-sum to a non-zero-sum game, and even an unattractive industry can be
made attractive by companies’ conscious efforts. Which is to say a red
ocean need not stay red. This brings us to a third point of distinction.
Strategic creativity can be unlocked systematically. Ever since
Schumpeter’s vision of the lone and creative entrepreneur, innovation and
creativity have been essentially viewed as a black box, unknowable and
random.3 Not surprisingly, with innovation and creativity viewed as such,
the field of strategy predominantly focused on how to compete in
established markets, creating an arsenal of analytic tools and frameworks to
skillfully achieve this. But is creativity a black box? When it comes to
artistic creativity or scientific breakthroughs—think Gaudi’s majestic art or
Marie Curie’s radium discovery—the answer may be yes. But is the same
true for strategic creativity that drives value innovation that opens up new
market spaces? Think Ford’s Model T in autos, Starbucks in coffee, or
Salesforce.com in CRM software. Our research suggests no. It revealed
common strategic patterns behind the successful creation of blue oceans.
These patterns allowed us to develop underlying analytic frameworks, tools,


and methodologies to systematically link innovation to value and
reconstruct industry boundaries in an opportunity-maximizing, risk-
minimizing way. While luck, of course, will always play a role, as it does
with all strategies, these tools—like the strategy canvas, four actions
framework, and six paths to reconstruct market boundaries—bring structure
to what has historically been an unstructured problem in strategy, informing
organizations’ ability to create blue oceans systematically.
Execution can be built into strategy formulation. Blue ocean strategy is
a strategy that joins analytics with the human dimension of organizations. It
recognizes and pays respect to the importance of aligning people’s minds
and hearts with a new strategy so that at the level of the individual, people
embrace it of their own accord and willingly go beyond compulsory
execution to voluntary cooperation in carrying it out. To achieve this, blue
ocean strategy does not separate strategy formulation from execution.
Although this disconnect may be a hallmark of most companies’ practices,
our research shows it is also a hallmark of slow and questionable
implementation and mechanical follow-through at best. Instead, blue ocean
strategy builds execution into strategy from the start through the practice of
fair process in the making and rolling out of strategy.
Over twenty-five years, we have written about the impact of fair process
on the quality of execution of decisions through many academic and
managerial publications.4 As blue ocean strategy brings to light, fair process
prepares the ground for implementation by invoking the most fundamental
basis of action: trust, commitment, and the voluntary cooperation of people
deep in an organization. Commitment, trust, and voluntary cooperation are
not merely attitudes or behaviors. They are intangible capital. They allow
companies to stand apart in the speed, quality, and consistency of their
execution and to implement strategic shifts fast at low cost.
A step-by-step model for creating strategy. The field of strategy has
produced a wealth of knowledge on the content of strategy. However, what
it has remained virtually silent on is the key question of how to create a
strategy to begin with. Of course, we know how to produce plans. But, as
we all know, the planning process doesn’t produce strategy. In short, we
don’t have a theory of strategy creation.


While there are many theories that explain why companies fail and
succeed, they are mostly descriptive, not prescriptive. There is no step-by-
step model that prescribes in specific terms how companies can formulate
and execute their strategies to obtain high performance. Such a model is
introduced here in the context of blue oceans to show how companies can
avoid market-competing traps and achieve market-creating innovations.
The strategy-making framework we advance here is built based on our
strategy practices in the field with many companies over the last two
decades. It helps managers in action as they formulate strategies that are
innovative and wealth creating.
OceanofPDF.com


Why Is Blue Ocean Strategy of Rising Importance?
When we first published Blue Ocean Strategy in 2005, there were many
forces driving the importance of creating blue oceans. At the top of the list
was the fact that competition in existing industries was getting fiercer and
pressure on costs and profits was increasing. These forces have not gone
away. On the contrary, they’ve only intensified. But beyond these, over the
last ten years, several new global trends have kicked in with a speed few
could have ever imagined when our book first came out. We believe that
these trends make creating blue oceans an even more important strategic
task in the future. Here, we highlight some of them without intending to be
comprehensive in their coverage or content.
A rising call for creative new solutions. Just look at a broad swath of
industries that matter fundamentally to who we are: health care, K-12
education, universities, financial services, energy, the environment, and the
government, where demands are high yet money and budgets are low. In the
last ten years, every one of these industries has been seriously called to task.
There has hardly been a time in history when the strategies of players in so
many industries and sectors needed fundamental rethinking. To remain
relevant, all these players are increasingly being called on to reimagine their
strategies to achieve innovative value at lower costs.
The rising influence and use of public megaphones. It’s hard to believe,
but only ten years back, organizations still controlled the majority of
information disseminated to the public on their products, services, and
offerings. Today that’s history. The surge in social network sites, blogs,
micro-blogs, video-sharing services, user-driven content, and internet
ratings that have become close to ubiquitous around the globe have shifted
the power and credibility of voice from organizations to individuals. To not
be a victim but a victor in this new reality, your offering needs to stand out
as never before. That’s what gets people tweeting your praises not your
faults; giving five-star ratings; clicking the thumbs up, not the thumbs
down; listing your offering as a favorite on social media sites; and even
being inspired to positively blog about your offering. You can’t hide or
overmarket your me-too offering when virtually everyone has a global
megaphone.


A locational shift in future demand and growth. When people around
the world talk about the growth markets of the future, Europe and Japan
hardly get a mention these days. Even the United States, though still the
largest economy in the world, has increasingly taken a backseat in terms of
future growth prospects. Instead, today China and India, not to mention
countries like Brazil, top the list. In the space of the last ten years, all three
have joined the ranks of the top-ten largest economies. However, this new
breed of big economies is not like the large economies the world has
historically looked to and counted on to consume the goods and services
produced by the world. Unlike the relatively high per capita incomes
enjoyed in the world’s developed economies, these big emerging markets
are the product of very low, though rising, per capita income for very large
populations of citizens. This makes the importance of affordable low cost in
organizations’ offerings more critical than before. But do not be fooled.
Low cost alone is not enough. For these same large populations also have
increasing access to the internet, mobile phones, and TVs with global
channels that raise their sophistication, demands, and desires. To capture
these increasingly savvy customers’ imaginations and wallets, both
differentiation and low cost are needed.
The rising speed and easiness of becoming a global player. Historically,
the major global companies came predominantly from the United States,
Europe, and Japan. But that is changing at incredible speed. Over the last
fifteen years, the number of companies from China in the Fortune Global
500 has increased more than twenty times, the number of Indian companies
has increased roughly eightfold, and the number of Latin American
companies more than doubled. This suggests that these big emerging
economies do not only represent oceans of new demand to unlock. They
also represent oceans of new potential competitors with global ambitions no
different than Toyota’s, General Electric’s, or Unilever’s.
But it’s not just companies from these big emerging markets that are on
the rise. That is just a tip of the iceberg of what the future portends. In the
last decade, there has been a fundamental shift in the cost and ease of
becoming a global player from virtually any corner of the globe. This is a
trend no organization can afford to downplay. Consider just a handful of
facts. With the ease and low cost of setting up a website, any business can
have a global storefront; today people from anywhere can raise money via


crowdfunding; with services like Gmail and Skype, communication costs
have dropped significantly; trust in transactions can now be rapidly and
economically achieved by using services like PayPal, while companies like
Alibaba.com make searching for and vetting suppliers across the world
relatively quick and easy. And there are search engines—the equivalent of
global business directories—that are free. As for global advertising, there is
Twitter and YouTube where you can market your offerings for free. With
the low entry cost to become a global player, new players from virtually all
corners of the world can increasingly participate in global markets and offer
their wares or services. While, of course, these trends don’t mitigate all
barriers to becoming a global player, they certainly intensify global
competition. To stand apart in these overcrowded markets, you need to be
creative through value innovation.
Today both the challenges and opportunities we all face are great. By
providing methodologies and tools organizations can apply to pursue blue
oceans, it is our hope that these ideas will help to meet these challenges and
create opportunities so we all come out better. Strategy, after all, is not just
for business. It is for everyone—the arts, nonprofits, the public sector, even
countries. We invite you to join us on this journey. One thing is clear: the
world needs blue oceans.
OceanofPDF.com


Preface to the Original Edition
THIS IS A BOOK about friendship, about loyalty, about believing in one
another. It was because of that friendship, and that belief, that we set out on
the journey to explore the ideas in this book and eventually came to write it.
We met twenty years ago in a classroom—one the professor, the other the
student. And we have worked together ever since, often seeing ourselves
along the journey as two wet rats in a drain. This book is not the victory of
an idea but of a friendship that we have found more meaningful than any
idea in the world of business. It has made our lives rich and our worlds
more beautiful. We were not alone.
No journey is easy; no friendship is filled only with laughter. But we
were excited every day of that journey because we were on a mission to
learn and improve. We believe passionately in the ideas in this book. These
ideas are not for those whose ambition in life is to get by or merely to
survive. That was never an interest of ours. If you can be satisfied with that,
do not read on. But if you want to make a difference, to create a company
that builds a future where customers, employees, shareholders, and society
win, read on. We are not saying it is easy, but it is worthwhile.
Our research confirms that there are no permanently excellent
companies, just as there are no permanently excellent industries. As we
have found on our own tumbling road, we all, like corporations, do smart
things and less-than-smart things. To improve the quality of our success we
need to study what we did that made a positive difference and understand
how to replicate it systematically. That is what we call making smart
