# Preface to the Original Edition

strategic moves, and we have found that the strategic move that matters
centrally is to create blue oceans.
Blue ocean strategy challenges companies to break out of the red ocean
of bloody competition by creating uncontested market space that makes the
competition irrelevant. Instead of dividing up existing—and often shrinking
—demand and benchmarking competitors, blue ocean strategy is about
growing demand and breaking away from the competition. This book not
only challenges companies but also shows them how to achieve this. We
first introduce a set of analytical tools and frameworks that show you how
to systematically act on this challenge, and, second, we elaborate the
principles that define and separate blue ocean strategy from competition-
based strategic thought.
Our aim is to make the formulation and execution of blue ocean strategy
as systematic and actionable as competing in the red waters of known
market space. Only then can companies step up to the challenge of creating
blue oceans in a smart and responsible way that is both opportunity
maximizing and risk minimizing. No company—large or small, incumbent
or new entrant—can afford to be a riverboat gambler. And no company
should.
The contents of this book are based on more than fifteen years of
research, data stretching back more than a hundred years, and a series of
Harvard Business Review articles as well as academic articles on various
dimensions of this topic. The ideas, tools, and frameworks presented here
have been further tested and refined over the years in corporate practice in
Europe, the United States, and Asia. This book builds on and extends this
work by providing a narrative arc that draws these ideas together to offer a
unified framework. This framework addresses not only the analytic aspects
behind the creation of blue ocean strategy but also the all-important human
aspects of how to bring an organization and its people on this journey with a
willingness to execute these ideas in action. Here, understanding how to
build trust and commitment, as well as an understanding of the importance
of intellectual and emotional recognition, are highlighted and brought to the
core of strategy.
Blue ocean opportunities have been out there. As they have been
explored, the market universe has been expanding. This expansion, we


believe, is the root of growth. Yet poor understanding exists both in theory
and in practice as to how to systematically create and capture blue oceans.
We invite you to read this book to learn how you can be a driver of this
expansion in the future.
OceanofPDF.com


Acknowledgments
WE HAVE HAD SIGNIFICANT help in actualizing this book. INSEAD has
provided a unique environment in which to conduct our research. We have
benefited greatly from the crossover between theory and practice that exists
at INSEAD, and from the truly global composition of our faculty, student,
and executive education populations. Deans Antonio Borges, Gabriel
Hawawini, and Ludo Van der Heyden provided encouragement and
institutional support from the start and allowed us to closely intertwine our
research and teaching. PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) and the Boston
Consulting Group (BCG) have extended the financial support for our
research; in particular, Frank Brown and Richard Baird at PwC, and René
Abate, John Clarkeson, George Stalk, and Olivier Tardy of BCG have been
valued partners.
While we had help from a highly talented group of researchers over the
years, our two dedicated research associates, Jason Hunter and Ji Mi, who
have worked with us for the last several years, deserve special mention.
Their commitment, persistent research support, and drive for perfection,
were essential in realizing this book. We feel blessed by their presence.
Our colleagues at the school have contributed to the ideas in the book.
INSEAD faculty members, particularly Subramanian Rangan and Ludo Van
der Heyden, helped us to reflect upon our ideas and offered valuable
comments and support. Many of INSEAD’s faculty have taught the ideas
and frameworks in this book to executive and MBA audiences, providing
valuable feedback that sharpened our thinking. Others have provided
intellectual encouragement and the energy of kindness. We thank here,
among others, Ron Adner, Jean-Louis Barsoux, Ben Bensaou, Henri-Claude
