# Acknowledgments

de Bettignies, Mike Brimm, Laurence Capron, Marco Ceccagnoli, Karel
Cool, Arnoud De Meyer, Ingemar Dierickx, Gareth Dyas, George Eapen,
Paul Evans, Charlie Galunic, Annabelle Gawer, Javier Gimeno, Dominique
Héau, Neil Jones, Philippe Lasserre, Jean-François Manzoni, Jens Meyer,
Claude Michaud, Deigan Morris, Quy Nguyen-Huy, Subramanian Rangan,
Jonathan Story, Heinz Thanheiser, Ludo Van der Heyden, David Young,
Peter Zemsky, and Ming Zeng.
We have been fortunate to have a network of practitioners and case
writers across the globe. They have contributed greatly in showing how the
ideas in this book apply in action and helping to develop case material for
our research. Among many people, one deserves special mention: Marc
Beauvois-Coladon, who has worked with us from the start and made a
major contribution to chapter 4 based on his field experiences practicing our
ideas in companies. Among the wealth of others, we would like to thank
Francis Gouillart and his associates; Gavin Fraser and his associates; Wayne
Mortensen; Brian Marks; Kenneth Lau; Yasushi Shiina; Jonathan Landrey
and his associates; Junan Jiang; Ralph Trombetta and his associates; Gabor
Burt and his associates; Shantaram Venkatesh; Miki Kawawa and her
associates; Atul Sinha and his associates; Arnold Izsak and his associates;
Volker Westermann and his associates; Matt Williamson; and Caroline
Edwards and her associates. We also appreciate the emerging cooperation
with Accenture as kicked off with Mark Spelman, Omar Abbosh, Jim
Sayles, and their team. Thanks are also due to Lucent Technologies for their
support.
During the course of our research, we have met with corporate executives
and public officers around the world who generously gave us their time and
insight, greatly shaping the ideas in this book. We are grateful to them.
Among many private and public initiatives for putting our ideas into
practice, the Value Innovation Program (VIP) Center at Samsung
Electronics and the Value Innovation Action Tank (VIAT) in Singapore for
the country’s government and private sectors have been major sources of
inspiration and learning. In particular, Jong-Yong Yun at Samsung
Electronics and all the Permanent Secretaries of Singapore Government
have been valued partners. Warm thanks also to the members of the Value
Innovation Network (VIN), a global community of practice on the Value


Innovation family of concepts—especially to those we were unable to
mention here.
Finally, we would like to thank Melinda Merino, our editor, for her wise
comments and editorial feedback, and the Harvard Business School
Publishing team for their commitment and enthusiastic support. Thanks also
to our present and past editors at Harvard Business Review, in particular
David Champion, Tom Stewart, Nan Stone, and Joan Magretta. We owe a
great deal to INSEAD MBAs and PhDs and executive education
participants. Particularly, participants in both Strategy and Value Innovation
Study Group (VISG) courses have been patient as we have tried out the
ideas in this book. Their challenging questions and thoughtful feedback
clarified and strengthened our ideas.
Since the publication of the first edition of our book, many people in
addition to those originally cited in our acknowledgments deserve mention
for their support and contribution over the last ten years. Dean Frank Brown
had a vision to establish the INSEAD Blue Ocean Strategy Institute
(IBOSI) and deans Ilian Mihov and Peter Zemsky have continued to
support its growth. With our deans’ vision and support, we have been able
to create many blue ocean strategy (BOS) programs for INSEAD
executives and MBAs based on theory-based movies, a new pedagogical
approach that aims to complement conventional paper cases for classroom
discussions. We are grateful for all our faculty who have taught the BOS
theory, simulation, and study courses in the MBA, EMBA, and executive
programs of INSEAD. Among the faculty not already cited are professors
Andrew Shipilov, Fares Boulos, Guoli Chen, Ji Mi, Michael Shiel, James
Costantini, and Lauren Mathys. Fellows and researchers in addition to those
already cited who deserve special mention are Zunaira Munir, Oh Young
Koo, Katrina Ling, Michael Olenick, Zoë McKay, Jee-eun Lee, Olivier
Henry, and Kinga Petro. We appreciate their support in creating blue ocean
strategy teaching materials, industry studies, and apps. We would also like
to thank the Beaucourt Foundation for its generous financial support of our
research.


Among many public and nonprofit initiatives for putting our ideas into
practice, the Malaysia Blue Ocean Strategy Institute (MBOSI) and
President Obama’s White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges
and Universities have provided new impetus for us to apply and expand our
BOS theory into areas of leadership, entrepreneurship, and the nonprofit
sector. We are grateful for, among others, all country leaders of Malaysia in
both public and private sectors and for the President’s Board of Advisors on
Historically Black Colleges and Universities. Thanks are also due to Jae
Won Park and his Fellows in MBOSI, Robert Bong and his associates, John
Riker and his associates, Peter Ng and his associates, and Alessandro Di
Fiore and his associates. In MBOSI, we would like to also thank our BOS
officers Kasia Duda and Julie Lee for their enthusiastic support and tireless
dedication, along with Craig Wilkie for his research support. Finally, warm
thanks to our IBOSI supporting staff, Mélanie Pipino and Marie-Françoise
Piquerez, for their ongoing assistance and commitment.
OceanofPDF.com


PART ONE
Blue Ocean Strategy
OceanofPDF.com
