# 1 Creating Blue Oceans

with scaled-down versions. From the perspective of competition-based
strategy, then, the circus industry appeared unattractive.
Another compelling aspect of Cirque du Soleil’s success is that it did not
win by taking customers from the already shrinking circus industry, which
historically catered to children. Cirque du Soleil did not compete with
Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey. Instead it created uncontested new
market space that made the competition irrelevant. It appealed to a whole
new group of customers: adults and corporate clients prepared to pay a
price several times as great as traditional circuses for an unprecedented
entertainment experience. Significantly, one of the first Cirque productions
was titled “We Reinvent the Circus.”
OceanofPDF.com


New Market Space
Cirque du Soleil succeeded because it realized that to win in the future,
companies must stop competing with each other. The only way to beat the
competition is to stop trying to beat the competition.
To understand what Cirque du Soleil achieved, imagine a market
universe composed of two sorts of oceans: red oceans and blue oceans. Red
oceans represent all the industries in existence today. This is the known
market space. Blue oceans denote all the industries not in existence today.
This is the unknown market space.
In the red oceans, industry boundaries are defined and accepted, and the
competitive rules of the game are known.1 Here, companies try to
outperform their rivals to grab a greater share of existing demand. As the
market space gets crowded, prospects for profits and growth are reduced.
Products become commodities, and cutthroat competition turns the red
ocean bloody.
Blue oceans, in contrast, are defined by untapped market space, demand
creation, and the opportunity for highly profitable growth. Although some
blue oceans are created well beyond existing industry boundaries, most are
created from within red oceans by expanding existing industry boundaries,
as Cirque du Soleil did. In blue oceans, competition is irrelevant because
the rules of the game are waiting to be set.
It will always be important to swim successfully in the red ocean by
outcompeting rivals. Red oceans will always matter and will always be a
fact of business life. But with supply exceeding demand in more industries,
competing for a share of contracting markets, while necessary, will not be
sufficient to sustain high performance.2 Companies need to go beyond
competing. To seize new profit and growth opportunities, they also need to
create blue oceans.
Unfortunately, blue oceans are largely uncharted. The dominant focus of
strategy work over the past thirty years has been on competition-based red
ocean strategies.3 The result has been a fairly good understanding of how to
compete skillfully in red waters, from analyzing the underlying economic
structure of an existing industry, to choosing a strategic position of low cost


or differentiation or focus, to benchmarking the competition. Some
discussions around blue oceans exist.4 However, there is little practical
guidance on how to create them. Without analytic frameworks to create
blue oceans and principles to effectively manage risk, creating blue oceans
has remained wishful thinking that is seen as too risky for managers to
pursue as strategy. This book provides practical frameworks and analytics
for the systematic pursuit and capture of blue oceans.
OceanofPDF.com


The Continuing Creation of Blue Oceans
Although the term blue oceans is new, their existence is not. They are a
feature of business life, past and present. Look back 120 years and ask
yourself, How many of today’s industries were then unknown? The answer:
many industries as basic as automobiles, music recording, aviation,
petrochemicals, health care, and management consulting were unheard of or
had just begun to emerge at that time. Now turn the clock back only forty
years. Again, a plethora of multibillion-and trillion-dollar industries jumps
out—e-commerce; cell phones; laptops, routers, switches, and networking
devices; gas-fired electricity plants; biotechnology; discount retail; express
package delivery; minivans; snowboards; and coffee bars to name a few.
Just four decades ago, none of these industries existed in a meaningful way.
Now put the clock forward twenty years—or perhaps fifty years—and
ask yourself how many now unknown industries will likely exist then. If
history is any predictor of the future, again the answer is many of them.
The reality is that industries never stand still. They continuously evolve.
Operations improve, markets expand, and players come and go. History
teaches us that we have a hugely underestimated capacity to create new
industries and re-create existing ones. In fact, the more than half-century-
old Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system published by the US
Census was replaced in 1997 by the North America Industry Classification
Standard (NAICS) system. The new system expanded the ten SIC industry
sectors into twenty sectors to reflect the emerging realities of new industry
territories.5 The services sector under the old system, for example, is now
expanded into seven business sectors ranging from information to health
care and social assistance.6 Given that these systems are designed for
standardization and continuity, such a replacement shows how significant
the expansion of blue oceans has been.
Yet the overriding focus of strategic thinking has been on competition-
based red ocean strategies. Part of the explanation for this is that corporate
strategy is heavily influenced by its roots in military strategy. The very
language of strategy is deeply imbued with military references—chief
executive “officers” in “headquarters,” “troops” on the “front lines.”
Described this way, strategy is about confronting an opponent and fighting


over a given piece of land that is both limited and constant.7 Unlike war,
however, the history of industry shows us that the market universe has
never been constant; rather, blue oceans have continuously been created
over time. To focus on the red ocean is therefore to accept the key
constraining factors of war—limited terrain and the need to beat an enemy
to succeed—and to deny the distinctive strength of the business world: the
capacity to create new market space that is uncontested.
OceanofPDF.com


The Impact of Creating Blue Oceans
We set out to quantify the impact of creating blue oceans on a company’s
growth in both revenues and profits in a study of the business launches of
108 companies (see figure 1-1). We found that 86 percent of the launches
were line extensions, that is, incremental improvements within the red ocean
of existing market space. Yet they accounted for only 62 percent of total
revenues and a mere 39 percent of total profits. The remaining 14 percent of
the launches were aimed at creating blue oceans. They generated 38 percent
of total revenues and 61 percent of total profits. Given that business launches
included the total investments made for creating red and blue oceans
(regardless of their subsequent revenue and profit consequences, including
failures), the performance benefits of creating blue waters are evident.
Although we don’t have data on the hit rate of success of red and blue ocean
initiatives, the global performance differences between them are marked.
FIGURE 1-1
The profit and growth consequences of creating blue oceans
OceanofPDF.com


The Rising Imperative of Creating Blue Oceans
There are several driving forces behind a rising imperative to create blue
oceans. Accelerated technological advances have substantially improved
industrial productivity and have allowed suppliers to produce an
unprecedented array of products and services. The result is that in
increasing numbers of industries, supply exceeds demand.8 The trend
toward globalization compounds the situation. As trade barriers between
nations and regions are dismantled and as information on products and
prices becomes instantly and globally available, niche markets and havens
for monopoly continue to disappear.9 While supply is on the rise as global
competition intensifies, there is no clear evidence of an increase in demand
relative to supply, and statistics even point to declining populations in many
developed markets.10
The result has been accelerated commoditization of products and
services, increasing price wars, and shrinking profit margins. Industrywide
studies on major American brands confirm this trend.11 They reveal that for
major product and service categories, brands are generally becoming more
similar, and as they are becoming more similar, people increasingly select
based on price.12 People no longer insist, as in the past, that their laundry
detergent be Tide. Nor will they necessarily stick to Colgate when Crest is
on sale, and vice versa. In overcrowded industries, differentiating brands
becomes harder in both economic upturns and downturns.
All this suggests that the business environment in which most strategy
and management approaches of the twentieth century evolved is
increasingly disappearing. As red oceans become increasingly bloody,
management will need to be more concerned with blue oceans than the
current cohort of managers is accustomed to.
OceanofPDF.com


From Company and Industry to Strategic Move
How can a company break out of the red ocean of bloody competition?
How can it create a blue ocean? Is there a systematic approach to achieve
this and thereby sustain high performance?
In search of an answer, our initial step was to define the basic unit of
analysis for our research. To understand the roots of high performance, the
business literature typically uses the company as the basic unit of analysis.
People have marveled at how companies attain strong, profitable growth
with a distinguished set of strategic, operational, and organizational
characteristics. Our question, however, was this: Are there lasting
“excellent” or “visionary” companies that continuously outperform the
market and repeatedly create blue oceans?
Consider, for example, In Search of Excellence and Built to Last.13 The
bestselling book In Search of Excellence was published some thirty years
ago. Yet within two years of its publication, a number of the companies
surveyed began to slip into oblivion: Atari, Chesebrough-Pond’s, Data
General, Fluor, National Semiconductor. As documented in Managing on
the Edge, two-thirds of the identified model firms in the book had fallen
from their perches as industry leaders within five years of its publication.14
The book Built to Last continued in the same footsteps. It sought out the
“successful habits of visionary companies” that had a long-running track
record of superior performance. To avoid the pitfalls of In Search of
Excellence, however, the survey period of Built to Last was expanded to the
entire life span of the companies, while its analysis was limited to firms
more than forty years old. Built to Last also became a bestseller.
But again, upon closer examination, deficiencies in some of the visionary
companies spotlighted in Built to Last have come to light. As illustrated in
the book Creative Destruction, much of the success attributed to some of
the model companies in Built to Last was the result of industry-sector
performance rather than the companies themselves.15 For example,
Hewlett-Packard (HP) met the criteria of Built to Last by outperforming the
market over the long term. In reality, while HP outperformed the market, so
did the entire computer-hardware industry. What’s more, HP did not even


outperform the competition within the industry. Through this and other
examples, Creative Destruction questioned whether “visionary” companies
that continuously outperform the market have ever existed.
If there is no perpetually high-performing company and if the same
company can be brilliant at one moment and wrongheaded at another, it
appears that the company is not the appropriate unit of analysis in exploring
the roots of high performance and blue oceans.
As discussed earlier, history also shows that industries are constantly
being created and expanded over time and that industry conditions and
boundaries are not given; individual actors can shape them. Companies
need not compete head-on in a given industry space; Cirque du Soleil
created a new market space in the entertainment sector, generating strong,
profitable growth as a result. It appears, then, that neither the company nor
the industry is the best unit of analysis in studying the roots of profitable
growth.
Consistent with this observation, our study shows that the strategic move,
and not the company or the industry, is the right unit of analysis for
explaining the creation of blue oceans and sustained high performance. A
strategic move is the set of managerial actions and decisions involved in
making a major market-creating business offering. Compaq, for example,
was acquired by Hewlett-Packard in 2001 and ceased to be an independent
company. As a result, many people might judge the company as
unsuccessful. This does not, however, invalidate the blue ocean strategic
moves that Compaq made in creating the server industry. These strategic
moves not only were a part of the company’s powerful comeback in the
mid-1990s but also unlocked a new multibillion-dollar market space in
computing.
Appendix A, “A Sketch of the Historical Pattern of Blue Ocean
Creation,” provides a snapshot overview of the history of three
representative US industries drawn from our database: the auto industry—
how we get to work; the computer industry—what we use at work; and the
cinema industry—where we go after work for enjoyment. As shown in
appendix A, no perpetually excellent company or industry is found. But a
striking commonality appears to exist across strategic moves that have


created blue oceans and have led to new trajectories of strong, profitable
growth.
The strategic moves we discuss—moves that have delivered products and
services that opened and captured new market space, with a significant leap
in demand—contain great stories of profitable growth as well as thought-
provoking tales of missed opportunities by companies stuck in red oceans.
We built our study around these strategic moves to understand the pattern
by which blue oceans are created and high performance achieved. The
original research for our book covered more than one hundred fifty strategic
moves made from 1880 to 2000 in more than thirty industries. In
conducting our research, we closely examined the relevant business players
in each event. Industries ranged from hotels, the cinema, retail, airlines,
energy, computers, broadcasting, and construction to automobiles and steel.
We analyzed not only winning business players who created blue oceans
but also their less successful competitors.
Both within a given strategic move and across strategic moves, we
searched for convergence among the group that created blue oceans and
within less successful players caught in the red ocean. We also searched for
divergence across these two groups. In so doing, we tried to discover the
common factors leading to the creation of blue oceans and the key
differences separating those winners from the mere survivors and the losers
adrift in the red ocean.
Our analysis of more than thirty industries confirms that neither industry
nor organizational characteristics explain the distinction between the two
groups. In assessing industry, organizational, and strategic variables, we
found that the creation and capturing of blue oceans were achieved by small
and large companies, by young and old managers, by companies in
attractive and unattractive industries, by new entrants and established
incumbents, by private and public companies, by companies in B2B and
B2C industries, and by companies of diverse national origins.
Our analysis failed to find any perpetually excellent company or industry.
What we did find behind the seemingly idiosyncratic success stories,
however, was a consistent and common pattern across strategic moves for
creating and capturing blue oceans. Whether it was Ford in 1908 with the
Model T; GM in 1924 with cars styled to appeal to the emotions; CNN in


1980 with real-time news 24/7; or Compaq Servers, Starbucks, Southwest
Airlines, Cirque du Soleil, or more recently Salesforce.com—or, for that
matter, any of the other blue ocean moves in our study—the approach to
strategy in creating blue oceans was consistent across time regardless of
industry. Our research also reached out to embrace famous strategic moves
in public-sector turnarounds. Here we found a strikingly similar pattern. As
our database and research have continued to expand and grow over the last
ten years since the first edition of our book was published, we have
continued to observe similar patterns.
OceanofPDF.com


Value Innovation: The Cornerstone of Blue Ocean
Strategy
What consistently separated winners from losers in creating blue oceans was
their approach to strategy. The companies caught in the red ocean followed a
conventional approach, racing to beat the competition by building a
defensible position within the existing industry order.16 The creators of blue
oceans, surprisingly, didn’t use the competition as their benchmark.17
Instead, they followed a different strategic logic that we call value
innovation. Value innovation is the cornerstone of blue ocean strategy. We
call it value innovation because instead of focusing on beating the
competition, you focus on making the competition irrelevant by creating a
leap in value for buyers and your company, thereby opening up new and
uncontested market space.
Value innovation places equal emphasis on value and innovation. Value
without innovation tends to focus on value creation on an incremental scale,
something that improves value but is not sufficient to make you stand out in
the marketplace.18 Innovation without value tends to be technology-driven,
market pioneering, or futuristic, often shooting beyond what buyers are
ready to accept and pay for.19 In this sense, it is important to distinguish
between value innovation as opposed to technology innovation and market
pioneering. Our study shows that what separates winners from losers in
creating blue oceans is neither bleeding-edge technology nor “timing for
market entry.” Sometimes these exist; more often, however, they do not.
Value innovation occurs only when companies align innovation with utility,
price, and cost positions. If they fail to anchor innovation with value in this
way, technology innovators and market pioneers often lay the eggs that other
companies hatch.
Value innovation is a new way of thinking about and executing strategy
that results in the creation of a blue ocean and a break from the competition.
Importantly, value innovation defies one of the most commonly accepted
dogmas of competition-based strategy: the value-cost trade-off.20 It is
conventionally believed that companies can either create greater value to
customers at a higher cost or create reasonable value at a lower cost. Here
strategy is seen as making a choice between differentiation and low cost.21


In contrast, those that seek to create blue oceans pursue differentiation and
low cost simultaneously.
Let’s return to the example of Cirque du Soleil. Pursuing differentiation
and low cost simultaneously lies at the heart of the entertainment experience
it created. At the time of its debut, other circuses focused on benchmarking
one another and maximizing their share of already shrinking demand by
tweaking traditional circus acts. This included trying to secure more famous
clowns and lion tamers, a strategy that raised circuses’ cost structure without
substantially altering the circus experience. The result was rising costs
without rising revenues, and a downward spiral of overall circus demand.
These efforts were made irrelevant when Cirque du Soleil appeared.
Neither an ordinary circus nor a classic theater production, Cirque du Soleil
paid no heed to what the competition did. Instead of following the
conventional logic of outpacing the competition by offering a better solution
to the given problem—creating a circus with even greater fun and thrills—it
sought to offer people the fun and thrill of the circus and the intellectual
sophistication and artistic richness of the theater at the same time; hence, it
redefined the problem itself.22 By breaking the market boundaries of theater
and circus, Cirque du Soleil gained a new understanding not only of circus
customers but also of circus noncustomers: adult theater customers.
This led to a whole new circus concept that broke the value-cost trade-off
and created a blue ocean of new market space. Consider the differences.
Whereas other circuses focused on offering animal shows, hiring star
performers, presenting multiple show arenas in the form of three rings, and
pushing aisle concession sales, Cirque du Soleil did away with all these
factors. These factors had long been taken for granted in the traditional
circus industry, which never questioned their ongoing relevance. However,
there was increasing public discomfort with the use of animals. Moreover,
animal acts were one of the most expensive elements, including not only the
cost of the animals but also their training, medical care, housing, insurance,
and transportation.
Similarly, while the circus industry focused on featuring stars, in the mind
of the public the so-called stars of the circus were trivial next to movie stars
or famous singers. Again, they were a high-cost component carrying little
sway with spectators. Gone, too, are three-ring venues. Not only did this
arrangement create angst among spectators as they rapidly switched their


gaze from one ring to the other, but it also increased the number of
performers needed, with obvious cost implications. And although aisle
concession sales appeared to be a good way to generate revenue, in practice
the high prices discouraged audiences from making purchases and made
them feel they were being taken for a ride.
The lasting allure of the traditional circus came down to only three key
factors: the tent, the clowns, and the classic acrobatic acts such as the
wheelman and short stunts. So Cirque du Soleil kept the clowns but shifted
their humor from slapstick to a more enchanting, sophisticated style. It
glamorized the tent, an element that, ironically, many circuses had begun to
forfeit in favor of rented venues. Seeing that this unique venue symbolically
captured the magic of the circus, Cirque du Soleil designed the classic
symbol of the circus with a glorious external finish and a higher level of
comfort, making its tents reminiscent of the grand epic circuses. Gone were
the sawdust and hard benches. Acrobats and other thrilling acts are retained,
but their roles were reduced and made more elegant by the addition of
artistic flair and intellectual wonder to the acts.
By looking across the market boundary of theater, Cirque du Soleil also
offered new noncircus factors, such as a story line and, with it, intellectual
richness, artistic music and dance, and multiple productions. These factors,
entirely new creations for the circus industry, are drawn from the alternative
live entertainment industry of theater.
Unlike traditional circus shows having a series of unrelated acts, for
example, Cirque du Soleil creations have a theme and story line, somewhat
resembling a theater performance. Although the theme is vague (and
intentionally so), it brings harmony and an intellectual element to the show
—without limiting the potential for acts. Cirque also borrows ideas from
Broadway shows. For example, it features multiple productions rather than
the traditional “one for all” shows. As with Broadway shows, too, each
Cirque du Soleil show has an original score and assorted music, which
drives the visual performance, lighting, and timing of the acts rather than the
other way around. The shows feature abstract and spiritual dance, an idea
derived from theater and ballet. By introducing these new factors into its
offering, Cirque du Soleil has created more sophisticated shows.
Moreover, by injecting the concept of multiple productions and by giving
people a reason to come to the circus more frequently, Cirque du Soleil


dramatically increased demand.
In short, Cirque du Soleil offers the best of both circus and theater, and it
has eliminated or reduced everything else. By offering unprecedented utility,
Cirque du Soleil created a blue ocean and invented a new form of live
entertainment, one that is markedly different from both traditional circus and
theater. At the same time, by eliminating many of the most costly elements
of the circus, it dramatically reduced its cost structure, achieving both
differentiation and low cost. Cirque strategically priced its tickets against
those of the theater, lifting the price point of the circus industry by several
multiples while still pricing its productions to capture the mass of adult
customers, who were used to theater prices.
Figure 1-2 depicts the differentiation– low cost dynamics underpinning
value innovation.
FIGURE 1-2
Value innovation: The cornerstone of blue ocean strategy
Value innovation is created in the region where a company’s actions
favorably affect both its cost structure and its value proposition to buyers.
Cost savings are made by eliminating and reducing the factors an industry
competes on. Buyer value is lifted by raising and creating elements the
industry has never offered. Over time, costs are reduced further as scale
economies kick in due to the high sales volumes that superior value
generates.


As shown in figure 1-2, the creation of blue oceans is about driving costs
down while simultaneously driving value up for buyers. This is how a leap
in value for both the company and its buyers is achieved. Because buyer
value comes from the utility and price that the company offers to buyers and
because the value to the company is generated from price and its cost
structure, value innovation is achieved only when the system of the
company’s utility, price, and cost activities is properly aligned. To sustain
value innovation, however, people working for and with the company need
to support it. For value innovation to be a sustainable strategy, then, the
alignment of the company’s utility, price, cost, and people is needed. It is
this whole-system approach that makes value innovation strategic rather
than operational or functional.
In contrast, innovations such as production innovations can be achieved at
the subsystem level without impacting the company’s overall strategy. An
innovation in the production process, for example, may lower a company’s
cost structure to reinforce its existing cost leadership strategy without
changing the utility proposition of its offering. Although innovations of this
sort may help to secure and even lift a company’s position in the existing


market space, such a subsystem approach will rarely create a blue ocean of
new market space.
In this sense, value innovation is a distinct concept. It is about strategy
that embraces the entire system of a company’s activities.23 Value innovation
requires companies to orient the whole system toward achieving a leap in
value for both buyers and themselves. Absent such an integral approach,
innovation will remain divided from the core of strategy.24 Figure 1-3
outlines the key defining features of red and blue ocean strategies.
FIGURE 1-3
Red ocean versus blue ocean strategy
Competition-based red ocean strategy assumes that an industry’s structural
conditions are given and that firms are forced to compete within them, an
assumption based on what the academics call the structuralist view, or
environmental determinism.25 In contrast, value innovation is based on the


view that market boundaries and industry structure are not given and can be
reconstructed by the actions and beliefs of industry players. We call this the
reconstructionist view. In the red ocean, differentiation raises costs because
firms compete with the same best-practice rule. Here, the strategic choices
for firms are to pursue either differentiation or low cost. In the
reconstructionist world, however, the strategic aim is to create new best-
practice rules by breaking the existing value-cost trade-off and thereby
creating a blue ocean. (For more discussions on this, see appendix B, “Value
Innovation: A Reconstructionist View of Strategy.”)
Cirque du Soleil broke the best practice rule of the circus industry,
achieving both differentiation and low cost by reconstructing elements
across existing industry boundaries. Is Cirque du Soleil, then, really a circus,
with all that it eliminated, reduced, raised, and created? Or is it theater? And
if it is theater, then what genre—a Broadway show, an opera, a ballet? It is
not clear. Cirque du Soleil reconstructed elements across these alternatives,
and, in the end, it is simultaneously a little of all of them and none of any of
them in their entirety. It created a blue ocean of new, uncontested market
space.
OceanofPDF.com


Formulating and Executing Blue Ocean Strategy
Although economic conditions indicate the rising imperative of blue oceans,
there is a general belief that the odds of success are lower when companies
venture beyond existing industry space.26 The issue is how to succeed in
blue oceans. How can companies systematically maximize the opportunities
while simultaneously minimizing the risks of formulating and executing blue
ocean strategy? If you lack an understanding of the opportunity-maximizing
and risk-minimizing principles driving the creation and capture of blue
oceans, the odds will be lengthened against your blue ocean initiative.
Of course, there is no such thing as a riskless strategy.27 Strategy will
always involve both opportunity and risk, be it a red ocean or a blue ocean
initiative. But at present the playing field is dramatically unbalanced in favor
of tools and analytical frameworks to succeed in red oceans. As long as this
remains true, red oceans will continue to dominate companies’ strategic
agendas even as the business imperative for creating blue oceans takes on
new urgency. Perhaps this explains why, despite prior calls for companies to
go beyond existing industry space, companies have yet to act seriously on
these recommendations.
This book seeks to address this imbalance by laying out a methodology to
support our thesis. Here we present the principles and analytical frameworks
to succeed in blue oceans.
Chapter 2 introduces the analytical tools and frameworks that are essential
for creating and capturing blue oceans. Although supplementary tools are
introduced in other chapters as needed, these basic analytics are used
throughout the book. Companies can make proactive changes in industry or
market fundamentals through the purposeful application of these blue ocean
tools and frameworks, which are grounded in the issues of both opportunity
and risk. Subsequent chapters introduce the principles that drive the
successful formulation and implementation of blue ocean strategy and
explain how they, along with the analytics, are applied in action. There are
four guiding principles for the successful formulation of blue ocean strategy.
Chapters 3 through 6 address these in turn. Chapter 3 identifies the paths by
which you can systematically create uncontested market space across diverse
industry domains, hence attenuating search risk. It teaches you how to make


the competition irrelevant by looking across the six conventional boundaries
of competition to open up commercially important blue oceans. The six
paths focus on looking across alternative industries, across strategic groups,
across buyer groups, across complementary product and service offerings,
across the functional-emotional orientation of an industry, and even across
time.
Chapter 4 shows how to design a company’s strategic planning process to
go beyond incremental improvements to create value innovations. It presents
an alternative to the existing strategic planning process, which is often
criticized as a number-crunching exercise that keeps companies locked into
making incremental improvements. This principle tackles planning risk.
Using a visualizing approach that drives you to focus on the big picture
rather than to be submerged in numbers and jargon, this chapter proposes a
four-step process whereby you can build a strategy that creates and captures
blue ocean opportunities.
Chapter 5 shows how to maximize the size of a blue ocean. To create the
greatest market of new demand, this chapter challenges the conventional
practice of aiming for finer segmentation to better meet existing customer
preferences. This practice often results in increasingly small target markets.
Instead, this chapter shows you how to aggregate demand, not by focusing
on the differences that separate customers but by building on the powerful
commonalities across noncustomers to maximize the size of the blue ocean
being created and new demand being unlocked, hence minimizing scale risk.
Chapter 6 lays out the design of a strategy that allows you not only to
provide a leap in value to the mass of buyers but also to build a viable
business model to produce and maintain profitable growth. It shows you how
to ensure that your company builds a business model that profits from the
blue ocean it is creating. It addresses business model risk. The chapter
articulates the sequence in which you should create a strategy to ensure that
both you and your customers win as you create new business terrain. Such a
strategy follows the sequence of utility, price, cost, and adoption.
Chapters 7 through 10 turn to the principles that drive effective execution
of blue ocean strategy. Specifically, chapter 7 introduces what we call
tipping point leadership. Tipping point leadership shows managers how to
mobilize an organization to overcome the key organizational hurdles that
block the implementation of a blue ocean strategy. It deals with


organizational risk. It lays out how leaders and managers alike can surmount
the cognitive, resource, motivational, and political hurdles in spite of limited
time and resources in executing blue ocean strategy.
Chapter 8 argues for the integration of execution into strategy making,
thus motivating people to act on and execute a blue ocean strategy in a
sustained way deep in an organization. This chapter introduces what we call
fair process. Because a blue ocean strategy perforce represents a departure
from the status quo, this chapter shows how fair process facilitates both
strategy making and execution by mobilizing people for the voluntary
cooperation needed to execute blue ocean strategy. It deals with management
risk associated with people’s attitudes and behaviors. People here include
both internal and external stakeholders who work for and with an
organization.
Chapter 9, new in this expanded edition, tackles the overarching concept
of alignment and the critical role it plays for the sustainability of a strategy.
Here we provide a simple but comprehensive framework to fully develop
and align an organization’s three strategy propositions from value to profit to
people. It deals with how to manage sustainability risk. While this chapter
starts with the importance of alignment for the sustainability of any strategy,
whether blue or red, it shows how alignment works in the context of blue
ocean strategy by illustrating and contrasting cases of success and failure.
Chapter 10 addresses the issue of renewal and the dynamic aspects of blue
ocean strategy at both the business level and the corporate level for
multibusiness firms. Here we expand our original discussion on how to
manage and monitor your individual business and your corporate portfolio
over time to achieve continuing high performance. In so doing, this chapter
deals with the important issue of managing renewal risk so that the blue
ocean strategy process can become institutionalized rather than a one-off
occurrence. This chapter shows how red and blue ocean strategies fit
together and complement each other in the context of managing a corporate
portfolio over time.
Figure 1-4 highlights the eight principles driving the successful
formulation and execution of blue ocean strategy and the risks that these
principles attenuate.


FIGURE 1-4
The eight principles of blue ocean strategy
Lastly, we end our expanded edition with a new chapter where we zoom
in on the ten most-common red ocean traps that keep organizations anchored
in the red even as they set out to sail into the blue. Here we expressly
address how to avoid each of these traps. We highlight and set straight the
misconceptions behind these red ocean traps to ensure people have not only
the right framing but also the proper application of blue ocean strategy tools
to achieve success in practice.
Let’s now move on to chapter 2, where we lay out the basic analytical
tools and frameworks that will be used throughout this book in the
formulation and execution of blue ocean strategy.
OceanofPDF.com


CHAPTER 2
Analytical Tools and Frameworks
WE SPENT A DECADE DEVELOPING a set of analytical tools and frameworks
in an attempt to make the formulation and execution of blue ocean strategy
as systematic and actionable as competing in the red waters of known
market space. These analytics fill a central void in the field of strategy,
which has developed an impressive array of tools and frameworks to
compete in red oceans, such as the five forces for analyzing existing
industry conditions and three generic strategies, but has remained virtually
silent on practical tools to excel in blue oceans. Instead, executives have
received calls to be brave and entrepreneurial, to learn from failure, and to
seek out revolutionaries. Although thought provoking, these are not
substitutes for analytics to navigate successfully in blue waters. In the
absence of analytics, executives cannot be expected to act on the call to
break out of existing competition. Effective blue ocean strategy should be
about risk minimization and not risk taking.
To address this imbalance, we studied companies around the world and
developed practical methodologies in the quest of blue oceans. We then
applied and tested these tools and frameworks in action by working with
companies in their pursuit of blue oceans, enriching and refining them in
the process. The tools and frameworks presented here are used throughout
this book as we discuss the eight principles of formulating and executing
