# 2 Analytical Tools and Frameworks

blue ocean strategy. As a brief introduction to these tools and frameworks,
let’s look at one industry—the US wine industry—to see how these tools
can be applied in practice in the creation of blue oceans.
Here is the situation. Up until 2000, the United States had the third
largest aggregate consumption of wine worldwide with an estimated $20
billion in sales. Yet despite its size, the industry was intensely competitive.
California wines dominated the domestic market, capturing two-thirds of all
US wine sales. These wines competed head-to-head with imported wines
from France, Italy, and Spain and New World wines from countries such as
Chile, Australia, and Argentina, which increasingly targeted the US market.
At the same time, the supply of wines was increasing from Oregon,
Washington, and New York State and with newly mature vineyard plantings
in California, the number of wines was exploding. Yet the US consumer
base had essentially remained stagnant. The United States remained stuck at
thirty-first place in world per capita wine consumption.
The intense competition fueled ongoing industry consolidation. The top
eight companies produced more than 75 percent of the wine in the United
States, and the estimated one thousand six hundred other wineries at the
time produced the remaining 25 percent. The dominance of a few key
players allowed them to leverage distributors to gain shelf space and put
millions of dollars into above-the-line marketing budgets. A simultaneous
consolidation of retailers and distributors was also underway across the
United States, something that raised their bargaining power against the
plethora of wine makers. Titanic battles were being fought for retail and
distribution space. It is no surprise that weak, poorly run companies were
increasingly being swept aside. Downward pressure on wine prices had set
in.
In short, the US wine industry in 2000 faced intense competition,
mounting price pressure, increasing bargaining power on the part of retail
and distribution channels, and flat demand despite overwhelming choice.
Following conventional strategic thinking, the industry was hardly
attractive. For strategists, the critical question is, How do you break out of
this red ocean of bloody competition to make the competition irrelevant?
How do you open up and capture a blue ocean of uncontested market
space?


To address these questions, we turn to the strategy canvas, an analytic
framework that is central to value innovation and the creation of blue
oceans.
OceanofPDF.com


The Strategy Canvas
The strategy canvas is both a diagnostic and an action framework for
building a compelling blue ocean strategy. It serves two purposes. First, it
captures the current state of play in the known market space. This allows you
to understand where the competition is currently investing, the factors the
industry currently competes on in products, service, and delivery, and what
customers receive from the existing competitive offerings on the market.
Figure 2-1 captures all this information in graphic form. The horizontal axis
captures the range of factors the industry competes on and invests in.
FIGURE 2-1
The strategy canvas of the US wine industry in the late 1990s


In the case of the US wine industry, it had long competed on seven
principal factors:
Price per bottle of wine
An elite, refined image in packaging, including labels announcing the
wine medals won and the use of esoteric enological terminology to
stress the art and science of wine making
Above-the-line marketing to raise consumer awareness in a crowded
market and to encourage distributors and retailers to give prominence to
a particular wine house
Aging quality of wine
The prestige of a wine’s vineyard and its legacy (hence the appellations
of estates and chateaux and references to the historic age of the
establishment)
The complexity and sophistication of a wine’s taste, including such
things as tannins and oak
A diverse range of wines to cover all varieties of grapes and consumer
preferences from Chardonnay to Merlot, and so on
These factors were viewed as key to the promotion of wine as a unique
beverage for the informed wine drinker, worthy of special occasions.
That was essentially the underlying structure of the US wine industry
from the market perspective. Now let’s turn to the vertical axis of the
strategy canvas, which captures the offering level that buyers receive across
all these key competing factors. A high score means that a company offers
buyers more, and hence invests more, in that factor. In the case of price, a
higher score indicates a higher price. We can now plot the current offering of
wineries across all these factors to understand wineries’ strategic profiles, or
value curves. The value curve, the basic component of the strategy canvas, is
a graphic depiction of a company’s relative performance across its industry’s
factors of competition.
Figure 2-1 shows that, although more than one thousand six hundred
wineries participated in the US wine industry in 2000, from the buyer’s point
of view there was enormous convergence in their value curves. Despite the
plethora of competitors, when premium brand wines are plotted on the


strategy canvas, we discover that from the market point of view all of them
essentially have the same strategic profile. They offered a high price and
presented a high level of offering across all the key competing factors. Their
strategic profile follows a classic differentiation strategy. From the market
point of view, however, they are all different in the same way. On the other
hand, budget wines also have the same essential strategic profile. Their price
was low, as was their offering across all the key competing factors. These are
classic low-cost players. Moreover, the value curves of premium and low-
cost wines share the same basic shape. The two strategic groups’ strategies
marched in lockstep, but at different altitudes of offering level.
To set a company on a strong, profitable growth trajectory in the face of
industry conditions like these, it won’t work to benchmark competitors and
try to outcompete them by offering a little more for a little less. Such a
strategy may nudge sales up but will hardly drive a company to open up
uncontested market space. Nor is conducting extensive customer research
the path to blue oceans. Our research found that customers can scarcely
imagine how to create uncontested market space. Their insight also tends
toward the familiar “offer me more for less.” And what customers typically
want “more” of are those product and service features that the industry
currently offers.
To fundamentally shift the strategy canvas of an industry, you must begin
by reorienting your strategic focus from competitors to alternatives, and
from customers to noncustomers of the industry.1 To pursue both value and
low cost, you should resist the old logic of benchmarking competitors in the
existing field and choosing between differentiation and cost leadership. As
you shift your strategic focus from current competition to alternatives and
noncustomers, you gain insight into how to redefine the problem the industry
focuses on and thereby reconstruct buyer value elements that reside across
industry boundaries. Conventional strategic logic, by contrast, drives you to
offer better solutions than your rivals to existing problems defined by your
industry.
In the case of the US wine industry, conventional wisdom caused wineries
to focus on overdelivering on prestige and the quality of wine at its price
point. Overdelivery meant adding complexity to the wine based on taste
profiles shared by wine makers and reinforced by the wine show judging
system. Wine makers, show judges, and knowledgeable drinkers concur that


complexity—layered personality and characteristics that reflect the
uniqueness of the soil, season, and wine maker’s skill in tannins, oak, and
aging processes—equates with quality.
By looking across alternatives, however, Casella Wines, an Australian
winery, redefined the problem of the wine industry to a new one: how to
make a fun and nontraditional wine that’s easy to drink for everyone. Why?
In looking at the demand side of the alternatives of beer, spirits, and ready-
to-drink cocktails, which captured three times as many US consumer alcohol
sales as wine at the time, Casella Wines found that the mass of American
adults saw wine as a turnoff. It was intimidating and pretentious, and the
complexity of wine’s taste created flavor challenges for the average person,
even though it was the basis on which the industry fought to excel. With this
insight, Casella Wines was ready to explore how to redraw the strategic
profile of the US wine industry to create a blue ocean. To achieve this, it
turned to the second basic analytic underlying blue oceans: the four actions
framework.
OceanofPDF.com


The Four Actions Framework
To reconstruct buyer value elements in crafting a new value curve, we have
developed the four actions framework. As shown in figure 2-2, to break the
trade-off between differentiation and low cost and to create a new value
curve, there are four key questions to challenge an industry’s strategic logic
and business model:
Which of the factors that the industry takes for granted should be
eliminated?
Which factors should be reduced well below the industry’s standard?
Which factors should be raised well above the industry’s standard?
Which factors should be created that the industry has never offered?
FIGURE 2-2
The four actions framework


The first question forces you to consider eliminating factors that
companies in your industry have long competed on. Often those factors are
taken for granted even though they no longer have value or may even detract
from value. Sometimes there is a fundamental change in what buyers value,
but companies that are focused on benchmarking one another do not act on,
or even perceive, the change.
The second question forces you to determine whether products or services
have been overdesigned in the race to match and beat the competition. Here,
companies overserve customers, increasing their cost structure for no gain.
The third question pushes you to uncover and eliminate the compromises
your industry forces customers to make. The fourth question helps you to
discover entirely new sources of value for buyers and to create new demand
and shift the strategic pricing of the industry.
It is by pursuing the first two questions (of eliminating and reducing) that
you gain insight into how to drop your cost structure vis-à-vis competitors.
Our research has found that rarely do managers systematically set out to


eliminate and reduce their investments in factors that an industry competes
on. The result is mounting cost structures and complex business models. The
second two factors, by contrast, provide you with insight into how to lift
buyer value and create new demand. Collectively, they allow you to
systematically explore how you can reconstruct buyer value elements across
alternative industries to offer buyers an entirely new experience, while
simultaneously keeping your cost structure low. Of particular importance are
the actions of eliminating and creating, which push companies to go beyond
value maximization exercises with existing factors of competition.
Eliminating and creating prompt companies to change the factors
themselves, hence making the existing rules of competition irrelevant.
When you apply the four actions framework to the strategy canvas of your
industry, you get a revealing new look at old perceived truths. In the case of
the US wine industry, by thinking in terms of these four actions vis-à-vis the
current industry logic and looking across alternatives and noncustomers,
Casella Wines created [yellow tail], a wine whose strategic profile broke
from the competition and created a blue ocean. Instead of offering wine as
wine, Casella created a social drink accessible to everyone: beer drinkers,
cocktail drinkers, and traditional drinkers of wine. In the space of only two
years, the fun, social drink [yellow tail] emerged as the fastest-growing
brand in the histories of both the Australian and the US wine industries and
the number-one imported wine into the United States, surpassing the wines
of France and Italy. By August 2003, it was the number-one red wine in a
750-ml bottle sold in the United States, outstripping California labels. By
mid-2003, [yellow tail]’s moving average annual sales were tracking at 4.5
million cases. In the context of a global wine glut, [yellow tail] was racing to
keep up with sales. Today, ten years later, [yellow tail] is available in more
than fifty countries with more than 2.5 million glasses of [yellow tail]
enjoyed around the world each day. In the space of a decade, it emerged as
one of the top-five most powerful wine brands in the world.2
What’s more, whereas large wine companies developed strong brands
over decades of marketing investment, [yellow tail] leapfrogged tall
competitors with no promotional campaign, mass media, or consumer
advertising for the initial years. It didn’t simply steal sales from competitors;
it grew the market. [yellow tail] brought nonwine drinkers—beer and ready-
to-drink cocktail consumers—into the wine market. Moreover, novice table


wine drinkers started to drink wine more frequently, jug wine drinkers
moved up, and drinkers of more expensive wines moved down to become
consumers of [yellow tail].
Figure 2-3 shows the extent to which the application of these four actions
led to a break from the competition in the US wine industry. Here we can
graphically compare [yellow tail]’s blue ocean strategy with the more than
one thousand six hundred wineries competing in the United States at the
time. As shown in figure 2-3, [yellow tail]’s value curve stands apart. Casella
Wines acted on all four actions—eliminate, reduce, raise, and create—to
unlock uncontested market space that changed the face of the US wine
industry in a span of two years.
FIGURE 2-3
The strategy canvas of [yellow tail]


By looking at the alternatives of beer and ready-to-drink cocktails and
thinking in terms of noncustomers, Casella Wines created three new factors
in the US wine industry—easy drinking, ease of selection, and fun and
adventure—and eliminated or reduced everything else. Casella Wines found
that the mass of Americans rejected wine because its complicated taste was
difficult to appreciate. Beer and ready-to-drink cocktails, for example, were
much sweeter and easier to drink. Accordingly, [yellow tail] was a
completely new combination of wine characteristics that produced an
uncomplicated wine structure that was instantly appealing to the mass of
alcohol drinkers. The wine was soft in taste and approachable like ready-to-
drink cocktails and beer, and had up-front, primary flavors and pronounced
fruit flavors. The sweet fruitiness of the wine also kept people’s palate
fresher, allowing them to enjoy another glass of wine without thinking about


it. The result was an easy-drinking wine that did not require years to develop
an appreciation for.
In line with this simple fruity sweetness, [yellow tail] dramatically
reduced or eliminated all the factors the wine industry had long competed on
—tannins, oak, complexity, and aging—in crafting fine wine, whether it was
for the premium or the budget segment. With the need for aging eliminated,
the needed working capital for aging wine at Casella Wines was also
reduced, creating a faster payback for the wine produced. The wine industry
criticized the sweet fruitiness of [yellow tail] wine, seeing it as significantly
lowering the quality of wine and working against proper appreciation of fine
grapes and historic wine craftsmanship. These claims may have been true,
but customers of all sorts loved the wine.
Wine retailers in the United States offered buyers aisles of wine varieties,
but to the general consumer the choice was overwhelming and intimidating.
The bottles looked the same, labels were complicated with enological
terminology understandable only to the wine connoisseur or hobbyist, and
the choice was so extensive that salesclerks at retail shops were at an equal
disadvantage in understanding or recommending wine to bewildered
potential buyers. Moreover, the rows of wine choice fatigued and
demotivated customers, making selection a difficult process that left the
average wine purchaser insecure with their choice.
[yellow tail] changed all that by creating ease of selection. It dramatically
reduced the range of wines offered, creating only two at the start:
Chardonnay, the most popular white in the United States, and a red, Shiraz.
It removed all technical jargon from the bottles and created instead a
striking, simple, and nontraditional label featuring a kangaroo in bright,
vibrant colors of orange and yellow on a black background. The wine boxes
[yellow tail] came in were also of the same vibrant colors, with the name
[yellow tail] printed boldly on the sides; the boxes served the dual purpose
of acting as eye-catching, unintimidating displays for the wine.
[yellow tail] hit a home run in ease of selection when it made retail shop
employees the ambassadors of [yellow tail] at its launch by giving them
Australian outback clothing, including bushman’s hats and oilskin jackets to
wear at work. The retail employees were inspired by the branded clothing
and having a wine they themselves did not feel intimidated by, and


recommendations to buy [yellow tail] flew out of their mouths. In short, it
was fun to recommend [yellow tail].
The simplicity of offering only two wines at the start—a red and a white
—streamlined Casella Wines’ business model. Minimizing the stockkeeping
units maximized its stock turnover and minimized investment in warehouse
inventory. In fact, this reduction of variety was carried over to the bottles
inside the cases. [yellow tail] broke industry conventions. Casella Wines was
the first company to put both red and white wine in the same-shaped bottle, a
practice that created further simplicity in manufacturing and purchasing and
resulted in stunningly simple wine displays.
The wine industry worldwide was proud to promote wine as a refined
beverage with a long history and tradition. This is reflected in the target
market for the United States: educated professionals in the upper-income
brackets. Hence, the continuous focus on the quality and legacy of the
vineyard, the chateau’s or estate’s historical tradition, and the wine medals
won. Indeed the growth strategies of the major players in the US wine
industry were targeted at the premium end of the market, with tens of
millions invested in brand advertising to strengthen this image. By looking
to beer and ready-to-drink cocktail customers, however, [yellow tail] found
that this elite image did not resonate with the general public, which found it
intimidating. So [yellow tail] broke with tradition and created a personality
that embodied the characteristics of the Australian culture: bold, laid back,
fun, and adventurous. Approachability was the mantra: “The essence of a
great land . . . Australia.” There was no traditional winery image. The
lowercase spelling of the name [yellow tail], coupled with the vibrant colors
and the kangaroo motif, echoed Australia and made people smile. And
indeed no reference to the vineyard was made on the bottle. The wine
promised to jump from the glass like an Aussie kangaroo.
The result is that [yellow tail] appealed to a broad cross section of alcohol
beverage consumers. By offering this leap in value, [yellow tail] raised the
price of its wines above the budget market, pricing them then at $6.99 a
bottle, more than double the price of a jug wine at the time. From the
moment the wine hit the retail shelves in July 2001, sales took off. Today,
over a decade later, its price stands at $7.49 in the United States.
OceanofPDF.com


The Eliminate-Reduce-Raise-Create Grid
There is a third tool that is key to creation of blue oceans. It is a
supplementary analytic to the four actions framework called the eliminate-
reduce-raise-create grid (see figure 2-4). The grid pushes companies not
only to ask all four questions in the four actions framework but also to act on
all four to create a new value curve. By driving companies to fill in the grid
with the actions of eliminating and reducing as well as raising and creating,
the grid gives companies four immediate benefits:
FIGURE 2-4
Eliminate-reduce-raise-create grid: The case of [yellow tail]


It pushes them to simultaneously pursue differentiation and low costs to
break the value-cost trade-off.
It immediately flags companies that are focused only on raising and
creating and thereby lifting their cost structure and often
overengineering products and services—a common plight in many
companies.
It is easily understood by managers at any level, creating a high level of
engagement in its application.
Because completing the grid is a challenging task, it drives companies
to robustly scrutinize every factor the industry competes on, making
them discover the range of implicit assumptions they make
unconsciously in competing.
Figure 2-5, the eliminate-reduce-raise-create grid for Cirque du Soleil,
provides another snapshot of this tool in action and shows what it reveals.
Worth noting is the range of factors that an industry has long competed on
that companies discover can be eliminated and reduced. In the case of
Cirque du Soleil, it eliminated several factors from traditional circuses, such
as animal shows, star performers, and multiple show arenas. These factors
had long been taken for granted in the traditional circus industry, which
never questioned their ongoing relevance. However, there was increasing
public discomfort with the use of animals. Moreover, animal acts are one of
the most expensive elements; not only is there the cost of the animals, but
also their training, medical care, housing, insurance, and transportation.
Similarly, although the circus industry focused on featuring stars, in the
mind of the public the so-called stars of the circus were trivial next to movie
stars or famous singers. Again, they were a high-cost component carrying
little sway with spectators. Gone, too, are three-ring venues. Not only did
these create angst among spectators as they rapidly switched their gaze from
one ring to the other, but they also increased the number of performers
needed, with the obvious cost implications.
FIGURE 2-5
Eliminate-reduce-raise-create grid: The case of Cirque du Soleil


OceanofPDF.com


Three Characteristics of a Good Strategy
[yellow tail], like Cirque du Soleil, created a unique and exceptional value
curve to unlock a blue ocean. As shown in the strategy canvas, [yellow
tail]’s value curve has focus; the company did not diffuse its efforts across
all key factors of competition. The shape of its value curve diverged from
the other players’, a result of not benchmarking competitors but instead
looking across alternatives. The tagline of [yellow tail]’s strategic profile
was clear: a fun and simple wine to be enjoyed every day.
When expressed through a value curve, then, an effective blue ocean
strategy like [yellow tail]’s has three complementary qualities: focus,
divergence, and a compelling tagline. Without these qualities, a company’s
strategy will likely be muddled, undifferentiated, and hard to communicate
with a high cost structure. The four actions of creating a new value curve
should be well guided toward building a company’s strategic profile with
these characteristics. These three characteristics serve as an initial litmus
test of the commercial viability of blue ocean ideas.
A look at Southwest Airlines’ strategic profile illustrates how these three
qualities underlie the company’s effective strategy in reinventing the short-
haul airline industry via value innovation (see figure 2-6). Southwest
Airlines created a blue ocean by breaking the trade-offs customers had to
make between the speed of airplanes and the economy and flexibility of car
transport. To achieve this, Southwest offered high-speed transport with
frequent and flexible departures at prices attractive to the mass of buyers.
By eliminating and reducing certain factors of competition and raising
others in the traditional airline industry, as well as by creating new factors
drawn from the alternative industry of car transport, Southwest Airlines was
able to offer unprecedented utility for air travelers and achieve a leap in
value with a low-cost business model.
The value curve of Southwest Airlines differs distinctively from those of
its competitors in the strategy canvas. Its strategic profile is a typical
example of a compelling blue ocean strategy.
OceanofPDF.com




Focus
Every great strategy has focus, and a company’s strategic profile, or value
curve, should clearly show it. Looking at Southwest’s profile, we can see at
once that the company emphasizes only three factors: friendly service,
speed, and frequent point-to-point departures. By focusing in this way,
Southwest has been able to price against car transportation; it doesn’t make
extra investments in meals, lounges, and seating choices. By contrast,
Southwest’s traditional competitors invest in all the airline industry’s
competitive factors, making it much more difficult for them to match
Southwest’s prices. Investing across the board, these companies let their
competitors’ moves set their own agendas. Costly business models result.
FIGURE 2-6
The strategy canvas of Southwest Airlines


OceanofPDF.com




Divergence
When a company’s strategy is formed reactively as it tries to keep up with
the competition, it loses its uniqueness. Consider the similarities in most
airlines’ meals and business-class lounges. On the strategy canvas,
therefore, reactive strategists tend to share the same strategic profile.
Indeed, in the case of Southwest, the value curves of the company’s
competitors are virtually identical and therefore can be summarized on the
strategy canvas with a single value curve.
In contrast, the value curves of blue ocean strategists always stand apart.
By applying the four actions of eliminating, reducing, raising, and creating,
they differentiate their profiles from the industry’s average profile.
Southwest, for example, pioneered point-to-point travel between midsize
cities; previously, the industry operated through hub-and-spoke systems.
OceanofPDF.com




Compelling Tagline
A good strategy has a clear-cut and compelling tagline. “The speed of a
plane at the price of a car—whenever you need it.” That’s the tagline of
Southwest Airlines, or at least it could be. What could Southwest’s
competitors say? Even the most proficient ad agency would have difficulty
reducing the conventional offering of meals, seat choices, lounges, and hub
links, with standard service, slower speeds, and higher prices into a
memorable tagline. A good tagline must not only deliver a clear message but
also advertise an offering truthfully, or else customers will lose trust and
interest. In fact, a good way to test the effectiveness and strength of a
strategy is to look at whether it contains a strong and authentic tagline.
As shown in figure 2-7, Cirque du Soleil’s strategic profile also met the
three criteria that define blue ocean strategy: focus, divergence, and a
compelling tagline. Cirque du Soleil’s strategy canvas allows us to
graphically compare its strategic profile with those of its major competitors.
The canvas shows clearly the extent of Cirque du Soleil’s departure from the
conventional logic of the circus. The figure shows that the value curve of
Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey is the same basic shape as those of
smaller regional circuses. The main difference is that regional circuses offer
less of each competing factor because of their restricted resources.
By contrast, Cirque du Soleil’s value curve stands apart. It has new and
noncircus factors such as theme, multiple productions, refined watching
environment, and artistic music and dance. These factors, entirely new
creations for the circus industry, are drawn from the alternative live
entertainment industry of theater. In this way, the strategy canvas clearly
depicts the traditional factors that affect competition among industry players,
as well as new factors that lead to creation of new market space and that
shift the strategy canvas of an industry.
FIGURE 2-7
The strategy canvas of Cirque du Soleil


[yellow tail], Cirque du Soleil, and Southwest Airlines created blue oceans
in very different business situations and industrial contexts. However, their
strategic profiles shared the same three characteristics: focus, divergence,
and a compelling tagline. These three criteria guide companies in carrying
out the process of reconstruction to arrive at a breakthrough in value both for
buyers and for themselves.
OceanofPDF.com


Reading the Value Curves
The strategy canvas enables companies to see the future in the present. To
achieve this, companies must understand how to read value curves.
Embedded in the value curves of an industry is a wealth of strategic
knowledge on the current status and future of a business.
OceanofPDF.com




A Blue Ocean Strategy
The first question the value curves answer is whether a business deserves to
be a winner. When a company’s value curve, or its competitors’, meets the
three criteria that define a good blue ocean strategy—focus, divergence, and
a compelling tagline that speaks to the market—the company is on the right
track. These three criteria serve as an initial litmus test of the commercial
viability of blue ocean ideas.
On the other hand, when a company’s value curve lacks focus, its cost
structure will tend to be high and its business model complex in
implementation and execution. When it lacks divergence, a company’s
strategy is a me-too, with no reason to stand apart in the marketplace. When
it lacks a compelling tagline that speaks to buyers, it is likely to be
internally driven or a classic example of innovation for innovation’s sake
with no great commercial potential and no natural take-off capability.
OceanofPDF.com




A Company Caught in the Red Ocean
When a company’s value curve converges with its competitors, it signals
that a company is likely caught within the red ocean of bloody competition.
A company’s explicit or implicit strategy tends to be trying to outdo its
competition on the basis of cost or quality. This signals slow growth unless,
by the grace of luck, the company benefits from being in an industry that is
growing on its own accord. This growth is not due to a company’s strategy,
however, but to luck.
OceanofPDF.com




Overdelivery without Payback
When a company’s value curve on the strategy canvas is shown to deliver
high levels across all factors, the question is, Does the company’s market
share and profitability reflect these investments? If not, the strategy canvas
signals that the company may be oversupplying its customers, offering too
much of those elements that add incremental value to buyers. To value-
innovate, the company must decide which factors to eliminate and reduce—
and not only those to raise and create—to construct a divergent value curve.
OceanofPDF.com




Strategic Contradictions
Are there strategic contradictions? These are areas where a company is
offering a high level on one competing factor while ignoring others that
support that factor. An example is investing heavily in making a company’s
website easy to use but failing to correct the site’s slow speed of operation.
Strategic inconsistencies can also be found between the level of your
offering and your price. For example, a petroleum station company found
that it offered “less for more”: fewer services than the best competitor at a
higher price. No wonder it was losing market share fast.
OceanofPDF.com




An Internally Driven Company
In drawing the strategy canvas, how does a company label the industry’s
competing factors? For example, does it use the word megahertz instead of
speed, or thermal water temperature instead of hot water? Are the
competing factors stated in terms buyers can understand and value, or are
they in operational jargon? The kind of language used in the strategy canvas
gives insight as to whether a company’s strategic vision is built on an
“outside-in” perspective, driven by the demand side, or an “inside-out”
perspective that is operationally driven. Analyzing the language of the
strategy canvas helps a company understand how far it is from creating
industry demand.
The tools and frameworks introduced here are essential analytics used
throughout this book, and supplementary tools are introduced in other
chapters as needed. It is the intersection between these analytic techniques
and the eight principles of formulating and executing blue oceans that allow
companies to break from the competition and unlock uncontested market
space.
Now we move on to the first principle, reconstructing market boundaries.
In the next chapter we discuss the opportunity-maximizing and risk-
minimizing paths to creating blue oceans.
OceanofPDF.com


PART TWO
Formulating Blue Ocean Strategy
OceanofPDF.com
