# 3 Reconstruct Market Boundaries

most companies hypnotically build their strategies, keep companies trapped
competing in red oceans. Specifically, companies tend to do the following:
Define their industry similarly and focus on being the best within it
Look at their industries through the lens of generally accepted strategic
groups (such as luxury automobiles, economy cars, and family
vehicles), and strive to stand out in the strategic group they play in
Focus on the same buyer group, be it the purchaser (as in the office
equipment industry), the user (as in the clothing industry), or the
influencer (as in the pharmaceutical industry)
Define the scope of the products and services offered by their industry
similarly
Accept their industry’s functional or emotional orientation
Focus on the same point in time—and often on current competitive
threats—in formulating strategy
The more that companies share this conventional wisdom about how they
compete, the greater the competitive convergence among them.
To break out of red oceans, companies must break out of the accepted
boundaries that define how they compete. Instead of looking within these
boundaries, managers need to look systematically across them to create blue
oceans. They need to look across alternative industries, across strategic
groups, across buyer groups, across complementary product and service
offerings, across the functional-emotional orientation of an industry, and
even across time. This gives companies keen insight into how to reconstruct
market realities to open up blue oceans. Let’s examine how each of these
six paths works.
OceanofPDF.com


Path 1: Look Across Alternative Industries
In the broadest sense, a company competes not only with the other firms in
its own industry but also with companies in those other industries that
produce alternative products or services. Alternatives are broader than
substitutes. Products or services that have different forms but offer the same
functionality or core utility are often substitutes for each other. On the other
hand, alternatives include products or services that have different functions
and forms but the same purpose.
For example, to sort out their personal finances, people can buy and install
a financial software package, hire a CPA, or simply use pencil and paper.
And nowadays there are also apps that help with this. The software, the CPA,
the pencil and financial apps are largely substitutes for each other. They have
very different forms but serve the same function: helping people manage
their financial affairs.
In contrast, products or services can take different forms and perform
different functions but serve the same objective. Consider cinemas versus
restaurants. Restaurants have few physical features in common with cinemas
and serve a distinct function: they provide conversational and gastronomical
pleasure. This is a very different experience from the visual entertainment
offered by cinemas. Despite the differences in form and function, however,
people go to a restaurant for the same objective that they go to the movies: to
enjoy a night out. These are not substitutes, but alternatives to choose from.
In making every purchase decision, buyers implicitly weigh alternatives,
often unconsciously. Do you need a self-indulgent two hours? What should
you do to achieve it? Do you go to the movies, have a massage, or enjoy
reading a favorite book at a local café? The thought process is intuitive for
individual consumers and industrial buyers alike.
For some reason, we often abandon this intuitive thinking when we
become sellers. Rarely do sellers think consciously about how their
customers make trade-offs across alternative industries. A shift in price, a
change in model, even a new ad campaign can elicit a tremendous response
from rivals within an industry, but the same actions in an alternative industry
usually go unnoticed. Trade journals, trade shows, and consumer rating
reports reinforce the vertical walls between one industry and another. Often,


however, the space between alternative industries provides opportunities for
value innovation.
Consider NetJets, which created the blue ocean of fractional jet
ownership. In less than twenty years since its inception, NetJets grew larger
than many airlines, with more than five hundred aircraft, operating more
than two hundred fifty thousand flights to more than one hundred forty
countries. Today those numbers are even higher, with a fleet of over seven
hundred aircraft, flying to over one hundred seventy countries. Purchased by
Berkshire Hathaway in 1998, NetJets is a multibillion-dollar business with
the largest private jet fleet in the world. NetJets’ success has been attributed
to its flexibility, shortened travel time, hassle-free travel experience,
increased reliability, and strategic pricing. The reality is that NetJets
reconstructed market boundaries to create this blue ocean by looking across
alternative industries.
The most lucrative mass of customers in the aviation industry is corporate
travelers. NetJets looked at the existing alternatives and found that when
business travelers want to fly, they have two principal choices. On the one
hand, a company’s executives can fly business class or first class on a
commercial airline. On the other hand, a company can purchase its own
aircraft to serve its corporate travel needs. The strategic question is, Why
would corporations choose one alternative industry over another? By
focusing on the key factors that lead corporations to trade across alternatives
and eliminating or reducing everything else, NetJets created its blue ocean
strategy.
Consider this: Why do corporations choose to use commercial airlines for
their corporate travel? Surely it’s not because of the long check-in and
security lines, hectic flight transfers, overnight stays, or congested airports.
Rather, they choose commercial airlines for only one reason: costs. On the
one hand, commercial travel avoids the high up-front, fixed-cost investment
of a multimillion-dollar jet aircraft. On the other hand, a company purchases
only the number of corporate airline tickets needed per year, lowering
variable costs and reducing the possibility of unused aviation travel time that
often accompanies the ownership of corporate jets.
So NetJets created the concept of selling fractions of jets, which can be as
small as one-sixteenth ownership of an aircraft in the United States, entitling
customers to fifty flight hours per year. Starting at just over $400,000 (plus


pilot, maintenance, and other monthly costs), owners can purchase a share in
a $7 million aircraft.1 Customers get the convenience of a private jet at the
price of first-and business-class air travel. Comparing first-class travel with
private aircraft, the National Business Aviation Association found that when
direct and indirect costs—hotel, meals, travel time, expenses—were factored
in, the cost of first-class commercial travel was higher.2 As for NetJets, it
avoids the fixed costs that commercial airlines attempt to cover by filling
larger and larger aircraft. NetJets’ smaller airplanes, the use of smaller
regional airports, and limited staff help to keep costs low.
To understand the rest of the NetJets formula, consider the flip side: Why
do people choose corporate jets over commercial travel? Certainly it is not to
pay the multimillion-dollar price to purchase planes. Nor is it to set up a
dedicated flight department to take care of scheduling and other
administrative matters. Nor is it to pay so-called deadhead costs—the costs
of flying the aircraft from its home base to where it is needed. Rather,
corporations and wealthy individuals buy private jets to dramatically cut
total travel time, to reduce the hassle of congested airports, to allow for
point-to-point travel, and to gain the benefit of being more productive and
arriving energized, ready to hit the ground running. So NetJets built on these
distinctive strengths. Whereas 70 percent of commercial flights go to only
thirty airports across the United States, NetJets offers access to more than
two thousand airports in the US and five thousand airports around the world
with convenient locations near business centers and popular destinations. On
international flights, your plane pulls directly up to the customs office.
With point-to-point service and the exponential increase in the number of
airports to land in, there are no flight transfers; trips that would otherwise
require overnight stays can be completed in a single day. The time from your
car to takeoff is measured in minutes instead of hours. For example, whereas
a flight from Washington, DC, to Sacramento would take on average 10.5
hours using commercial airlines, it is only 5.2 hours on a NetJets aircraft;
from Palm Springs to Cabo San Lucas takes on average 6 hours commercial,
and only 2.1 hours via NetJets. NetJets offers substantial cost savings in total
travel time.
Perhaps most appealing, your jet is always available with only four hours’
notice. If a jet is not available, NetJets will charter one for you. Last but not
least, NetJets dramatically reduces issues related to security threats and


offers clients customized in-flight service, such as having your favorite food
and beverages ready for you when you board.
By offering the best of commercial travel and private jets and eliminating
and reducing everything else, NetJets opened up a multibillion-dollar blue
ocean wherein customers get the convenience and speed of a private jet with
a low fixed cost and the lower variable cost of first-and business-class
commercial airline travel (see figure 3-1). And the competition? Now, nearly
thirty years later, NetJets’ share of the blue ocean it unlocked still stands a
staggering five times greater than that of its nearest competitor.3
FIGURE 3-1
The strategy canvas of NetJets


The biggest telecommunications success in Japan since the 1980s also has
its roots in path 1. Here we are speaking of NTT DoCoMo’s i-mode, which
was launched in 1999. The i-mode service changed the way people
communicate and access information in Japan. NTT DoCoMo’s insight into
creating a blue ocean came by thinking about why people trade across the
alternatives of mobile phones and the internet. With deregulation of the
Japanese telecommunications industry, new competitors were entering the
market and price competition and technological races were the norm. The
result was that costs were rising while the average revenue per user fell.
NTT DoCoMo broke out of this red ocean of bloody competition by creating
a blue ocean of wireless transmission that reconstructed the mobile phone
industry and the internet.


NTT DoCoMo asked, What are the distinctive strengths of the internet
over cell phones, and vice versa? Although the internet offered endless
information and services, the killer apps were e-mail, simple information
(such as news, weather forecasts, and a telephone directory), and
entertainment (including games, events, and music entertainment). The key
downside of the internet was the far higher price of computer hardware
needed to access the internet at the time, an overload of information, the
nuisance of logging on to go online, and the fear of giving credit card
information over the internet. On the other hand, the distinctive strengths of
mobile phones were their mobility, voice transmission, and ease of use.
NTT DoCoMo broke the trade-off that existed at the time between these
two alternatives, not by creating new technology but by focusing on the
decisive advantages that the internet has over the cell phone and vice versa.
The company eliminated or reduced everything else. Its user-friendly
interface has one simple button, the i-mode button (i standing for interactive,
internet, information, and the English pronoun I), which users press to give
them immediate access to the few killer apps of the internet. Instead of
barraging you with infinite information as on the internet, however, the i-
mode button acts as a hotel concierge service, connecting only to preselected
and preapproved sites for the most popular internet applications. That makes
navigation fast and easy. At the same time, even though the i-mode phone
was priced 25 percent higher than a regular cell phone, the price of the i-
mode phone was dramatically less than that of a PC or laptop, which were
the dominant means to access the internet at the time, and its mobility was
high.
Moreover, beyond adding voice, the i-mode used a simple billing service
whereby all the services used on the web via the i-mode got billed to the user
on the same monthly bill. This dramatically reduced the number of bills
users received and eliminated the need to give credit card details on the
internet. And because the i-mode service was automatically turned on
whenever the phone was on, users were always connected and had no need
to go through the hassle of logging on.
Neither the standard cell phone nor the PC or laptop could compete with i-
mode’s divergent value curve. By 2009, ten years after its launch, i-mode
subscribers had climbed to just shy of 50 million and its revenue from the
transmission of data, pictures, and text increased from 295 million yen ($2.6


million) in 1999 to 1,589 billion yen ($17 billion). The i-mode service did
not simply win customers from competitors. It dramatically grew the market,
drawing in youth and senior citizens and converting voice-only customers to
voice and data transmission customers. The i-mode was the world’s first
smart phone to achieve mass adoption by a country. It wasn’t until 2007 that
the iPhone was launched, which seriously challenged the i-mode and created
a new and even larger blue ocean space with the introduction of apps (see
path 4).
Many other well-known success stories have looked across alternatives to
create new markets. The Home Depot offered the expertise of professional
home contractors at markedly lower prices than hardware stores. By
delivering the decisive advantages of both alternative industries—and
eliminating or reducing everything else—The Home Depot has transformed
enormous latent demand for home improvement into real demand, making
ordinary homeowners into do-it-yourselfers. Today it is the world’s largest
home retail improvement store. Southwest Airlines concentrated on driving
as the alternative to flying, providing the speed of air travel at the price and
flexibility of car travel to create the blue ocean of short-haul air travel.
Similarly, Intuit looked to the pencil as the chief alternative to personal
financial software to develop the fun and intuitive Quicken software. Today,
more than thirty years on, Quicken still remains the number-one-selling
personal financial software, even as Intuit explores the creation of new blue
oceans in online financial services and apps.
What are the alternative industries to your industry? Why do customers
trade across them? By focusing on the key factors that lead buyers to trade
across alternative industries and eliminating or reducing everything else, you
can create a blue ocean of new market space.
OceanofPDF.com


Path 2: Look Across Strategic Groups within
Industries
Just as blue oceans can often be created by looking across alternative
industries, so can they be unlocked by looking across strategic groups. The
term refers to a group of companies within an industry that pursue a similar
strategy. In most industries, the fundamental strategic differences among
industry players are captured by a small number of strategic groups.
Strategic groups can generally be ranked in a rough hierarchical order
built on two dimensions: price and performance. Each jump in price tends to
bring a corresponding jump in some dimensions of performance. Most
companies focus on improving their competitive position within a strategic
group. Mercedes, BMW, and Jaguar, for example, focus on outcompeting
one another in the luxury car segment as economy carmakers focus on
excelling over one another in their strategic group. Neither strategic group,
however, pays much heed to what the other is doing because from a supply
point of view they do not seem to be competing.
The key to creating a blue ocean across existing strategic groups is to
break out of this narrow tunnel vision by understanding which factors
determine customers’ decisions to trade up or down from one group to
another.
Consider Curves, the Texas-based women’s fitness company, which began
franchising in 1995. In the space of ten years, it had more than two million
members. What’s more, this growth was triggered almost entirely through
word of mouth and buddy referrals. Yet, at its inception, Curves was seen as
entering an oversaturated market, gearing its offering to customers who
would not want it, and making its offering significantly blander than the
competition’s. In reality, however, Curves created new demand in the US
fitness industry, unlocking an untapped market, a veritable blue ocean of
women struggling and failing to keep in shape through sound fitness. Curves
built on the decisive advantages of two strategic groups in the US fitness
industry—traditional health clubs and home exercise programs—and
eliminated or reduced everything else.
At the one extreme, the US fitness industry was awash with traditional
health clubs that catered to both men and women, offering a full range of


exercise and sporting options, usually in upscale urban locations. Their
trendy facilities were designed to attract the high-end health club set. They
had the full range of aerobic and strength training machines, a juice bar,
instructors, and a full locker room with showers and sauna, because the aim
was for customers to spend social as well as exercise time there. Having
fought their way across town to health clubs, customers would typically
spend at least an hour there, and more often two. Membership fees for all
this were in the range of $100 per month at the time—not cheap,
guaranteeing that the market would stay upscale and small. Traditional
health club customers represented only 12 percent of the entire population,
concentrated overwhelmingly in the larger urban areas. Investment costs for
a traditional full-service health club ran from $500,000 to more than $1
million, depending on the city center location.
At the other extreme was the strategic group of home exercise programs,
such as exercise videos, books, and magazines. These were a small fraction
of the cost, were used at home, and generally required little or no exercise
equipment. Instruction was minimal, being confined to the star of the
exercise video or book and magazine explanations and illustrations.
The question is, What made women trade either up or down between
traditional health clubs and home exercise programs? Most women don’t
trade up to health clubs for the profusion of special machines, juice bars,
locker rooms with sauna, pool, and the chance to meet men. The average
female nonathlete does not even want to run into men when she is working
out, perhaps revealing lumps in her leotards. She is not inspired to line up
behind machines in which she needs to change weights and adjust their
incline angles. As for time, it has become an increasingly scarce commodity
for the average woman. Few can afford to spend one to two hours at a health
club several times a week. For the mass of women, the city center locations
also present traffic challenges, something that increases stress and
discourages going to the gym.
It turns out that most women trade up to health clubs for one principal
reason. When they are at home, it’s too easy to find an excuse for not
working out. It is hard to be disciplined in the confines of one’s home if you
are not already a committed sports enthusiast. Working out collectively,
instead of alone, is more motivating and inspiring. Conversely, women who


use home exercise programs do so primarily for the time saving, lower costs,
and privacy.
Curves built its blue ocean by drawing on the distinctive strengths of these
two strategic groups, eliminating and reducing everything else (see figure 3-
2). Curves eliminated all the aspects of the traditional health club that are of
little interest to the broad mass of women. Gone are the profusion of special
machines, food, spa, pool, and even locker rooms, which have been replaced
by a few curtained-off changing areas.
The experience in a Curves club was entirely different from that in a
typical health club. The member entered the exercise room where the
machines (typically about ten) were arranged, not in rows facing a television
as in the health club, but in a circle to facilitate interchange among members,
making the experience fun. The QuickFit circuit training system used
hydraulic exercise machines, which needed no adjusting and were safe,
simple to use, and nonthreatening. Specifically designed for women, these
machines reduced impact stress and built strength and muscle. While
exercising, members could talk and support one another, and the social,
nonjudgmental atmosphere was totally different from that of a typical health
club. There were few if any mirrors on the wall, and there were no men
staring at you. Members moved around the circle of machines and aerobic
pads and in thirty minutes completed the whole workout. The result of
reducing and focusing service on the essentials was that prices fell to around
$30 per month, opening the market to the broad mass of women. Curves’
tagline could have been “for the price of a cup of coffee a day you can obtain
the gift of health through proper exercise.”
FIGURE 3-2
The strategy canvas of Curves


Curves offered the distinctive value depicted in figure 3-2 at a lower cost.
Compared with the start-up investment of $500,000 to $1 million for
traditional health clubs, start-up investments for Curves were in the range of
only $25,000 to $30,000 (excluding a $20,000 franchise fee) because of the
wide range of factors the company eliminated. Variable costs were also
significantly lower, with personnel and maintenance of facilities
dramatically reduced and rent reduced because of the much smaller spaces
required: 1,500 square feet in nonprime suburban locations versus 35,000 to
100,000 square feet in prime urban locations. Curves’ low-cost business
model made its franchises easy to afford and helps explain why they
mushroomed quickly. Most franchises were profitable within a few months,
as soon as they recruited on average one hundred members.


The result is that Curves did not compete directly with other health and
exercise concepts; it created new demand. Today, twenty years out, it has
nearly ten thousand clubs worldwide serving more than four million
members.4 Despite bumps along the way, it has become the largest women’s
fitness franchise in the world.
Beyond Curves, many companies have created blue oceans by looking
across strategic groups. Ralph Lauren created the blue ocean of “high
fashion with no fashion.” Its designer name, the elegance of its stores, and
the luxury of its materials capture what most customers value in haute
couture. At the same time, its updated classical look and price capture the
best of the classical lines such as Brooks Brothers and Burberry. By
combining the most attractive factors of both groups and eliminating or
reducing everything else, Polo Ralph Lauren not only captured share from
both segments but also drew many new customers into the market. In the
luxury car market, Toyota’s Lexus carved out a new blue ocean by offering
the quality of the high-end Mercedes, BMW, and Jaguar at a price closer to
the lower-end Cadillac and Lincoln.
Michigan-based Champion Enterprises identified a similar opportunity by
looking across two strategic groups in the housing industry: makers of
prefabricated housing and on-site developers. Prefabricated houses were
historically cheap and quick to build, but they were also dismally
standardized with a low-quality image. Houses built by developers on-site
offer variety and an image of high quality but are dramatically more
expensive and take longer to build.
Champion created a blue ocean by offering the decisive advantages of
both strategic groups. Its prefabricated houses were quick to build and
benefited from tremendous economies of scale and lower costs, but
Champion also allowed buyers to choose such high-end finishing touches as
fireplaces, skylights, and even vaulted ceilings to give the homes a personal
feel. In essence, Champion changed the definition of prefabricated housing.
As a result, more low-and middle-income buyers became interested in
purchasing prefabricated housing rather than renting or buying an apartment,
and even some affluent people were drawn into the market. It was only the
financial crisis of 2008 that put a damper on this blue ocean strategic move,
hitting Champion hard as it hit the rest of the US housing industry.


What are the strategic groups in your industry? Why do customers trade
up for the higher group, and why do they trade down for the lower one?
OceanofPDF.com


Path 3: Look Across the Chain of Buyers
In most industries, competitors converge around a common definition of
who the target buyer is. In reality, though, there is a chain of “buyers” who
are directly or indirectly involved in the buying decision. The purchasers
who pay for the product or service may differ from the actual users, and in
some cases there are important influencers as well. Although these three
groups may overlap, they often differ. When they do, they frequently hold
different definitions of value. A corporate purchasing agent, for example,
may be more concerned with costs than the corporate user, who is likely to
be far more concerned with ease of use. Similarly, a retailer may value a
manufacturer’s just-in-time stock replenishment and innovative financing.
But consumer purchasers, although strongly influenced by the channel, do
not value these things.
Individual companies in an industry often target different customer
segments—for example, large versus small customers. But an industry
typically converges on a single buyer group. The pharmaceutical industry,
for example, focuses overridingly on influencers: doctors. The office
equipment industry focuses heavily on purchasers: corporate purchasing
departments. And the clothing industry sells predominantly to users.
Sometimes there is a strong economic rationale for this focus. But often it is
the result of industry practices that have never been questioned.
Challenging an industry’s conventional wisdom about which buyer group
to target can lead to the discovery of a new blue ocean. By looking across
buyer groups, companies can gain new insights into how to redesign their
value curves to focus on a previously overlooked set of buyers.
Think of Novo Nordisk, the Danish insulin producer that created a blue
ocean in the insulin industry. Insulin is used by diabetics to regulate the
level of sugar in their blood. Historically, the insulin industry, like most of
the pharmaceutical industry, focused its attention on the key influencers:
doctors. The importance of doctors in affecting the insulin purchasing
decision of diabetics made doctors the target buyer group of the industry.
Accordingly, the industry geared its attention and efforts to produce purer
insulin in response to doctors’ quest for better medication. The issue was
that innovations in purification technology had improved dramatically by


the early 1980s. As long as the purity of insulin was the major parameter
upon which companies competed, little progress could be made further in
that direction. Novo itself had already created the first “human
monocomponent” insulin that was a chemically exact copy of human
insulin. Competitive convergence among the major players was rapidly
occurring.
Novo Nordisk, however, saw that it could break away from the
competition and create a blue ocean by shifting the industry’s long-standing
focus on doctors to the users—patients themselves. In focusing on patients,
Novo Nordisk found that insulin, which was supplied to diabetes patients in
vials, presented significant challenges in administering. Vials left the patient
with the complex and unpleasant task of handling syringes, needles, and
insulin, and of administering doses according to his or her needs. Needles
and syringes also evoked unpleasant feelings of social stigmatism for
patients. And patients did not want to fiddle with syringes and needles
outside their homes, a frequent occurrence because many patients must
inject insulin several times a day.
This led Novo Nordisk to the blue ocean opportunity of NovoPen.
NovoPen, the first user-friendly insulin delivery solution, was designed to
remove the hassle and embarrassment of administering insulin. The
NovoPen resembled a fountain pen; it contained an insulin cartridge that
allowed the patient to easily carry, in one self-contained unit, roughly a
week’s worth of insulin. The pen had an integrated click mechanism,
making it possible for even blind patients to control the dosing and
administer insulin. Patients could take the pen with them and inject insulin
with ease and convenience without the embarrassing complexity of syringes
and needles.
To dominate the blue ocean it had unlocked, Novo Nordisk followed this
up by introducing NovoLet, a prefilled disposable insulin injection pen with
a dosing system that provided users with even greater convenience and ease
of use. And it later brought out the Innovo, an integrated electronic memory
and cartridge-based delivery system. Innovo was designed to manage the
delivery of insulin through built-in memory and to display the dose, the last
dose, and the elapsed time—information that is critical for reducing risk
and eliminating worries about missing a dose.


Novo Nordisk’s blue ocean strategy shifted the industry landscape and
transformed the company from an insulin producer to a diabetes care
company. NovoPen and the later delivery systems swept over the insulin
market. Sales of insulin in prefilled devices or pens now account for the
dominant share in Europe, Asia, and Scandinavia, where patients are
advised to take frequent injections of insulin every day. Today, almost thirty
years since its initial blue ocean strategic move, Novo Nordisk remains the
global leader in diabetes care, with some 70 percent of its total turnover
coming from this offering, which originated largely in the company’s
thinking in terms of users rather than influencers.
Similarly, consider Bloomberg. In a little more than a decade, Bloomberg
became one of the largest and most profitable business-information
providers in the world. Until Bloomberg’s debut, Reuters and Telerate
dominated the online financial-information industry, providing news and
prices in real time to the brokerage and investment community. The
industry focused on purchasers—IT managers—who valued standardized
systems, which made their lives easier.
This made no sense to Bloomberg. Traders and analysts, not IT
managers, make or lose millions of dollars for their employers each day.
Profit opportunities come from disparities in information. When markets are
active, traders and analysts must make rapid decisions. Every second
counts.
So Bloomberg designed a system specifically to offer traders better
value, one with easy-to-use terminals and keyboards labeled with familiar
financial terms. The systems also have two flat-panel monitors so that
traders can see all the information they need at once without having to open
and close numerous windows. Because traders must analyze information
before they act, Bloomberg added a built-in analytic capability that works
with the press of a button. Before, traders and analysts had to download
data and use a pencil and calculator to perform important financial
calculations. After Bloomberg, users could quickly run “what if” scenarios
to compute returns on alternative investments, and they could perform
longitudinal analyses of historical data.
By focusing on users, Bloomberg was also able to see the paradox of
traders’ and analysts’ personal lives. They have tremendous income but


work such long hours that they have little time to spend it. Realizing that
markets have slow times during the day when little trading takes place,
Bloomberg decided to add information and purchasing services aimed at
enhancing traders’ personal lives. Well before the internet offered such
services, traders could use Bloomberg online services to buy items such as
flowers, clothing, and jewelry; make travel arrangements; get information
about wines; or search through real estate listings.
By shifting its focus upstream from purchasers to users, Bloomberg
created a value curve that was radically different from anything the industry
had seen before. The traders and analysts wielded their power within their
firms to force IT managers to purchase Bloomberg terminals.
Many industries afford similar opportunities to create blue oceans. By
questioning conventional definitions of who can and should be the target
buyer, companies can often see fundamentally new ways to unlock value.
Consider how Canon copiers created the small desktop copier industry by
shifting the target customer of the copier industry from corporate purchasers
to users. Or how SAP shifted the customer focus of the business application
software industry from the functional user to the corporate purchaser to
create its enormously successful real-time integrated software business.
What is the chain of buyers in your industry? Which buyer group does
your industry typically focus on? If you shifted the buyer group of your
industry, how could you unlock new value?5
OceanofPDF.com


Path 4: Look Across Complementary Product and
Service Offerings
Few products and services are used in a vacuum. In most cases, other
products and services affect their value. But in most industries, rivals
converge within the bounds of their industry’s product and service offerings.
Take movie theaters. The ease and cost of getting a babysitter and parking
the car affect the perceived value of going to the movies. Yet these
complementary services are beyond the bounds of the movie theater industry
as it has been traditionally defined. Few cinema operators worry about how
hard or costly it is for people to get babysitters. But they should, because it
affects demand for their business. Imagine a movie theater with a babysitting
service.
Untapped value is often hidden in complementary products and services.
The key is to define the total solution buyers seek when they choose a
product or service. A simple way to do so is to think about what happens
before, during, and after your product is used. Babysitting and parking the
car are needed before people can go to the movies. Operating and
application software are used along with computer hardware. In the airline
industry, ground transportation is used after the flight but is clearly part of
what the customer needs to travel from one place to another.
Consider NABI, a Hungarian bus company that was recently acquired by
New Flyer. It applied path 4 to the $1 billion-plus US transit bus industry.
The major customers in the industry are public transport properties (PTPs),
municipally owned transportation companies serving fixed-route public bus
transportation in major cities or counties.
Under the accepted rules of competition in the industry, companies long
competed to offer the lowest purchase price. Designs were outdated, delivery
times were late, quality was low, and the price of options was prohibitive
given the industry’s penny-pinching approach. To NABI, however, none of
this made sense. Why were bus companies focused only on the initial
purchase price of the bus, when municipalities kept buses in circulation for
twelve years on average? When it framed the market in this way, NABI saw
insights that had escaped the entire industry.


NABI discovered that the highest-cost element to municipalities was not
the price of the bus per se, the factor the whole industry competed on, but
rather the costs that came after the bus was purchased: the maintenance of
running the bus over its twelve-year life cycle. Repairs after traffic
accidents, fuel usage, wear and tear on parts that frequently needed to be
replaced due to the bus’s heavy weight, preventive body work to stop
rusting, and the like—these were the highest-cost factors to municipalities.
With new demands for clean air being placed on municipalities, the cost for
public transport not being environmentally friendly was also beginning to be
felt. Yet despite all these costs, which outstripped the initial bus price, the
industry had virtually overlooked the complementary activity of
maintenance and life-cycle costs.
This made NABI realize that the transit bus industry did not have to be a
commodity-price-driven industry but that bus companies, focusing on selling
buses at the lowest possible price, had largely made it that way. By looking
at the total solution of complementary activities, NABI created a bus unlike
any the industry had seen before. Buses were normally made from steel,
which was heavy, corrosive, and hard to repair after accidents because entire
panels had to be replaced. NABI adopted fiberglass in making its buses, a
practice that killed five birds with one stone. Fiberglass bodies substantially
cut the costs of preventive maintenance by being corrosion-free. It made
body repairs faster, cheaper, and easier because fiberglass does not require
panel replacements for dents and accidents; rather, damaged parts are simply
cut out and new fiberglass materials are easily soldered. At the same time, its
light weight (30–35 percent lighter than steel) cut fuel consumption and
emissions substantially, making the buses more environmentally friendly.
Moreover, its light weight allowed NABI to use not only lower-powered
engines but also fewer axles, resulting in lower manufacturing costs and
more space inside the bus.
FIGURE 3-3
The strategy canvas of the US municipal bus industry, circa 2001


In this way, NABI created a value curve that was radically divergent from
the industry’s average curve. As you can see in figure 3-3, by building its
buses in lightweight fiberglass, NABI eliminated or significantly reduced
costs related to corrosion prevention, maintenance, and fuel consumption. As
a result, even though NABI charged a higher initial purchase price than the
average price of the industry at the time, it offered its buses at a much lower
life-cycle cost to municipalities. With much lighter emissions, the NABI
buses raised the level of environmental friendliness high above the industry
standard. Moreover, the higher price NABI charged allowed it to create
factors unprecedented in the industry, such as modern aesthetic design and
customer friendliness, including lower floors for easy mounting and more
seats for less standing. These boosted demand for transit bus service,
generating more revenues for municipalities. NABI changed the way
municipalities saw their revenues and costs involved in transit bus service.
NABI created exceptional value for the buyers—in this case for both


municipalities and end users—at a low life-cycle cost. Municipalities and
riders loved NABI’s new buses, with ridership expanding by as much as 30
percent when NABI’s new buses were deployed.6
Similarly, consider the British teakettle industry, which, despite its
importance to British culture, had flat sales and shrinking profit margins
until Philips Electronics came along with a teakettle that turned the red
ocean blue. By thinking in terms of complementary products and services,
Philips saw that the biggest issue the British had in brewing tea was not in
the kettle itself but in the complementary product of water, which had to be
boiled in the kettle. The issue was the lime scale found in tap water. The lime
scale accumulated in kettles as the water was boiled, and later found its way
into the freshly brewed tea. The phlegmatic British typically took a teaspoon
and went fishing to capture the off-putting lime scale before drinking home-
brewed tea. To the kettle industry, the water issue was not its problem. It was
the problem of another industry—the public water supply.
By thinking in terms of solving the major pain points in customers’ total
solution, Philips saw the water problem as its opportunity. The result: Philips
created a kettle having a mouth filter that effectively captured the lime scale
as the water was poured. Lime scale would never again be found swimming
in British home-brewed tea. The industry was again kick-started on a strong
growth trajectory as people began replacing their old kettles with the new
filtered kettles.
There are many other examples of companies that have followed this path
to create a blue ocean. Just think of Dyson, which designs its vacuum
cleaners to eliminate the cost and annoyance of having to buy and change
vacuum cleaner bags. Dyson entered the US vacuum cleaner market in 2002.
Back then, the total size of the vacuum cleaner market in the United States
was around $4 billion. Market leaders, including Hoover, Electrolux, and
Oreck made modest money on the sale of their basic units, which typically
sold for between $75 and $125. However, by eliminating vacuum cleaner
bags and all the cost and hassle of buying new bags for the life of the
vacuum, Dyson leapfrogged the competition, grew the industry, and was
able to sell its vacuums for nearly triple the price of the rest of the industry.
What is the context in which your product or service is used? What
happens before, during, and after? Can you identify the pain points? How


can you eliminate these pain points through a complementary product or
service offering?
OceanofPDF.com


Path 5: Look Across Functional or Emotional Appeal
to Buyers
Competition in an industry tends to converge not only on an accepted notion
of the scope of its products and services but also on one of two possible
bases of appeal. Some industries compete principally on price and function
largely on calculations of utility; their appeal is rational. Other industries
compete largely on feelings; their appeal is emotional.
Yet the appeal of most products or services is rarely intrinsically one or
the other. Rather it is usually a result of the way companies have competed
in the past, which has unconsciously educated consumers on what to expect.
Companies’ behavior affects buyers’ expectations in a reinforcing cycle.
Over time, functionally oriented industries become more functionally
oriented; emotionally oriented industries become more emotionally oriented.
No wonder market research rarely reveals new insights into what attracts
customers. Industries have trained customers on what to expect. When
surveyed, they echo back: more of the same for less.
When companies are willing to challenge the functional-emotional
orientation of their industry, they often find new market space. We have
observed two common patterns. Emotionally oriented industries offer many
extras that add price without enhancing functionality. Stripping away those
extras may create a fundamentally simpler, lower-priced, lower-cost business
model that customers would welcome. Conversely, functionally oriented
industries can often infuse commodity products with new life by adding a
dose of emotion and, in so doing, can stimulate new demand.
Two well-known examples are Swatch, which transformed the
functionally driven budget watch industry into an emotionally driven fashion
statement, or The Body Shop, which did the reverse, transforming the
emotionally driven industry of cosmetics into a functional, no-nonsense
cosmetics house. In addition, consider the experience of QB (Quick Beauty)
House. QB House created a blue ocean in the Japanese barbershop industry
and is rapidly growing throughout Asia. Started in 1996 in Tokyo, QB House
blossomed from one outlet in 1996 to more than two hundred shops in 2003.
The number of visitors surged from 57,000 in 1996 to 3.5 million annually


in 2002. Today QB House has 463 franchise outlets in Japan and 79
franchise outlets in Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan.
At the heart of QB House’s blue ocean strategy is a shift in the Asian
barbershop industry from an emotional industry to a highly functional one.
In Japan the time it takes to get a man’s haircut hovers around one hour.
Why? A long process of activities is undertaken to make the haircutting
experience a ritual. Numerous hot towels are applied, shoulders are rubbed
and massaged, customers are served tea and coffee, and the barber follows a
ritual in cutting hair, including special hair and skin treatments such as blow
drying and shaving. The result is that the actual time spent cutting hair is a
fraction of the total time. Moreover, these actions create a long queue for
other potential customers. The price of this haircutting process is 3,000 to
5,000 yen ($27 to $45).
QB House changed all that. It recognized that many people, especially
working professionals, do not wish to waste an hour on a haircut. So QB
House stripped away the emotional service elements of hot towels, shoulder
rubs, and tea and coffee. It also dramatically reduced special hair treatments
and focused mainly on basic cuts. QB House then went one step further,
eliminating the traditional time-consuming wash-and-dry practice by
creating the “air wash” system—an overhead hose that is pulled down to
“vacuum” every cut-off hair. This new system works much better and faster,
without getting the customer’s head wet. These changes reduced the
haircutting time from one hour to ten minutes. Moreover, outside each shop
is a traffic light system that indicates when a haircut slot is available. This
removes waiting time uncertainty and eliminates the reservation desk.
In this way, QB House was able to reduce the price of a haircut to 1,000
yen ($9) versus the industry average of 3,000 to 5,000 yen ($27–$45) while
raising the hourly revenue earned per barber nearly 50 percent, with lower
staff costs and less required retail space per barber. QB House created this
“no-nonsense” haircutting service with improved hygiene. It introduced not
only a sanitation facility set up for each chair but also a “one-use” policy,
where every customer is provided with a new set of towel and comb. To
appreciate its blue ocean creation, see figure 3-4.
FIGURE 3-4


The strategy canvas of QB House
Cemex, one of the world’s largest cement producers, is another company
that created a blue ocean by shifting the orientation of its industry—this time
in the reverse direction, from functional to emotional. In Mexico, cement
sold in retail bags to the average do-it-yourselfer represents some 85 percent
of the total cement market.7 As it stood, however, the market was
unattractive. There were far more noncustomers than customers. Even
though most poor families owned their own land and cement was sold as a
relatively inexpensive functional input material, the Mexican population
lived in chronic overcrowding. Few families built additions, and those that
did took on average four to seven years to build only one additional room.
Why? Most of families’ extra money was spent on village festivals,
quinceañeras (girls’ fifteen-year birthday parties), baptisms, and weddings.


Contributing to these important milestone events was a chance to distinguish
oneself in the community, whereas not contributing would be a sign of
arrogance and disrespect.
As a result, most of Mexico’s poor had insufficient and inconsistent
savings to purchase building materials, even though having a cement house
was the stuff of dreams in Mexico. Cemex conservatively estimated that this
market could grow to be worth $500 million to $600 million annually if it
could unlock this latent demand.8
Cemex’s answer to this dilemma came with its launch of the Patrimonio
Hoy program, which shifted the orientation of cement from a functional
product to the gift of dreams. When people bought cement they were on the
path to building rooms of love, where laughter and happiness could be
shared—what better gift could there be? At the foundation of Patrimonio
Hoy was the traditional Mexican system of tandas, a traditional community
savings scheme. In a tanda, ten individuals (for example) contribute 100
pesos per week for ten weeks. In the first week, lots are drawn to see who
“wins” the 1,000 pesos ($93) in each of the ten weeks. All participants win
the 1,000 pesos one time only, but when they win, they receive a large
amount to make a large purchase.
In traditional tandas, the “winning” family would spend the windfall on
an important festive or religious event such as a baptism or marriage. In the
Patrimonio Hoy, however, the supertanda is directed toward building room
additions with cement. Think of it as a form of wedding registry, except that
instead of giving, for example, silverware, Cemex positioned cement as a
loving gift.
At its debut, the Patrimonio Hoy building materials club that Cemex set
up consisted of a group of roughly seventy people contributing on average
120 pesos each week for seventy weeks. The winner of the supertanda each
week, however, did not receive the total sum in pesos but rather received the
equivalent building materials to complete an entire new room. Cemex
complemented the winnings with the delivery of the cement to the winner’s
home, construction classes on how to effectively build rooms, and a
technical adviser who maintained a relationship with the participants during
their project. The result: Patrimonio Hoy participants build their homes or
additions three times faster at a lower cost than the norm in Mexico.


Whereas Cemex’s competitors sold bags of cement, Cemex was selling a
dream, with a business model involving innovative financing and
construction know-how. Cemex went a step further, throwing small
festivities for the town when a room was finished and thereby reinforcing the
happiness it brought to people and the tanda tradition.
Since the company launched this new emotional orientation of Cemex
cement coupled with its funding and technical services, demand for its
cement soared. As of 2012, the Patrimonio Hoy program benefited 1.9
million individuals and 380,000 families. For more than fifteen years,
CEMEX has been contributing to solving the housing shortage in
underserved areas through its Patrimonio Hoy program. The predictability of
the quantities of cement sold through the program has also contributed to
dropping Cemex’s cost structure via lower inventory costs, smoother
production runs, and guaranteed sales that lower costs of capital. Social
pressure makes defaults on supertanda payments rare. Overall, Cemex
created a blue ocean of emotional cement that achieved differentiation at a
low cost and has won multiple awards, including the UN Programme’s 2006
World Business Award in support of the UN Millennium Development Goals
and the 2009 UN Habitat Award for Best Practices in Affordable Housing
Solutions.
Similarly, with its wildly successful Viagra, Pfizer shifted the focus from
medical treatment to lifestyle enhancement. Likewise, consider how
Starbucks turned the coffee industry on its head by shifting its focus from
commodity coffee sales to the emotional atmosphere in which customers
enjoy their coffee.
A burst of blue ocean creation has been under way in a number of service
industries but in the opposite direction—moving from an emotional to a
functional orientation. Relationship businesses, such as insurance, banking,
and investing, have relied heavily on the emotional bond between broker and
client. They are ripe for change. Direct Line Group, a UK insurance
company, for example, has done away with traditional brokers. It reasoned
that customers would not need the hand-holding and emotional comfort that
brokers traditionally provide if the company did a better job of, for example,
paying claims rapidly and eliminating complicated paperwork. So instead of
using brokers and regional branch offices, Direct Line uses information
technology to improve claims handling, and it passes on some of the cost


savings to customers in the form of lower insurance premiums. For more
than twenty years since its inception, Direct Line’s blue ocean strategic
move has been winning customers and awards including that for the best,
most trusted, and most innovative motor insurance brand in the UK. In the
United States, The Vanguard Group (in index funds) and Charles Schwab (in
brokerage services) did the same thing in the investment industry, creating a
blue ocean by transforming emotionally oriented businesses based on
personal relationships into high-performance, low-cost functional
businesses.
Does your industry compete on functionality or emotional appeal? If you
compete on emotional appeal, what elements can you strip out to make it
functional? If you compete on functionality, what elements can be added to
make it emotional?
OceanofPDF.com


Path 6: Look Across Time
All industries are subject to external trends that affect their businesses over
time. Think of the rapid rise of the cloud or the global movement toward
protecting the environment. Looking at these trends with the right
perspective can show you how to create blue ocean opportunities.
Most companies adapt incrementally and somewhat passively as events
unfold. Whether it’s the emergence of new technologies or major regulatory
changes, managers tend to focus on projecting the trend itself. That is, they
ask in which direction a technology will evolve, how it will be adopted,
whether it will become scalable. They pace their own actions to keep up
with the development of the trends they’re tracking.
But key insights into blue ocean strategy rarely come from projecting the
trend itself. Instead they arise from business insights into how the trend will
change value to customers and impact the company’s business model. By
looking across time—from the value a market delivers today to the value it
might deliver tomorrow—managers can actively shape their future and lay
claim to a new blue ocean. Looking across time is perhaps more difficult
than the previous approaches we’ve discussed, but it can be made subject to
the same disciplined approach. We’re not talking about predicting the
future, something that is inherently impossible. Rather, we’re talking about
finding insight in trends that are observable today.
Three principles are critical to assessing trends across time. To form the
basis of a blue ocean strategy, these trends must be decisive to your
business, they must be irreversible, and they must have a clear trajectory.
Many trends can be observed at any one time—for example, a discontinuity
in technology, the rise of a new lifestyle, or a change in regulatory or social
environments. But usually only one or two will have a decisive impact on
any particular business. Having identified a trend of this nature, you can
then look across time and ask yourself what the market would look like if
the trend were taken to its logical conclusion. Working back from that
vision of a blue ocean strategy, you can identify what must be changed
today to unlock a new blue ocean.
For example, Apple observed the flood of illegal music file sharing that
began in the late 1990s. Music file sharing programs such as Napster,


Kazaa, and LimeWire had created a network of internet-savvy music lovers
freely, yet illegally, sharing music across the globe. By 2003 more than two
billion illegal music files were being traded every month. While the
recording industry fought to stop the cannibalization of physical CDs,
illegal digital music downloading continued to grow.
With the technology out there for anyone to digitally download music
free instead of paying $19 for an average CD at the time, the trend toward
digital music was clear. This trend was underscored by the fast-growing
demand for MP3 players that played mobile digital music, such as Apple’s
hit iPod. Apple capitalized on this decisive trend with a clear trajectory by
launching the iTunes online music store in 2003.
In agreement with five major music companies—BMG, EMI Group,
Sony, Universal Music Group, and Warner Brothers Records—iTunes
offered legal, easy-to-use, and flexible à la carte song downloads. At its
debut, iTunes allowed buyers to freely browse two hundred thousand songs,
listen to thirty-second samples, and download an individual song for 99
cents or an entire album for $9.99. By allowing people to buy individual
songs and strategically pricing them far more reasonably, iTunes broke a
key customer annoyance factor: the need to purchase an entire CD when
they wanted only one or two songs on it.
iTunes also leapt past free downloading services, providing sound quality
as well as intuitive navigating, searching, and browsing functions. To
illegally download music, you first had to search for the song, album, or
artist. If you were looking for a complete album, you had to know the
names of all the songs and their order. It was rare to find a complete album
to download in one location. The sound quality was consistently poor
because most people burn CDs at a low bit rate to save space. And most of
the tracks available reflected the tastes of sixteen-year-olds, so although
theoretically there were billions of tracks available, the scope was limited.
In contrast, Apple’s search and browsing functions are considered the
best in the business. Moreover, iTunes music editors included a number of
added features traditionally found in music stores, including iTunes
essentials such as Best Hair Bands or Best Love Songs, staff favorites,
celebrity play lists, and Billboard charts. And the iTunes sound quality is
the highest because iTunes encoded songs in a format called AAC, which


offered sound quality superior to MP3s, even those burned at a very high
data rate.
Customers have been flocking to iTunes, and recording companies and
artists are also winning. Under iTunes they receive some 70 percent of the
purchase price of digitally downloaded songs, at last financially benefiting
from the digital downloading craze. In addition, at the time Apple further
protected recording companies by devising copyright protection that would
not inconvenience users—who had grown accustomed to the freedom of
digital music in the post-Napster world—but would satisfy the music
industry. At its outset, the iTunes Music Store allowed users to burn songs
onto iPods and CDs up to seven times, enough to easily satisfy music lovers
but far too few times to make professional piracy an issue.
Today iTunes offers more than 37 million songs as well as movies, TV
shows, books, and podcasts. It has now sold more than 25 billion songs,
with users downloading on average fifteen thousand songs per minute.
iTunes is estimated to account for more than 60 percent of the global digital
music download market. Apple’s iTunes has unlocked a blue ocean in
digital music that it has dominated for more than a decade, with the added
advantage of increasing the attractiveness of its long popular iPod player.
As other online stores zoom in on this market, the challenge for Apple will
be to keep its sights on the evolving mass market and not to fall into
competitive benchmarking or high-end niche marketing.
Similarly, Cisco Systems created a new market space by thinking across
time trends. It started with a decisive and irreversible trend that had a clear
trajectory: the growing demand for high-speed data exchange. Cisco looked
at the world as it was and concluded that the world was hampered by slow
data rates and incompatible computer networks. Demand was exploding as,
among other factors, the number of internet users was doubling roughly
every one hundred days. So Cisco could clearly see that the problem would
inevitably worsen. Cisco’s routers, switches, and other networking devices
were designed to create breakthrough value for customers, offering fast data
exchanges in a seamless networking environment. Thus Cisco’s insight to
create a blue ocean was as much about value innovation as it was about
technology.


Similarly, a host of other companies have created blue oceans by
applying path 6. Consider how CNN created the first real-time twenty-four-
hour global news network based on the rising tide of globalization. Or how
HBO’s hit show Sex and the City acted on the trend of increasingly urban
and successful women who struggle to find love and marry later in life and
created a blue ocean that lasted six years. The show, which still airs in
syndication, was listed as one of Time magazine’s “The 100 Best TV Shows
of All-TIME.”
What trends have a high probability of impacting your industry, are
irreversible, and are evolving in a clear trajectory? How will these trends
impact your industry? Given this, how can you open up unprecedented
customer utility?
OceanofPDF.com


Conceiving New Market Space
By thinking across conventional boundaries of competition, you can see how
to make convention-altering, strategic moves that reconstruct established
market boundaries and create blue oceans. The process of discovering and
creating blue oceans is not about predicting or preempting industry trends.
Nor is it a trial-and-error process of implementing wild new business ideas
that happen to come across managers’ minds or intuition. Rather, managers
are engaged in a structured process of reordering market realities in a
fundamentally new way. Through reconstructing existing market elements
across industry and market boundaries, they will be able to free themselves
from head-to-head competition in the red ocean. Figure 3-5 summarizes the
six-path framework.
FIGURE 3-5
From head-to-head competition to blue ocean creation


We are now ready to move on to building your strategy planning process
around these six paths. We next look at how you reframe your strategy
planning process to focus on the big picture and apply these ideas in
formulating your own blue ocean strategy.
OceanofPDF.com


CHAPTER 4
Focus on the Big Picture, Not the Numbers
YOU NOW KNOW THE PATHS to creating blue oceans. The next question is,
How do you align your strategic planning process to focus on the big
picture and apply these ideas in drawing your company’s strategy canvas to
arrive at a blue ocean strategy? This is no small challenge. Our research
reveals that most companies’ strategic planning process keeps them wedded
to red oceans. The process tends to drive companies to compete within
existing market space.
Think of a typical strategic plan. It starts with a lengthy description of
current industry conditions and the competitive situation. Next is a
discussion of how to increase market share, capture new segments, or cut
costs, followed by an outline of numerous goals and initiatives. A full
budget is almost invariably attached, as are lavish graphs and a surfeit of
spreadsheets. The process usually culminates in the preparation of a large
document culled from a mishmash of data provided by people from various
parts of the organization who often have conflicting agendas and poor
communication. In this process, managers spend the majority of strategic
thinking time filling in boxes and running numbers instead of thinking
outside the box and developing a clear picture of how to break from the
competition. If you ask companies to present their proposed strategies in no
more than a few slides, it is not surprising that few clear or compelling
strategies are articulated.
