# 4 Focus on the Big Picture, Not the Numbers

It’s no wonder that few strategic plans lead to the creation of blue oceans
or are translated into action. Executives are paralyzed by the muddle. Few
employees deep down in the company even know what the strategy is. And
a closer look reveals that most plans don’t contain a strategy at all but rather
a smorgasbord of tactics that individually make sense but collectively don’t
add up to a unified, clear direction that sets a company apart—let alone
makes the competition irrelevant. Does this sound like the strategic plans in
your company?
This brings us to the second principle of blue ocean strategy: focus on the
big picture, not the numbers. This principle is key to mitigating the planning
risk of investing lots of effort and lots of time but delivering only tactical
red ocean moves. Here we develop an alternative approach to the existing
strategic planning process that is based not on preparing a document but on
drawing a strategy canvas.1 This approach consistently produces strategies
that unlock the creativity of a wide range of people within an organization,
open companies’ eyes to blue oceans, and are easy to understand and
communicate for effective execution.
OceanofPDF.com


Focusing on the Big Picture
In our research and consulting work, we have found that drawing a strategy
canvas not only visualizes a company’s current strategic position in its
marketplace but also helps it chart its future strategy. By building a
company’s strategic planning process around a strategy canvas, a company
and its managers focus their main attention on the big picture rather than
becoming immersed in numbers and jargon and getting caught up in
operational details.2
As previous chapters reveal, drawing a strategy canvas does three things.
First, it shows the strategic profile of an industry by depicting very clearly
the factors (and the possible future factors) that affect competition among
industry players. Second, it shows the strategic profile of current and
potential competitors, identifying which factors they invest in strategically.
Finally, it shows the company’s strategic profile—or value curve—
depicting how it invests in the factors of competition and how it might
invest in them in the future. As discussed in chapter 2, the strategic profile
with high blue ocean potential has three complementary qualities: focus,
divergence, and a compelling tagline. If a company’s strategic profile does
not clearly reveal those qualities, its strategy will likely be muddled,
undifferentiated, and hard to communicate. It is also likely to be costly to
execute.
OceanofPDF.com


Drawing Your Strategy Canvas
Drawing a strategy canvas is never easy. Even identifying the key factors of
competition is far from straightforward. As you will see, the final list is
usually very different from the first draft.
Assessing to what extent your company and its competitors offer the
various competitive factors is equally challenging. Most managers have a
strong impression of how they and their competitors fare along one or two
dimensions within their own scope of responsibility, but very few can see the
overall dynamics of their industry. The catering manager of an airline, for
example, will be highly sensitive to how the airline compares in terms of
refreshments. But that focus makes consistent measurement difficult; what
seems to be a very big difference to the catering manager may not be
important to customers, who look at the complete offering. Some managers
will define the competitive factors according to internal benefits. For
example, a CIO might prize the company’s IT infrastructure for its data-
mining capacity, a feature lost on most customers, who are more concerned
with speed and ease of use.
Over the past twenty years, we have developed a structured process for
drawing and discussing a strategy canvas that pushes a company’s strategy
toward a blue ocean. A financial services group that we’ll call European
Financial Services (EFS) is one of the companies that adopted this process to
develop a strategy that breaks away from the competition. The resulting EFS
strategy yielded a 30 percent revenue boost in its initial year. The process,
which builds on the six paths of creating blue oceans and involves a lot of
visual stimulation in order to unlock people’s creativity, has four major steps
(see figure 4-1).
FIGURE 4-1
The four steps of visualizing strategy


OceanofPDF.com




Step 1: Visual Awakening
A common mistake is to discuss changes in strategy before resolving
differences of opinion about the current state of play. Another problem is that
executives are often reluctant to accept the need for change; they may have a
vested interest in the status quo, or they may feel that time will eventually
vindicate their previous choices. Indeed, when we ask executives what
prompts them to seek out blue oceans and introduce change, they usually say
that it takes a highly determined leader or a serious crisis.
Fortunately, we’ve found that asking executives to draw the value curve of
their company’s strategy brings home the need for change. It serves as a
forceful wake-up call for companies to challenge their existing strategies.
That was the experience at EFS, which had been struggling for a long time
with an ill-defined and poorly communicated strategy. The company was
also deeply divided. The top executives of EFS’s regional subsidiaries
bitterly resented what they saw as the arrogance of the corporate executives,
whose philosophy, they believed, was essentially “nuts in the field, brains in
the center.” That conflict made it all the more difficult for EFS to come to
grips with its strategic problems. Yet before the firm could chart a new
strategy, it was essential that it reach a common understanding of its current
position.
EFS began the strategy process by bringing together more than twenty
senior managers from subsidiaries in Europe, North America, Asia, and
Australia and splitting them into two teams. One team was responsible for
producing a value curve depicting EFS’s current strategic profile in its
traditional corporate foreign exchange business relative to its competitors.
The other team was charged with the same task for EFS’s emerging online
foreign exchange business. They were given ninety minutes, because if EFS
had a clear strategy, surely it would emerge quickly.
It was a painful experience. Both teams had heated debates about what
constituted a competitive factor and what the factors were. Different factors
were important, it seemed, in different regions and even for different
customer segments. For example, Europeans argued that in its traditional
business, EFS had to offer consulting services on risk management, given
the perceived risk-averse nature of its customers. Americans, however,


dismissed that as largely irrelevant. They stressed the value of speed and
ease of use. Many people had pet ideas of which they were the sole
champions. One person in the online team argued, for example, that
customers would be drawn in by the promise of instant confirmations of
their transactions—a service no one else thought necessary. This was a
service no player in the industry then offered. In fact, in early 2000, apart
from a few select companies like Amazon, there were very few companies in
any industry that offered automatic buyer confirmations.
Despite these difficulties, the teams completed their assignments and
presented their pictures in a general meeting of all participants. Their results
are shown in figures 4-2 and 4-3.
The pictures clearly revealed defects in the company’s strategy. EFS’s
traditional and online value curves both demonstrated a serious lack of
focus; the company was investing in diverse and numerous factors in both
businesses. What’s more, EFS’s two curves were very similar to those of
competitors. Not surprisingly, neither team could come up with a memorable
tagline that was true to the team’s value curve.
FIGURE 4-2
The strategy canvas of corporate foreign exchange, offline


FIGURE 4-3
The strategy canvas of corporate foreign exchange, online


The pictures also highlighted contradictions. The online business, for
example, had invested heavily in making the website easy to use—it had
even won awards for this—but it became apparent that speed had been
overlooked. EFS had one of the slowest websites in the business, and that
might explain why such a well-regarded site did a relatively poor job of
attracting customers and converting them into sales.
The sharpest shocks, perhaps, came from comparing EFS’s strategy with
its competitors’. The online group realized that its strongest competitor,
which we’ve called Clearskies, had a focused, original, and easily
communicable strategy: “One-click E-Z FX.” Clearskies, which was
growing rapidly, was swimming away from the red ocean.
Faced with direct evidence of the company’s shortcomings, EFS’s
executives could not defend what they had shown to be a weak, unoriginal,
and poorly communicated strategy. Trying to draw the strategy canvases had
made a stronger case for change than any argument based on numbers and
words could have done. This created a strong desire in top management to
seriously rethink the company’s current strategy.


OceanofPDF.com




Step 2: Visual Exploration
Getting the wake-up call is only the first step. The next step is to send a
team into the field, putting managers face-to-face with what they must
make sense of: how people use or don’t use their products or services. This
step may seem obvious, but we have found that managers often outsource
this part of the strategy-making process. They rely on reports that other
people (often at one or two removes from the world they report on) have
put together.
A company should never outsource its eyes. There is simply no substitute
for seeing for yourself. Great artists don’t paint from other people’s
descriptions or even from photographs; they like to see the subject for
themselves. The same is true for great strategists. Michael Bloomberg,
before becoming mayor of New York City, was hailed as a business
visionary for his realization that the providers of financial information also
needed to provide online analytics to help users make sense of the data. But
he would be the first to tell you that the idea should have been obvious to
anyone who had ever watched traders using Reuters or Dow Jones Telerate
at the time. Before Bloomberg, traders used paper, pencil, and handheld
calculators to write down price quotes and figure fair market values before
making buy and sell decisions, a practice that cost them time and money as
well as built-in possible errors.
Great strategic insights like this are less the product of genius than of
getting into the field and challenging the boundaries of competition.3 In the
case of Bloomberg, his insight came by switching the focus of the industry
from IT purchasers to users: the traders and analysts. This allowed him to
see what was invisible to others.4
Obviously, the first port of call should be the customers. But you should
not stop there. You should also go after noncustomers.5 And when the
customer is not the same as the user, you need to extend your observations
to the users, as Bloomberg did. You should not only talk to these people but
also watch them in action. Identifying the array of complementary products
and services that are consumed alongside your own may give you insight
into bundling opportunities. Finally, you need to look at how customers
might find alternative ways of fulfilling the need that your product or


service satisfies. For example, driving is an alternative to flying, so you
should also examine its distinct advantages and characteristics.
EFS sent its managers into the field for four weeks to explore the six
paths to creating blue oceans.6 In this process, each was to interview and
observe ten people involved in corporate foreign exchange, including lost
customers, new customers, and the customers of EFS’s competitors and
alternatives. The managers also reached outside the industry’s traditional
boundaries to companies that did not yet use corporate foreign exchange
services but that might in the future, such as internet-based companies with
a global reach like Amazon.com that were just beginning to take off at the
time. They interviewed the end users of corporate foreign exchange services
—the accounting and treasury departments of companies. And finally, they
looked at ancillary products and services that their customers used—in
particular, treasury management and pricing simulations.
The field research overturned many of the conclusions managers had
reached in the first step of the strategy creation process. For example,
account relationship managers, whom nearly everyone had agreed were a
key to success and on whom EFS prided itself, turned out to be the
company’s Achilles’ heel. Customers hated wasting time dealing with
relationship managers. To buyers, relationship managers were seen as
relationship savers because EFS failed to deliver on its promises.
To everyone’s astonishment, the factor customers valued most was
getting speedy confirmation of transactions, which only one manager had
previously suggested was important. The EFS managers saw that their
customers’ accounting department personnel spent a lot of time making
phone calls to confirm that payments had been made and to check when
they would be received. Customers received numerous calls on the same
subject, and the time wasted in handling them was compounded by the
necessity of making further calls to the foreign exchange provider, namely
EFS or a competitor.
EFS’s teams were then sent back to the drawing board. This time, though,
they had to propose a new strategy. Each team had to draw six new value
curves using the six path framework explained in chapter 3. Each new value
curve had to depict a strategy that would make the company stand out in its
market. By demanding six pictures from each team, we hoped to push


managers to create innovative proposals and break the boundaries of their
conventional thinking.
For each visual strategy, the teams also had to write a compelling tagline
that captured the essence of the strategy and spoke directly to buyers.
Suggestions included “Leave It to Us,” “Make Me Smarter,” and
“Transactions in Trust.” A strong sense of competition developed between
the two teams, making the process fun, imbuing it with energy, and driving
the teams to develop blue ocean strategies.
OceanofPDF.com




Step 3: Visual Strategy Fair
After two weeks of drawing and redrawing, the teams presented their
strategy canvases at what we call a visual strategy fair. Attendees included
senior corporate executives but consisted mainly of representatives of EFS’s
external constituencies—the kinds of people the managers had met with
during their field trips, including noncustomers, customers of competitors,
and some of the most demanding EFS customers. In two hours, the teams
presented all twelve curves—six by the online group, and six by the offline
group. They were given no more than ten minutes to present each curve, on
the theory that any idea that takes more than ten minutes to communicate is
probably too complicated to be any good. The pictures were hung on the
walls so that the audience could easily see them.
After the twelve strategies were presented, each judge—an invited
attendee—was given five sticky notes and told to put them next to his or her
favorites. The judges could put all five on a single strategy if they found it
that compelling. The transparency and immediacy of this approach freed it
from the politics that sometimes seem endemic to the strategic planning
process. Managers had to rely on the originality and clarity of their curves
and their pitches. One began, for example, with the line, “We’ve got a
strategy so cunning that you won’t be our customers, you’ll be our fans.”
After the notes were posted, the judges were asked to explain their picks,
adding another level of feedback to the strategy-making process. Judges
were also asked to explain why they did not vote for the other value curves.
As the teams synthesized the judges’ common likes and dislikes, they
realized that fully one-third of what they had thought were key competitive
factors were, in fact, marginal to customers. Another one-third either were
not well articulated or had been overlooked in the visual awakening phase. It
was clear that the executives needed to reassess some long-held
assumptions, such as EFS’s separation of its online and traditional
businesses.
They also learned that buyers from all markets had a basic set of needs
and expected similar services. If you met those common needs, customers
would happily forgo everything else. Regional differences became


significant only when there was a problem with the basics. This was news to
many people who had claimed that their regions were unique.
Following the strategy fair, the teams were finally able to complete their
mission. They were able to draw a value curve that was a truer likeness of
the existing strategic profile than anything they had produced earlier, in part
because the new picture ignored the specious distinction that EFS had made
between its online and offline businesses. More important, the managers
were now in a position to draw a future strategy that would be distinctive as
well as speak to a true but hidden need in the marketplace. Figure 4-4
highlights the stark differences between the company’s current and future
strategies.
FIGURE 4-4
EFS: Before and after


As the figure shows, EFS’s future strategy eliminated relationship
management and reduced investment in account executives, who, from this
point on, were assigned only to “AAA” accounts. These moves dramatically
reduced EFS’s costs because relationship managers and account executives
were the highest-cost element of its business. EFS’s future strategy
emphasized ease of use, security, accuracy, and speed. These factors would
be delivered through computerization, which would allow customers to input
data directly instead of having to send a fax to EFS, which was the industry
norm at the time.
This action would also free up corporate dealers’ time, a large portion of
which had been spent completing paperwork and correcting errors. Dealers
would now be able to provide richer market commentary, a key success
factor. And EFS would send automatic electronic confirmations to all
customers. It would also offer a payment-tracking service, just as FedEx and
UPS do for parcels. The foreign exchange industry had never offered these
services before. Figure 4-5 summarizes EFS’s four actions to create value
innovation, the cornerstone of blue ocean strategy.
FIGURE 4-5
Eliminate-reduce-raise-create grid: The case of EFS


The new value curve exhibited the criteria of a successful strategy. It
displayed more focus than the previous strategy; investments that were made
were given a much stronger commitment than before. It also stood apart
from the industry’s existing me-too curves and lent itself to a compelling
tagline: “The FedEx of corporate foreign exchange: easy, reliable, fast, and
trackable.” By collapsing its online and traditional businesses into one
compelling offering, EFS substantially cut the operational complexity of its
business model, making systematic execution far easier.
OceanofPDF.com




Step 4: Visual Communication
After the future strategy is set, the last step is to communicate it in a way
that can be easily understood by any employee. EFS distributed the one-
page picture showing its new and old strategic profiles so that every
employee could see where the company stood and where it had to focus its
efforts to create a compelling future. The senior managers who participated
in developing the strategy held meetings with their direct reports to walk
them through the picture, explaining what needed to be eliminated, reduced,
raised, and created to pursue a blue ocean. Those people passed the message
on to their direct reports. Employees were so motivated by the clear game
plan that many pinned up a version of the strategy canvas in their cubicles
as a reminder of EFS’s new priorities and the gaps that needed to be closed.
The new picture became a reference point for all investment decisions.
Only those ideas that would help EFS move from the old to the new value
curve were given the go-ahead. When, for example, regional offices
requested that the IT department add links on the website—something that
in the past would have been agreed to without debate—IT asked them to
explain how the new links helped move EFS toward its new profile. If the
regional offices couldn’t provide an explanation, the request was denied,
thereby promoting clarity and not confusion on the website. Similarly, when
the IT department pitched a multimillion-dollar back-office system to top
management, the system’s ability to meet the new value curve’s strategic
needs was the chief metric by which it was judged.
OceanofPDF.com


Visualizing Strategy at the Corporate Level
Visualizing strategy can also greatly inform the dialogue among individual
business units and the corporate center in transforming a company’s
business portfolio from red to blue. When business units present their
strategy canvases to one another, they deepen their understanding of the
other businesses in the corporate portfolio. Moreover, the process also
fosters the transfer of strategic best practices across units.
OceanofPDF.com




Using the Strategy Canvas
To see how this works, consider how Samsung Electronics of Korea used
strategy canvases. Let’s zoom in on one of its corporate conferences, for
example, that was attended by more than seventy top managers, including
the CEO. Here unit heads presented their canvases and implementation
plans to senior executives and to one another. Discussions were heated, and
a number of unit heads argued that the freedom of their units to form future
strategies was constrained by the degree of competition they faced. Poor
performers felt that they had little choice but to match their competitors’
offerings. That hypothesis proved to be false when one of the fastest-
growing units—the mobile phone business—presented its strategy canvas.
Not only did the unit have a distinctive value curve, but it also faced the
most intense competition.
Samsung Electronics institutionalized the use of the strategy canvas in its
key business creation decisions by establishing the Value Innovation
Program (VIP) Center all the way back in 1998. Samsung was at a
crossroads at the time. With the aftermath of the 1997 Asian financial crisis
still being felt, the company, under the direction of its leader, Jong Yong
Yun, saw the dire need to break out of commodity-type competition and
create products and businesses that were both differentiated and lower cost.
Only that, CEO Yun felt, would propel the company to become a leading
consumer electronics company of the future. With this aim, the VIP Center
was established under the influence of our value innovation theory.7 The
center is a five-story building nestled amid the company’s enormous
industrial complex in Suwon, South Korea. Here, core cross-functional
team members of its various business units come together to discuss their
strategic projects with code names like Rainbow and Habana.8 These
discussions typically focus on strategy canvases.
More than two thousand people a year have been known to cycle through
its VIP Center in Suwon, where designers, engineers, planners, and
programmers gather for days—or months—to hammer out detailed
specifications for new products that will launch the company’s products
toward the blue ocean. The center has a core team of members who work to
support the projects passing through the center, all focused on driving value


innovation into Samsung’s next-generation products. With the value
innovation knowledge it has developed, the center, equipped with twenty
project rooms, assists the units in making their product and service offering
decisions. On average, some ninety strategic projects pass through the
center each year. Samsung also opened more than ten VIP branches to meet
business units’ rising demands.
In this spirit, Samsung Electronics has established an annual Value
Innovation corporate conference presided over by all of its top executives.
At this conference, Samsung’s hit Value Innovation projects are shared
through presentations and exhibitions, and awards are given to the best
cases. This is one way that Samsung Electronics establishes a common
language system, instilling a corporate culture and strategic norms that
drive its corporate business portfolio from red to blue oceans.9
Samsung Electronics has come a long way since the VIP Center was
established. Its sales have grown from $16.6 billion in 1998 to $216.7
billion in 2013 and its brand value has catapulted with it. Samsung
Electronics is now ranked as one of the top-ten most valuable global
brands.10 While Samsung’s focus on driving value innovation has
contributed to its sales, brand value, and market leadership, it will need an
even stronger value innovation push in the future as new lower-cost rivals
and untraditional players enter the fast-moving, high-tech consumer
electronics industry.
Do your business unit heads lack an understanding of the other
businesses in your corporate portfolio? Are your strategic best practices
poorly communicated across your business units? Are your low-performing
units quick to blame their competitive situations for their results? If the
answer to any of these questions is yes, try drawing, and then sharing, the
strategy canvases of your business units.
OceanofPDF.com




Using the Pioneer-Migrator-Settler (PMS) Map
Visualizing strategy can also help managers responsible for corporate
strategy predict and plan the company’s future growth and profit. All the
companies that created blue oceans in our study have been pioneers in their
industries, not necessarily in developing new technologies but in pushing
the value they offer customers to new frontiers. Extending the pioneer
metaphor can provide a useful way of talking about the growth potential of
current and future businesses.
A company’s pioneers are the businesses that offer unprecedented value.
These are your blue ocean offerings, and they are the most powerful sources
of profitable growth. These businesses have a mass following of customers.
Their value curve diverges from the competition on the strategy canvas. At
the other extreme are settlers—businesses whose value curves conform to
the basic shape of the industry’s. These are me-too businesses. Settlers will
not generally contribute much to a company’s future growth. They are stuck
within the red ocean.
The potential of migrators lies somewhere in between. Such businesses
extend the industry’s curve by giving customers more for less, but they
don’t alter its basic shape. These businesses offer improved value, but not
innovative value. These are businesses whose strategies fall on the margin
between red oceans and blue oceans.
A useful exercise for a corporate management team pursuing profitable
growth is to plot the company’s current and planned portfolios on a pioneer-
migrator-settler (PMS) map. For the purpose of the exercise, settlers are
defined as me-too businesses, migrators are business offerings better than
most in the marketplace, and pioneers are your value innovation offerings.
If both the current portfolio and the planned offerings consist mainly of
settlers, the company has a low growth trajectory, is largely confined to red
oceans, and needs to push for value innovation. Although the company
might be profitable today as its settlers are still making money, it may well
have fallen into the trap of competitive benchmarking, imitation, and intense
price competition.


If current and planned offerings consist of a lot of migrators, reasonable
growth can be expected. But the company is not exploiting its potential for
growth, and it risks being marginalized by a company that value-innovates.
In our experience, the more an industry is populated by settlers, the greater
is the opportunity to value-innovate and create a blue ocean of new market
space.
This exercise is especially valuable for managers who want to see beyond
today’s performance. Revenue, profitability, market share, and customer
satisfaction are all measures of a company’s current position. Contrary to
what conventional strategic thinking suggests, those measures cannot point
the way to the future; changes in the environment are too rapid. Today’s
market share is a reflection of how well a business has performed
historically. Think of the strategic reversal and market share upset that
occurred when CNN entered the US news market. ABC, CBS, and NBC—
all with historically strong market shares—were devastated.
Chief executives should instead use value and innovation as the important
parameters for managing their portfolio of businesses. They should use
innovation because, without it, companies are stuck in the trap of
competitive improvements. They should use value because innovative ideas
will be profitable only if they are linked to what buyers are willing to pay
for.
Clearly, what senior executives should be doing is getting their
organizations to shift the balance of their future portfolio toward pioneers.
That is the path to profitable growth. The PMS map shown in figure 4-6
depicts this trajectory, showing the scatter plot of a company’s portfolio of
businesses, where the gravity of its current portfolio of twelve businesses,
expressed as twelve dots, shifts from a preponderance of settlers to a
stronger balance of migrators and pioneers.
In pushing their businesses toward pioneers, however, senior executives
should be well aware that even though settlers have marginal growth
potential, they are frequently today’s cash generators. How can senior
executives then balance between cash flow and growth at a given point in
time to maximize profitable growth at the corporate level? What would be
their best renewal strategy for their portfolio of businesses over time? How
would such a renewal strategy work in action? We address these important
questions on renewal in chapter 10.


FIGURE 4-6
Testing the growth potential of a portfolio of businesses
OceanofPDF.com


Overcoming the Limitations of Strategic Planning
Managers often express discontent, either explicitly or implicitly, with
existing strategic planning—the core activity of strategy. To them, strategic
planning should be more about collective wisdom building than top-down
or bottom-up planning. They think that it should be more conversational
than solely documentation-driven, and it should be more about building the
big picture than about number-crunching exercises. It should have a
creative component instead of being strictly analysis-driven, and it should
be more motivational, invoking willing commitment, than bargaining-
driven, producing negotiated commitment. Despite this appetite for change,
however, scant work exists on building a viable alternative to existing
strategic planning, which is the most essential management task in the sense
that almost every company in the world not only does it but often takes
several grueling months each year to complete the exercise. Put differently,
while companies have a clear process to create plans, as of yet there has
been no theory or process for true strategy creation.
We believe the four-step process proposed here goes a long way to
correct this situation. By being built around a picture, it addresses many of
managers’ discontents with existing strategic planning and yields much
better results. As Aristotle pointed out, “The soul never thinks without an
image.”
Drawing a strategy canvas and a PMS map is not, of course, the only part
of strategy making. At some stage, numbers and documents must be
compiled and discussed. But we believe that the details will fall into place
more easily if managers start with the big picture of how to break away
from the competition. The methods of visualizing strategy proposed here
will put strategy back into strategic planning, and they will greatly improve
your chances of creating a blue ocean.
How do you maximize the size of the blue ocean you are creating? The
following chapter addresses that precise question.
OceanofPDF.com


CHAPTER 5
Reach Beyond Existing Demand
NO COMPANY WANTS to venture beyond red oceans only to find itself in a
puddle. The question is, How do you maximize the size of the blue ocean
you are creating? This brings us to the third principle of blue ocean
strategy: reach beyond existing demand. This is a key component of
achieving value innovation. By aggregating the greatest demand for a new
offering, this approach attenuates the scale risk associated with creating a
new market.
To achieve this, companies should challenge two conventional strategy
practices. One is the focus on existing customers. The other is the drive for
finer segmentation to accommodate buyer differences. Typically, to grow
their share of a market, companies strive to retain and expand existing
customers. This often leads to finer segmentation and greater tailoring of
offerings to better meet customer preferences. The more intense the
competition is, the greater, on average, is the resulting customization of
offerings. As companies compete to embrace customer preferences through
finer segmentation, they often risk creating too-small target markets.
To maximize the size of their blue oceans, companies need to take a
reverse course. Instead of concentrating on customers, they need to look to
noncustomers. And instead of focusing on customer differences, they need
to build on powerful commonalities in what buyers value. That allows
