# 5 Reach Beyond Existing Demand

companies to reach beyond existing demand to unlock a new mass of
customers that did not exist before.
Think of Callaway Golf. It aggregated new demand for its offering by
looking to noncustomers. While the US golf industry fought to win a
greater share of existing customers, Callaway created a blue ocean of new
demand by asking why sports enthusiasts and people in the country club set
had not taken up golf as a sport. By looking to why people shied away from
golf, it found one key commonality uniting the mass of noncustomers:
hitting the golf ball was perceived as too difficult. The small size of the golf
club head demanded enormous hand-eye coordination, took time to master,
and required concentration. As a result, fun was sapped for novices, and it
took too long to get good at the sport.
This understanding gave Callaway insight into how to aggregate new
demand for its offering. The answer was Big Bertha, a golf club with a large
head that made it far easier to hit the golf ball. Big Bertha not only
converted noncustomers of the industry into customers, but it also pleased
existing golf customers, making it a runaway bestseller across the board.
With the exception of pros, it turned out that the mass of existing customers
also had been frustrated with the difficulty of advancing their game by
mastering the skills needed to hit the ball consistently. The club’s large head
also lessened this difficulty.
Interestingly, however, existing customers, unlike noncustomers, had
implicitly accepted the difficulty of the game. Although the mass of existing
customers didn’t like it, they had taken for granted that that was the way the
game was played. Instead of registering their dissatisfaction with golf club
makers, they themselves accepted the responsibility to improve. By looking
to noncustomers and focusing on their key commonalities—not differences
—Callaway saw how to aggregate new demand and offer the mass of
customers and noncustomers a leap in value. The result: Callaway sailed in
a lucrative blue ocean that lasted nearly a decade.
Where is your locus of attention—on capturing a greater share of existing
customers, or on converting noncustomers of the industry into new
demand? Do you seek out key commonalities in what buyers value, or do
you strive to embrace customer differences through finer customization and
segmentation? To reach beyond existing demand, think noncustomers


before customers; commonalities before differences; and desegmentation
before pursuing finer segmentation.
OceanofPDF.com


The Three Tiers of Noncustomers
Although the universe of noncustomers typically offers big blue ocean
opportunities, few companies have keen insight into who noncustomers are
and how to unlock them. To convert this huge latent demand into real
demand in the form of thriving new customers, companies need to deepen
their understanding of the universe of noncustomers.
There are three tiers of noncustomers that can be transformed into
customers. They differ in their relative distance from your market. As
depicted in figure 5-1, the first tier of noncustomers is closest to your
market. They sit on the edge of the market. They are buyers who minimally
purchase an industry’s offering out of necessity but are mentally
noncustomers of the industry. They are waiting to jump ship and leave the
industry as soon as the opportunity presents itself. However, if offered a
leap in value, not only would they stay, but also their frequency of
purchases would multiply, unlocking enormous latent demand.
The second tier of noncustomers is people who refuse to use your
industry’s offerings. These are buyers who have seen your industry’s
offerings as an option to fulfill their needs but have voted against them. In
the Callaway case, for example, these were sports enthusiasts, especially the
country club tennis set, who could have chosen golf but had consciously
chosen against it.
FIGURE 5-1
The three tiers of noncustomers


First tier: “Soon-to-be” noncustomers who are on the edge of your market,
    waiting to jump ship.
Second tier: “Refusing” noncustomers who consciously choose against    
your market.
Third tier: “Unexplored” noncustomers who are in markets distant from
yours.
The third tier of noncustomers is farthest from your market. They are
noncustomers who have never thought of your market’s offerings as an
option. By focusing on key commonalities across these noncustomers and
existing customers, companies can understand how to pull them into their
new market.
Let’s look at each of the three tiers of noncustomers to understand how
you can attract them and expand your blue ocean.
OceanofPDF.com




First-Tier Noncustomers
These soon-to-be noncustomers are those who minimally use the current
market offerings to get by as they search for something better. Upon finding
any better alternative, they will eagerly jump ship. In this sense, they sit on
the edge of the market. A market becomes stagnant and develops a growth
problem as the number of soon-to-be noncustomers increases. Yet locked
within these first-tier noncustomers is an ocean of untapped demand
waiting to be released.
Consider how Pret A Manger, a British fast-food chain that opened in
1986, has expanded its blue ocean by tapping into the huge latent demand
of first-tier noncustomers. Before Pret, professionals in European city
centers principally frequented restaurants for lunch. Sit-down restaurants
offered a nice meal and setting. However, the number of first-tier
noncustomers was high and rising. Growing concerns over the need for
healthy eating gave people second thoughts about eating out in restaurants.
And professionals increasingly found they did not always have time for a
sit-down meal. Some restaurants were also too expensive for lunch on a
daily basis. So professionals were increasingly grabbing something on the
run, bringing a brown bag from home, or even skipping lunch.
These first-tier noncustomers were in search of better solutions. Although
there were numerous differences across them, they shared three key
commonalities: they wanted lunch fast, they wanted it fresh and healthy,
and they wanted it at a reasonable price.
The insight gained from the commonalities across these first-tier
noncustomers shed light on how Pret could unlock and aggregate untapped
demand. The Pret formula is simple. It offers restaurant-quality sandwiches
made fresh every day from only the finest ingredients, and it makes the
food available at a speed that is faster than that of restaurants and even fast
food. It also delivers this in a sleek setting at reasonable prices.
Consider what Pret is like. Walking into a Pret A Manger is like walking
into a bright Art Deco studio. Along the walls are clean refrigerated shelves
stocked with more than thirty types of sandwiches, baguettes, or wraps
made fresh that day, in that shop, from fresh ingredients delivered earlier
that morning. People can also choose from other freshly made items, such


as salads, yogurt, parfaits, and blended juices. Each store has its own
kitchen, and non-fresh items are made by high-quality producers. Even in
its New York stores, Pret’s baguettes are from France and its croissants are
from Belgium. And nothing is kept over to the next day. Leftover food is
given to homeless shelters.
In addition to offering fresh healthy sandwiches and other fresh food
items, Pret speeds up the customer ordering experience from fast food’s
queue-order-pay-wait-receive-sit down purchasing cycle to a much faster
browse-pick up-pay-leave cycle. On average, customers spend just ninety
seconds from the time they get in line to the time they leave the shop. This
is made possible because Pret produces ready-made sandwiches and other
things at high volume with a high standardization of assembly, does not
make to order, and does not serve its customers. They serve themselves as
in a supermarket.
Whereas sit-down restaurants have seen stagnant demand, Pret has been
converting the mass of soon-to-be noncustomers into core thriving
customers who eat at Pret more often than they used to eat at restaurants.
Beyond this, as with Callaway, restaurant-goers who were content to eat
lunch at restaurants also have been flocking to Pret. Although restaurant
lunches had been acceptable, the three key commonalities of first-tier
noncustomers struck a chord with these people; but unlike soon-to-be
noncustomers, they had not thought to question their lunch habits. The
lesson: noncustomers tend to offer far more insight into how to unlock and
grow a blue ocean than do relatively content existing customers.
Today, nearly thirty years on, Pret A Manger continues to enjoy robust
growth and sail in the blue ocean it created. It is recognized to have
revolutionized the British sandwich industry. Pret currently has some 335
stores with annual turnover at roughly £450 million ($760 million) per year,
with stores in the United Kingdom, the United States, Hong Kong, and
France.1
What are the key reasons first-tier noncustomers want to jump ship and
leave your industry? Look for the commonalities across their responses.
Focus on these, and not on the differences between them. You will glean
insight into how to desegment buyers and unleash an ocean of latent
untapped demand.


OceanofPDF.com




Second-Tier Noncustomers
These are refusing noncustomers, people who either do not use or cannot
afford to use the current market offerings because they find the offerings
unacceptable or beyond their means. Their needs are either dealt with by
other means or ignored. Harboring within refusing noncustomers, however,
is an ocean of untapped demand waiting to be released.
Consider how JCDecaux, a vendor of French outdoor advertising space,
pulled the mass of refusing noncustomers into its market. Before JCDecaux
created a new concept in outdoor advertising called “street furniture” in
1964, the outdoor advertising industry included billboards and transport
advertisement. Billboards typically were located on city outskirts and along
roads where traffic quickly passed by; transport advertisement comprised
panels on buses and taxies, which again people caught sight of only as they
whizzed by.
Outdoor advertising was not a popular campaign medium for many
companies because it was viewed only in a transitory way. Outdoor ads
were exposed to people for a very short time while they were in transit, and
the rate of repeat visits was low. Especially for lesser-known companies,
such advertising media were ineffective because they could not carry the
comprehensive messages needed to introduce new names and products.
Hence, many such companies refused to use such low-value-added outdoor
advertising because it was either unacceptable or a luxury they could not
afford.
Having thought through the key commonalities that cut across refusing
noncustomers of the industry, JCDecaux realized that the lack of stationary
downtown locations was the key reason the industry remained unpopular
and small. In searching for a solution, JCDecaux found that municipalities
could offer stationary downtown locations, such as bus stops, where people
tended to wait a few minutes and hence had time to read and be influenced
by advertisements. JCDecaux reasoned that if it could secure these locations
to use for outdoor advertising, it could convert second-tier noncustomers
into customers.
This gave it the idea to provide street furniture, including maintenance
and upkeep, free to municipalities. JCDecaux figured that as long as the


revenue generated from selling ad space exceeded the costs of providing
and maintaining the furniture at an attractive profit margin, the company
would be on a trajectory of strong, profitable growth. Accordingly, street
furniture was created that would integrate advertising panels.
In this way, JCDecaux created a breakthrough in value for second-tier
noncustomers, the municipalities, and itself. The strategy eliminated cities’
traditional costs associated with urban furniture. In return for free products
and services, JCDecaux gained the exclusive right to display advertisements
on the street furniture located in downtown areas. By making ads available
in city centers, the company significantly increased the average exposure
time, improving the recall capabilities of this advertising medium. The
increase in exposure time also permitted richer contents and more complex
messages. Moreover, as the maintainer of the urban furniture, JCDecaux
could help advertisers roll out their campaigns in two to three days, as
opposed to fifteen days of rollout time for traditional billboard campaigns.
In response to JCDecaux’s exceptional value offering, the mass of refusing
noncustomers flocked to the industry, and street furniture took off as a
medium of advertisement. By signing contracts of ten to twenty-five years
with municipalities, JCDecaux gained long-term exclusive rights for
displaying ads with street furniture. After an initial capital investment, the
only expenditure for JCDecaux in the subsequent years was the
maintenance and renewal of the furniture. The operating margin of street
furniture was as high as 40 percent, compared with 14 percent for billboards
and 18 percent for transport advertisements. The exclusive contracts and
relatively high operating margins created a steady source of long-term
revenue and profits. With this business model, JCDecaux was able to
capture a leap in value for itself in return for a leap in value created for its
buyers.
Today, fifty years later, JCDecaux remains the number-one global leader
in the street furniture-based ad market space it created. The company now
has nearly five hundred thousand street furniture advertising panels in
eighteen hundred cities in forty-eight countries around the world.2 What’s
more, by looking to second-tier noncustomers and focusing on the key
commonalities that turned them away from the industry, JCDecaux also
increased the demand for outdoor advertising by existing customers of the
industry. Until then, existing customers had focused on what billboard


locations or bus lines they could secure, for what period, and for how much.
They took for granted that those were the only options available and
worked within them. Again, it took noncustomers to shed insight into the
implicit assumptions of the industry that could be challenged and rewritten
to create a leap in value for all.
What are the key reasons second-tier noncustomers refuse to use the
products or services of your industry? Look for the commonalities across
their responses. Focus on these, and not on their differences. You will glean
insight into how to unleash an ocean of latent untapped demand.
OceanofPDF.com




Third-Tier Noncustomers
The third tier of noncustomers is the farthest away from an industry’s
existing customers. Typically, these unexplored noncustomers have not been
targeted or thought of as potential customers by any player in the industry.
That’s because their needs and the business opportunities associated with
them have somehow always been assumed to belong to other markets.
It would drive many companies crazy to know how many third-tier
noncustomers they are forfeiting. Just think of the long-held assumption that
tooth whitening was a service provided exclusively by dentists and not by
oral care consumer-product companies. Consequently, oral care companies,
until relatively recently, never looked at the needs of these noncustomers.
When they did, they found an ocean of latent demand waiting to be tapped;
they also found that they had the capability to deliver safe, high-quality, low-
cost tooth whitening solutions, and the market exploded.
This potential applies to most industries. Consider the US defense
aerospace industry. It has been argued that the inability to control aircraft
costs is a key vulnerability in the long-term military strength of the United
States.3 Soaring costs combined with shrinking budgets, concluded a 1993
Pentagon report, left the military without a viable plan to replace its aging
fleet of fighter aircraft.4 If the military couldn’t find a way to build aircraft
differently, military leaders worried, the United States would not have
enough airplanes to properly defend its interests.
Traditionally, the Navy, Marines, and Air Force differed in their
conceptions of the ideal fighter plane and hence each branch designed and
built its own aircraft independently. The Navy argued for a durable aircraft
that would survive the stress of landing on carrier decks. The Marines
wanted an expeditionary aircraft capable of short takeoffs and landings. The
Air Force wanted the fastest and most sophisticated aircraft.
Historically, these differences among the independent branches were taken
for granted, and the defense aerospace industry was regarded as having three
distinct and separate segments. The Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) program
aimed to challenge this industry practice.5 It looked to all three segments as
potentially unexplored noncustomers that could be aggregated into a new
market of higher-performing, lower-cost fighter planes. Rather than accept


the existing segmentation and develop products according to the differences
in specifications and features demanded by each branch of the military, the
JSF program set out to question these differences. It searched for the key
commonalities across the three branches that had previously disregarded one
another.
This process revealed that the highest-cost components of the three
branches’ aircraft were the same: avionics (software), engines, and major
airframe structural components. The shared use and production of these
components held the promise of enormous cost reductions. Moreover, even
though each branch had a long list of highly customized requirements, most
aircraft across branches performed the same missions.
The JSF team looked to understand how many of these highly customized
features decisively influenced the branches’ purchase decision. Interestingly,
the Navy’s answer did not hinge on a wide range of factors. Instead, it boiled
down to two predominant factors: durability and maintainability. With
aircraft stationed on aircraft carriers thousands of miles away from the
nearest maintenance hangar, the Navy wants a fighter that is easy to maintain
and yet durable as a Mack truck so that it can absorb the shock of carrier
landings and constant exposure to salt air. Fearing that these two essential
qualities would be compromised with the requirements of the Marines and
the Air Force, the Navy bought its aircraft separately.
The Marines had many differences in requirements from those of the other
branches, but again only two kept them from decisively avoiding joint
aircraft purchases: the need for short takeoff vertical landing (STOVL) and
robust countermeasures. To support troops in remote and hostile conditions
the Marines need an aircraft that performs as a jet fighter and yet hovers like
a helicopter. And given the low-altitude, expeditionary nature of their
missions, the Marines want an aircraft equipped with various
countermeasures—flares, electronic jamming devices—to evade enemy
ground-to-air missiles because their planes are relatively easier targets given
their short air-to-ground range.
Tasked with maintaining global air superiority, the Air Force demands the
fastest aircraft and superior tactical agility—the ability to outmaneuver all
current and future enemy aircraft—and one equipped with stealth
technology: radar-absorbing materials and structures to make it less visible
to radar and therefore more likely to evade enemy missiles and aircraft. The


other two branches’ aircraft lacked these factors, and hence the Air Force had
not considered them.
These findings on unexplored noncustomers made the JSF a promising
project. The aim was to build a single airframe in three variants that shared
some 70 percent of their parts while reducing or eliminating the other factors
that had been taken for granted by each branch but were, in effect, not
critically decisive to their purchase decision (see figure 5-2).
FIGURE 5-2
The key competing factors of the defense aerospace industry
The JSF project found that despite the wide range of key competing factors,
only those shaded in grey were decisive to each branch’s fighter aircraft
decision.


The JSF promised to be some one-third the cost per fighter aircraft. At the
same time, the performance of the JSF, now called the F-35, promised to be
superior to that of the top-performing aircraft for the three branches then: the
Air Force’s F-16, the Marine’s AV-8B Harrier jet, and the Navy’s F-18. By
focusing on the key decisive factors and dropping or reducing other factors
in the three dominant domains of customization—namely, design, weapons,
and mission customization—the JSF program undertook offering a superior
fighter plane at a lower cost. It was also reckoned that aggregating demand
previously divided among the three branches would further lower the cost.
In fall 2001, Lockheed Martin was awarded the massive $200 billion JSF
contract—the largest military contract in history—over Boeing. The
Pentagon was confident that the program would be an unqualified success


not only because the strategic profile of the F-35 achieved exceptional value
at lower cost but also because it had won the support of all three defense
branches that counted on it to replace their aging aircraft fleets.6
While the conception and prototype of the F-35 were well received, a
project of this magnitude and complexity will always have unusual
execution challenges. As there are great execution lessons to be learned here,
we will revisit this move and discuss its execution issue separately in chapter
8. At the end of the day, actual delivery of performance is a function of not
only creative conception but also good execution.7
OceanofPDF.com


Go for the Biggest Catchment
There is no hard-and-fast rule to suggest which tier of noncustomers you
should focus on and when. Because the scale of blue ocean opportunities
that a specific tier of noncustomers can unlock varies across time and
industries, you should focus on the tier that represents the biggest
catchment that your organization has the capability to act on. But you
should also explore whether there are overlapping commonalities across all
three tiers of noncustomers. In that way, you can expand the scope of latent
demand you can unleash. When that is the case, you should not focus on a
specific tier but instead should look across tiers. The rule here is to go for
the largest catchment that your organization has competence to seize.
The natural strategic orientation of many companies is toward retaining
existing customers and seeking further segmentation opportunities. This is
especially true in the face of competitive pressure. Although this might be a
good way to gain a focused competitive advantage and increase share of the
existing market space, it is not likely to produce a blue ocean that expands
the market and creates new demand. The point here is not to argue that it’s
wrong to focus on existing customers or segmentation but rather to
challenge these existing, taken-for-granted strategic orientations. What we
suggest is that to maximize the scale of your blue ocean, you should first
reach beyond existing demand to noncustomers and desegmentation
opportunities as you formulate future strategies.
If no such opportunities can be found, you can then move on to further
exploit differences among existing customers. But in making such a
strategic move, you should be aware that you might end up landing in a
smaller space. You should also be aware that when your competitors
succeed in attracting the mass of noncustomers with a value innovation
move, many of your existing customers may be attracted away because they
too may be willing to put their differences aside to gain the offered leap in
value.
It is not enough to maximize the size of the blue ocean you are creating.
You must profit from it to create a sustainable win-win outcome. The next
chapter shows how to build a viable business model that produces and
maintains profitable growth for your blue ocean offering.


OceanofPDF.com


CHAPTER 6
Get the Strategic Sequence Right
YOU’VE LOOKED ACROSS PATHS to discover possible blue oceans. You’ve
constructed a strategy canvas that clearly articulates your future blue ocean
strategy. And you have explored how to aggregate the largest catchment of
buyers for your idea. The next challenge is to build a robust business model
to ensure that you make a healthy profit on your blue ocean idea. This
brings us to the fourth principle of blue ocean strategy: get the strategic
sequence right.
This chapter discusses the strategic sequence of fleshing out and
validating blue ocean ideas to ensure their commercial viability. With an
understanding of the right strategic sequence and of how to assess blue
ocean ideas along the key criteria in that sequence, you dramatically reduce
business model risk.
OceanofPDF.com
