# 6 Get the Strategic Sequence Right

The Right Strategic Sequence
As shown in figure 6-1, companies need to build their blue ocean strategy
in the sequence of buyer utility, price, cost, and adoption.
FIGURE 6-1
The sequence of blue ocean strategy




The starting point is buyer utility. Does your offering unlock exceptional
utility? Is there a compelling reason for the target mass of people to buy it?
Absent this, there is no blue ocean potential to begin with. Here there are
only two options. Park the idea, or rethink it until you reach an affirmative
answer.
When you clear the exceptional utility bar, you advance to the second
step: setting the right strategic price. Remember, a company does not want
to rely solely on price to create demand. The key question here is this: Is
your offering priced to attract the mass of target buyers so that they have a
compelling ability to pay for your offering? If it is not, they cannot buy it.
Nor will the offering create irresistible market buzz.
These first two steps address the revenue side of a company’s business
model. They ensure that you create a leap in net buyer value, where net
buyer value equals the utility buyers receive minus the price they pay for it.
Securing the profit side brings us to the third element: cost. Can you
produce your offering at the target cost and still earn a healthy profit
margin? Can you profit at the strategic price—the price easily accessible to
the mass of target buyers? You should not let costs drive prices. Nor should
you scale down utility because high costs block your ability to profit at the
strategic price. When the target cost cannot be met, you must either forgo
the idea because the blue ocean won’t be profitable, or you must innovate
your business model to hit the target cost. The cost side of a company’s
business model ensures that it creates a leap in value for itself in the form of
profit—that is, the price of the offering minus the cost of production. It is
the combination of exceptional utility, strategic pricing, and target costing
that allows companies to achieve value innovation—a leap in value for both
buyers and companies.
The last step is to address adoption hurdles. What are the adoption
hurdles in rolling out your idea? Have you addressed these up front? The
formulation of blue ocean strategy is complete only when you can address
adoption hurdles in the beginning to ensure the successful actualization of
your idea. Adoption hurdles include, for example, potential resistance to the
idea by retailers or partners. Because blue ocean strategies represent a


significant departure from red oceans, it is key to address adoption hurdles
up front.
How can you assess whether your blue ocean strategy is passing through
each of the four sequential steps? And how can you refine your idea to pass
each bar? Let’s address these questions, starting with utility.
OceanofPDF.com


Testing for Exceptional Utility
The need to assess the buyer utility of your offering may seem self-evident.
Yet many companies fail to deliver exceptional value because they are
obsessed by the novelty of their product or service, especially if new
technology plays a part in it.
Consider Philips’ CD-i, an engineering marvel that failed to offer people a
compelling reason to buy it. The player was promoted as the “Imagination
Machine” because of its diverse functions. CD-i was a video machine, music
system, game player, and teaching tool all wrapped into one. Yet it did so
many different tasks without an easy or intuitive user interface that people
could not understand how to use it without a significant investment of time
and complicated manuals. In addition, it lacked attractive software titles. So
even though the CD-i theoretically could do almost anything, in reality it
could do very little. Customers lacked a compelling reason and ability to use
it, and sales never took off.
Managers responsible for Philips’ CD-i (as well as Motorola’s Iridium)
fell into the same trap: they reveled in the bells and whistles of their new
technology. They acted on the assumption that bleeding-edge technology is
equivalent to bleeding-edge utility for buyers—something that, our research
found, is rarely the case.
The technology trap that snagged Philips and Motorola trips up the best
and brightest companies time and again. Unless the technology makes
buyers’ lives dramatically simpler, more convenient, more productive, less
risky, or more fun and fashionable, it will not attract the masses no matter
how many awards it wins. Value innovation is not the same as technology
innovation.
To get around this trap, the starting point, as articulated in chapter 2, is to
create a strategic profile that passes the initial litmus test of being focused,
being divergent, and having a compelling tagline that speaks to buyers.
Having done this, companies are ready to expressly assess where and how
the new product or service will change the lives of its buyers. Such a
difference in perspective is important because it means that the way a
product or service is developed becomes less a function of its technical
possibilities and more a function of its utility to buyers.


The buyer utility map helps managers look at this issue from the right
perspective (see figure 6-2). It outlines all the levers companies can pull to
deliver exceptional utility to buyers as well as the various experiences
buyers can have with a product or service. This map allows managers to
identify the full range of utility spaces that a product or service can
potentially fill. Let’s look at the map’s dimensions in detail.
FIGURE 6-2
The buyer utility map
OceanofPDF.com




The Six Stages of the Buyer Experience Cycle
A buyer’s experience can usually be broken into a cycle of six stages,
running more or less sequentially from purchase to disposal. Each stage
encompasses a wide variety of specific experiences. Purchasing, for
example, may include the experience of browsing eBay as well as the aisles
of The Home Depot. At each stage, managers can ask a set of questions to
gauge the quality of buyers’ experience, as described in figure 6-3.
OceanofPDF.com




The Six Utility Levers
Cutting across the stages of the buyer’s experience are what we call utility
levers: the ways in which companies can unlock exceptional utility for
buyers. Most of the levers are obvious. Simplicity, fun and image, and
environmental friendliness need little explanation. Nor does the idea that a
product might reduce a customer’s financial, physical, or credibility risks.
And a product or service offers convenience simply by being easy to obtain,
use, or dispose of. The most commonly used lever is that of customer
productivity, in which an offering helps a customer do things faster or better.
To test for exceptional utility, companies should check whether their
offering has removed the greatest blocks to utility across the entire buyer
experience cycle for customers and noncustomers. The greatest blocks to
utility often represent the greatest and most pressing opportunities to unlock
exceptional value. Figure 6-4 shows how a company can identify the most
compelling hot spots to unlock exceptional utility. By locating your
proposed offering on the thirty-six spaces of the buyer utility map, you can
clearly see how, and whether, the new idea not only creates a different utility
proposition from existing offerings but also removes the biggest blocks to
utility that stand in the way of converting noncustomers into customers. If
your offering falls on the same space or spaces as those of other players,
chances are it is not a blue ocean offering.
FIGURE 6-3
The buyer experience cycle


FIGURE 6-4
Uncovering the blocks to buyer utility


Consider the Ford Model T. Before its debut, the more than five hundred
automakers in the United States focused on building custom-made luxury
autos for the wealthy. In terms of the buyer utility map, the entire industry
focused on image in the use phase, creating luxury cars for fashionable
weekend outings. Only one of the thirty-six utility spaces was occupied.
The greatest blocks to utility for the mass of people, however, were not in
refining the auto’s luxury or stylish image. Rather, they had to do with two
other factors. One was convenience in the use phase. The bumpy and muddy
dirt roads that prevailed at the century’s start were a natural for horses to
tread over but often prevented finely crafted autos from passing. This
significantly limited where and when cars could travel (driving on rainy and
snowy days was ill advised), making the use of the car limited and
inconvenient. The second block to utility was risk in the maintenance phase.
The cars, being finely crafted and having multiple options, often broke
down, requiring experts to fix them, and experts were expensive and in short
supply.
In one fell swoop, Ford’s Model T eliminated these two utility blocks. The
Model T was called the car for the great multitude. It came in only one color


(black) and one model, with scant options. In this way, Ford eliminated
investments in image in the use phase. Instead of creating cars for weekends
in the countryside—a luxury few could justify—Ford’s Model T was made
for everyday use. It was reliable. It was durable; it was designed to travel
effortlessly over dirt roads and in rain, sleet, or shine. It was easy to fix and
use. People could learn to drive it in one day.
In this way the buyer utility map highlights the differences between ideas
that genuinely create new and exceptional utility and those that are
essentially revisions of existing offerings or technological breakthroughs not
linked to value. The aim is to check whether your offering passes the
exceptional utility test, as did the Model T. By applying this diagnostic, you
can find out how your idea needs to be refined.
Where are the greatest blocks to utility across the buyer experience cycle
for your customers and noncustomers? Does your offering effectively
eliminate these blocks? If it does not, chances are your offering is innovation
for innovation’s sake or a revision of existing offerings. When a company’s
offering passes this test, the company is ready to move to the next step.
OceanofPDF.com


From Exceptional Utility to Strategic Pricing
To secure a strong revenue stream for your offering, you must set the right
strategic price. This step ensures that buyers not only will want to buy your
offering but also will have a compelling ability to pay for it. Many
companies take a reverse course, first testing the waters of a new product or
service by targeting novelty-seeking, price-insensitive customers at the
launch of a new business idea; only over time do they drop prices to attract
mainstream buyers. It is increasingly important, however, to know from the
start what price will quickly capture the mass of target buyers.
There are two reasons for this change. First, companies are discovering
that volume generates higher returns than it used to. As the nature of goods
becomes more knowledge intensive, companies bear much more of their
costs in product development than in manufacturing. This is easy to
understand in the software industry. While producing Apple’s iOS software,
for example, cost Apple billions, once produced it could be installed in an
infinite number of computers for a nearly trivial cost to Apple. This makes
volume key.
A second reason is that to a buyer, the value of a product or service may
be closely tied to the total number of people using it. A classic example is the
online auction service managed by eBay, where the more people who use it,
the more attractive the site becomes to both the sellers and buyers of goods.
As a result of this phenomenon, called network externalities, many products
and services are increasingly an all-or-nothing proposition: either you sell
millions at once, or you sell nothing at all.1
In the meantime, the rise of knowledge-intensive products also creates the
potential for free riding. This relates to the nonrival and partially excludable
nature of knowledge.2 The use of a rival good by one firm precludes its use
by another. So, for example, Nobel Prize–winning scientists who are fully
employed by IBM cannot simultaneously be employed by another company.
Nor can scrap steel consumed by Nucor be simultaneously consumed for
production by other mini-mill steelmakers.
In contrast, the use of a nonrival good by one firm does not limit its use
by another. Ideas fall into this category. So, for example, when Virgin
Atlantic Airways launched its Upper Class brand—which, for the first time,


essentially combined the huge seats and legroom of traditional first class
with the price of business-class tickets—other airlines were free to apply this
idea to their own business-class service without limiting Virgin’s ability to
use it. This makes competitive imitation not only possible but less costly.
The cost and risk of developing an innovative idea are borne by the initiator,
not the follower.
This challenge is exacerbated when the notion of excludability is
considered. Excludability is a function both of the nature of the good and of
the legal system. A good is excludable if the company can prevent others
from using it because of, for example, limited access or patent protection.
Intel, for example, can exclude other semiconductor chipmakers from using
its manufacturing facilities through property ownership laws. The Asian
barbershop QB House, however, cannot exclude someone from walking into
any of its shops, studying its layout, atmosphere, and haircutting routine, and
mimicking its innovative barbershop concept. Once ideas are out there,
knowledge naturally spills over to other firms.
This lack of excludability reinforces the risk of free-riding. Like the
creative concepts of Pret A Manger or JCDecaux, many of the most powerful
blue ocean ideas have tremendous value but in themselves consist of no new
technological discoveries. As a result they are neither patentable nor
excludable and hence are vulnerable to imitation.
All this means that the strategic price you set for your offering must not
only attract buyers in large numbers but also help you to retain them. Given
the high potential for free riding, an offering’s reputation must be earned on
day one, because brand building increasingly relies heavily on word-of-
mouth recommendations spreading rapidly through our networked society.
Companies must therefore start with an offer that buyers can’t refuse and
must keep it that way to discourage any free-riding imitations. This is what
makes strategic pricing key. Strategic pricing addresses this question: Is your
offering priced to attract the mass of target buyers from the start so that they
have a compelling ability to pay for it? When exceptional utility is combined
with strategic pricing, imitation is discouraged.
We have developed a tool called the price corridor of the target mass to
help managers find the right price for an irresistible offer, which, by the way,
isn’t necessarily the lower price. The tool involves two distinct but
interrelated steps (see figure 6-5).


FIGURE 6-5
The price corridor of the target mass
OceanofPDF.com




Step 1: Identify the Price Corridor of the Target Mass
In setting a price, all companies look first at the products and services that
most closely resemble their idea in terms of form. Typically they look at
other products and services within their industries. That’s still a necessary
exercise, of course, but it is not sufficient to attract new customers. So the
main challenge in determining a strategic price is to understand the price
sensitivities of those people who will be comparing the new product or
service with a host of very different-looking products and services offered
outside the group of traditional competitors.
A good way to look outside industry boundaries is to list products and
services that fall into two categories: those that take different forms but
perform the same function, and those that take different forms and functions
but share the same overarching objective.
Different form, same function.
Many companies that create blue oceans attract customers from other
industries who use a product or service that performs the same function or
bears the same core utility as the new one but takes a very different physical
form. In the case of Ford’s Model T, Ford looked to the horse-drawn
carriage. The horse-drawn carriage had the same core utility as the car:
transportation for individuals and families. But it had a very different form:
a live animal versus a machine. Ford effectively converted the majority of
noncustomers of the auto industry, namely customers of horse-drawn
carriages, into customers of its own blue ocean by pricing its Model T
against horse-drawn carriages and not the cars of other automakers.
In the case of the school lunch catering industry, raising this question led
to an interesting insight. Suddenly those parents who make their children’s
lunches came into the equation. For many children, parents had the same
function: making their child’s lunch. But they had a very different form:
mom or dad versus a lunch line in the cafeteria.
Different form and function, same objective.
Some companies lure customers from even further away. Cirque du Soleil,
for example, has diverted customers from a wide range of evening


activities. Its growth came in part through drawing people away from other
activities that differed in both form and function. For example, bars and
restaurants have few physical features in common with a circus. They also
serve a distinct function by providing conversational and gastronomical
pleasure, a very different experience from the visual entertainment that a
circus offers. Yet despite these differences in form and function, people
have the same objective in undertaking these three activities: to enjoy a
night out.
Listing the groups of alternative products and services allows managers
to see the full range of buyers they can poach from other industries as well
as from nonindustries, such as parents (for the school lunch catering
industry) or the noble pencil in managing household finances (for the
personal finance software industry). Having done this, managers should
then graphically plot the price and volume of these alternatives, as shown in
figure 6-5.
This approach provides a straightforward way to identify where the mass
of target buyers is and what prices these buyers are prepared to pay for the
products and services they currently use. The price bandwidth that captures
the largest groups of target buyers is the price corridor of the target mass.
In some cases, the range is very wide. For Southwest Airlines, for
example, the price corridor of the mass covered the group of people paying,
on average, some $400 to buy an economy-class short-haul ticket to about
$60 for the cost of going the same distance by car. The key here is not to
pursue pricing against the competition within an industry but rather to
pursue pricing against substitutes and alternatives across industries and
nonindustries. Had Ford, for example, priced its Model T against other
autos, which were more than three times the price of horse-drawn carriages,
the market for the Model T would not have exploded.
OceanofPDF.com




Step 2: Specify a Level within the Price Corridor
The second part of the tool helps managers determine how high a price they
can afford to set within the corridor without inviting competition from
imitation products or services. That assessment depends on two principal
factors. First is the degree to which the product or service is protected
legally through patents or copyrights. Second is the degree to which the
company owns some exclusive asset or core capability, such as an
expensive production plant or unique design competence that can block
imitation. Dyson, the British electrical white goods company, for example,
has been able to charge a high unit price for its bagless vacuum cleaner
from the product’s launch in 1995 until today, thanks to strong patents,
hard-to-imitate service capabilities, and a striking design.
Many other companies have used upper-boundary strategic pricing to
attract the mass of target buyers. Examples include Philips’ Alto in the
professional lighting industry, the Lycra brand created by DuPont (and now
owned by Invista) in specialty chemicals, SAP in the business application
software industry, and Bloomberg in the financial software industry. On the
other hand, companies with uncertain patent and asset protection should
consider pricing somewhere in the middle of the corridor. As for companies
that have no such protection, lower-boundary strategic pricing is advised. In
the case of Southwest Airlines, because its service wasn’t patentable and
required no exclusive assets, its ticket prices fell into the lower boundary of
the corridor—namely, against the price of car travel. Companies would be
wise to pursue mid-to lower-boundary strategic pricing from the start if any
of the following apply:
Their blue ocean offering has high fixed costs and marginal variable
costs.
The attractiveness of the blue ocean offering depends heavily on
network externalities.
The cost structure behind the blue ocean offering benefits from steep
economies of scale and scope. In these cases, volume brings with it
significant cost advantages, something that makes pricing for volume
even more key.


The price corridor of the target mass not only signals the strategic pricing
zone central to pulling in an ocean of new demand but also signals how you
might need to adjust your initial price estimates to achieve this. When your
offering passes the test of strategic pricing, you’re ready to move to the next
step.
OceanofPDF.com


From Strategic Pricing to Target Costing
Target costing, the next step in the strategic sequence, addresses the profit
side of the business model. To maximize the profit potential of a blue ocean
idea, a company should start with the strategic price and then deduct its
desired profit margin from the price to arrive at the target cost. Here, price-
minus costing, and not cost-plus pricing, is essential if you are to arrive at a
cost structure that is both profitable and hard for potential followers to
match.
When target costing is driven by strategic pricing, however, it is usually
aggressive. Part of the challenge of meeting the target cost is addressed in
building a strategic profile that has not only divergence but also focus, which
makes a company strip out costs. Think of the cost reductions Cirque du
Soleil enjoyed by eliminating animals and stars or that Ford enjoyed by
making the Model T in one color and one model having few options.
Sometimes these reductions are sufficient to hit the cost target, but often
they are not. Consider the cost innovations that Ford had to introduce to
meet its aggressive target cost for the Model T. Ford had to scrap the
standard manufacturing system, in which cars were handmade by skilled
craftsmen from start to finish. Instead, Ford introduced the assembly line,
which replaced skilled craftsmen with ordinary unskilled laborers, who
worked one small task faster and more efficiently, cutting the time to make a
Model T from twenty-one days to four days and cutting labor hours by 60
percent.3 Had Ford not introduced these cost innovations, it could not have
met its strategic price profitably.
Instead of drilling down and finding ways to creatively meet the target
cost as Ford did, if companies give in to the tempting route of either
bumping up the strategic price or cutting back on utility, they are not on the
path to lucrative blue waters. To hit the cost target, companies have three
principal levers.
The first involves streamlining operations and introducing cost
innovations from manufacturing to distribution. Can the product’s or
service’s raw materials be replaced by unconventional, less expensive ones
—such as switching from metal to plastic or shifting a call center from the
UK to Bangalore? Can high-cost, low-value-added activities in your value


chain be significantly eliminated, reduced, or outsourced? Can the physical
location of your product or service be shifted from prime real estate
locations to lower-cost locations, as The Home Depot, IKEA, and Walmart
have done in retail or Southwest Airlines has done by shifting from major to
secondary airports? Can you truncate the number of parts or steps used in
production by shifting the way things are made, as Ford did by introducing
the assembly line? Can you digitize activities to reduce costs?
By probing questions such as these, the Swiss watch company Swatch, for
example, was able to arrive at a cost structure some 30 percent lower than
any other watch company in the world. At the start, Nicolas Hayek,
chairman of Swatch, set up a project team to determine the strategic price for
the Swatch. At the time, cheap (about $75), high-precision quartz watches
from Japan and Hong Kong were capturing the mass market. Swatch set the
price at $40, a price at which people could buy multiple Swatches as fashion
accessories. The low price left no profit margin for Japanese or Hong Kong–
based companies to copy Swatch and undercut its price. Directed to sell the
Swatch for that price and not a penny more, the Swatch project team worked
backwards to arrive at the target cost, a process that involved determining
the margin Swatch needed to support marketing and services and earn a
profit.
Given the high cost of Swiss labor, Swatch was able to achieve this goal
only by making radical changes in the product and production methods.
Instead of using the more traditional metal or leather, for example, Swatch
used plastic. Swatch’s engineers also drastically simplified the design of the
watch’s inner workings, reducing the number of parts from one hundred fifty
to fifty-one. Finally, the engineers developed new and cheaper assembly
techniques; for example, the watch cases were sealed by ultrasonic welding
instead of screws. Taken together, the design and manufacturing changes
enabled Swatch to reduce direct labor costs from 30 percent to less than 10
percent of total costs. These cost innovations produced a cost structure that
was hard to beat and let Swatch profitably dominate the mass market for
watches, a market previously dominated by Asian manufacturers with a
cheaper labor pool.
Beyond streamlining operations and introducing cost innovations, a
second lever companies can pull to meet their target cost is partnering. In
bringing a new product or service to market, many companies mistakenly try


to carry out all the production and distribution activities themselves.
Sometimes that’s because they see the product or service as a platform for
developing new capabilities. Other times it is simply a matter of not
considering other outside options. Partnering, however, provides a way for
companies to secure needed capabilities fast and effectively while dropping
their cost structure. It allows a company to leverage other companies’
expertise and economies of scale. Partnering includes closing gaps in
capabilities through making small acquisitions when doing so is faster and
cheaper, providing access to needed expertise that has already been
mastered.
A large part of IKEA’s ability to meet its target cost, for example, comes
down to partnering. IKEA seeks out the lowest prices for materials and
production via partnering with some two thousand manufacturing companies
in more than fifty countries to ensure the lowest cost and fastest production
of products in its IKEA lineup of some twenty thousand items.
Or consider German-based SAP, which after forty years remains the
world’s leading business application software maker. By partnering with
Oracle at its outset, SAP saved hundreds of millions if not billions of dollars
in development costs and got a world-class central database, namely
Oracle’s, which sat at the heart of SAP’s first two blue oceans, namely R/2
and later R/3. SAP went a step further and also partnered with leading
consulting firms, such as Capgemini and Accenture, to gain quick access to a
global sales force and implementation team at no extra cost. Whereas Oracle
had the fixed costs of a much smaller sales force on its balance sheet, SAP
leveraged Capgemini’s and Accenture’s strong global networks to rapidly
reach SAP’s target customers, with no cost implication to the company. SAP
continues to maintain a very extensive ecosystem today, with partners
playing a critical role in helping organizations identify, purchase, and
implement SAP solutions.
Sometimes, however, no amount of streamlining and cost innovation or
partnering will make it possible for a company to deliver its target cost. This
brings us to the third lever companies can use to make their desired profit
margin without compromising their strategic price: changing the pricing
model of the industry. By changing the pricing model used—and not the
level of the strategic price—companies can often overcome this problem.


NetJets, for example, changed the pricing model of jets to time-share to
profitably deliver on its strategic price. The New Jersey company follows
this model to make jets accessible to a wide range of corporate customers
and wealthy individuals, who buy the right to use a jet for a certain amount
of time rather than buy the jet itself, which would have greatly truncated the
demand it could have unlocked. Another model is the slice-share; mutual
fund managers, for example, bring high-quality portfolio services—
traditionally provided by private banks to the rich—to the small investor by
selling a sliver of the portfolio rather than its whole. Freemium is yet another
pricing strategy some companies are using by which a product or service
(typically a digital offering such as software, media, games, or web services)
is provided free of charge to pull in the target mass, but a premium is
charged for proprietary features, functionality, or virtual goods. By being
both “free” and “premium,” companies are striving to be strategically priced
to capture the target mass while earning profit for the premium features
those users, having used the product or service, will feel compelled to buy
and upgrade to. These are all examples of pricing innovation. Remember,
however, that what is a pricing innovation for one industry is often a
standard pricing model in another industry. When IBM, for example,
exploded the tabulating market, it did so by shifting the pricing model of the
industry from selling to leasing to hit its strategic price while covering its
cost structure.
Figure 6-6 shows how value innovation typically maximizes profit by
using the foregoing three levers. As the figure depicts, a company begins
with its strategic price, from which it deducts its target profit margin to
arrive at its target cost. To hit the cost target that supports that profit,
companies have two key levers: one is streamlining and cost innovations,
and the other is partnering. When the target cost cannot be met despite all
efforts to build a low-cost business model, the company should turn to the
third lever, pricing innovation, to profitably meet the strategic price. Of
course, even when the target cost can be met, pricing innovation still can be
pursued. When a company’s offering successfully addresses the profit side of
the business model, the company is ready to advance to the final step in the
sequence of blue ocean strategy.
FIGURE 6-6


The profit model of blue ocean strategy
A business model built in the sequence of exceptional utility, strategic
pricing, and target costing produces value innovation. Unlike the practice of
conventional technology innovators, value innovation is based on a win-win
game among buyers, companies, and society. Appendix C, “The Market
Dynamics of Value Innovation,” illustrates how such a game is played out in


the market and shows the economic and social welfare implications for its
stakeholders.
OceanofPDF.com


From Utility, Price, and Cost to Adoption
Even an unbeatable business model may not be enough to guarantee the
commercial success of a blue ocean idea. Almost by definition, it threatens
the status quo, and for that reason it may provoke fear and resistance among
a company’s three main stakeholders: its employees, its business partners,
and the general public. Before plowing forward and investing in the new
idea, the company must first overcome such fears by educating the fearful.
OceanofPDF.com




Employees
Failure to adequately address the concerns of employees about the impact
of a new business idea on their work and livelihoods can be expensive.
When Merrill Lynch’s management, for example, announced plans to create
an online brokerage service, its stock price fell by 14 percent as reports
emerged of resistance and infighting within the company’s large retail
brokerage division.
Before companies go public with an idea and set out to implement it,
they should make a concerted effort to communicate to employees that they
are aware of the threats posed by the execution of the idea. Companies
should work with employees to find ways of defusing the threats so that
everyone in the company wins, despite shifts in people’s roles,
responsibilities, and rewards. In contrast to Merrill Lynch, consider Netflix,
which faced the difficult task of reinventing itself from a DVD-by-mail
business to providing video streaming. To achieve this transformation,
Netflix has put great emphasis on engaging employees on the necessity of
the shift, explaining what this means to them, and preparing them for
change, including, for example, making sure employees understand the
levers that drive the video-streaming business. The results to date have been
positive, with the company adding new customers at a steady rate, pushing
Netflix’s subscribers above the forty million mark for the first time in 2013.
OceanofPDF.com




Business Partners
Potentially even more damaging than employee disaffection is the
resistance of partners who fear that their revenue streams or market
positions are threatened by a new business idea. That was the problem faced
by SAP when it was developing its product AcceleratedSAP (ASAP), a
methodology for faster and lower-cost implementation of its enterprise
software system. ASAP brought business application software within the
reach of midsized and small companies for the first time. The problem was
that the development of best-practice templates for ASAP required the
active cooperation of large consulting firms that were deriving substantial
income from lengthy implementations of SAP’s other products. As a result,
they were not necessarily incentivized to find the fastest way to implement
the company’s software.
SAP resolved the dilemma by openly discussing the issues with its
partners. Its executives convinced the consulting firms that they stood to
gain more business by cooperating. Although ASAP would reduce
implementation time for small and midsized companies, consultants would
gain access to a new client base that would more than compensate for some
lost revenues from larger companies. The new system would also offer
consultants a way to respond to customers’ increasingly vocal concerns that
business application software took too long to implement. ASAP’s success
was a critical step on SAP’s journey to provide business application
software to not only large corporations but also to midsized and small
organizations as well.
OceanofPDF.com




The General Public
Opposition to a new business idea can also spread to the general public,
especially if the idea threatens established social or political norms. The
effects can be dire. Consider Monsanto, which makes genetically modified
crop seeds. Its intentions were initially questioned by European consumers,
largely because of the efforts of environmental groups such as Greenpeace,
Friends of the Earth, and the Soil Association. The attacks of these groups
struck many chords in Europe, which has a history of environmental
concern and powerful agricultural lobbies. Since then, the debate on
genetically modified foods has grown and spread around the globe, with
Monsanto often at the heart of the attacks.
While the issue of genetically modified foods is a large one, Monsanto’s
mistake has been to let others take charge of the debate. The company
should have proactively educated the environmental groups as well as the
public on the potential of genetically modified seeds to lower food costs
and eliminate world famine and disease through, for example, drought
tolerance and nutrition enhancement. When the products came out,
Monsanto should have given consumers a choice between organic and
genetically modified foods by supporting the labeling of products that had
genetically modified seeds as their base. If Monsanto had taken these steps,
listened to the objections and tried to provide solutions that responded to
people’s concerns like forthright mandatory labeling, then instead of being
vilified, it might have engendered more trust by the public and even ended
up being seen in a positive light as the provider of a technology that is
working to help eliminate famine and disease through enhanced seeds.
In educating these three groups of stakeholders—your employees, your
partners, and the general public—the key challenge is to engage in an open
discussion about why the adoption of the new idea is necessary. You need to
explain its merits, set clear expectations for its ramifications, and describe
how the company will address them. Stakeholders need to know that their
voices have been heard and that there will be no surprises. Companies that
take the trouble to have such a dialogue with stakeholders will find that it
amply repays the time and effort involved. (For a fuller discussion of how
companies can engage internal and external stakeholders, see chapter 8.)


OceanofPDF.com


The Blue Ocean Idea Index
Although companies should build their blue ocean strategy in the sequence
of utility, price, cost, and adoption, these criteria form an integral whole to
ensure commercial success. The blue ocean idea (BOI) index provides a
simple but robust test of this system view (see figure 6-7).
FIGURE 6-7
Blue ocean idea (BOI) index
As shown in figure 6-7, had Philips’ CD-i and Motorola’s Iridium scored
their ideas on the BOI index, they would have seen how far they were from
opening up lucrative blue oceans. With respect to Philips CD-i, it did not
create exceptional buyer utility with its offering of complex technological
functions and limited software titles. It was priced out of reach of the target


mass of buyers, and its manufacturing process was complicated and costly.
With its complicated design, it took more than thirty minutes to explain and
sell to customers, something that gave no incentive for sales clerks to sell
CD-i in fast-moving retail. Philips CD-i therefore failed all four criteria on
the BOI index despite the billions poured into it.
By assessing the business idea of the CD-i against the BOI index during
development, Philips could have foreseen the shortcomings embedded in the
idea and addressed them up front by simplifying the product and locking in
partners to develop winning software titles, setting a strategic price
accessible to the target mass, instituting price-minus costing instead of cost-
plus pricing, and working with retail to find a simple, easy way for the sales
force to sell and explain the product in a few minutes.
Similarly, Motorola’s Iridium was unreasonably expensive because of
high production costs. It provided no attractive utility for the target mass of
buyers, not being usable in buildings or cars and being the size of a brick.
When it came to adoption, Motorola overcame many regulations and secured
transmission rights from numerous countries. Employees, partners, and the
society were also reasonably motivated to accept the idea. But the company
had a weak sales team and marketing channels in the global markets.
Because Motorola was not able to follow up sales leads effectively, Iridium
phone sets were sometimes unavailable when requested. Weak utility, price,
and cost positions, plus average adoption ability, indicated that the Iridium
idea would be a flop.
In contrast to these failures, consider NTT DoCoMo’s i-mode launch in
Japan. While most telecom operators were focused on technology races and
price competition over voice-based wireless devices, NTT DoCoMo, the
largest Japanese telecom operator, launched i-mode to offer the internet on
cell phones. The i-mode was the world’s first smart phone to achieve mass
adoption by a country.
Before i-mode, regular mobile telephony in Japan had reached a high level
of sophistication in terms of mobility, quality of voice, ease of use, and
hardware design. However, like the mobile phone industry across the globe
at the time, it offered few data-based services such as e-mail, access to
information, news, and games, and transaction capabilities, which were the
killer applications of the internet world. The i-mode service changed that. It
brought together the key advantages of these two alternative industries—the


cell phone industry and the internet industry—and created unique and
superior buyer utility.
The i-mode service offered exceptional buyer utility at a price accessible
to the target mass of buyers in Japan. The monthly i-mode subscription fee,
the voice and data transmission fee, and the price of content were in the
“nonreflection” strategic price zone, encouraging impulse buying and
reaching the masses as quickly as possible. For example, the monthly
subscription fee for a content site was roughly the same as the price of the
most popular weekly magazines Japanese regularly pick up at their train
station kiosk.
After setting a price that was attractive to the mass of target buyers, NTT
DoCoMo strove to obtain the capabilities it needed to deliver the service
within its cost target in order to turn a profit. In achieving this end, the
company was never bounded by its own assets and capabilities. While it
focused on its traditional role as an operator to develop and maintain a high-
speed, high-capacity network in the i-mode project, it sought to deliver other
key elements of its offering by actively partnering with handset
manufacturers and information providers.
By creating a win-win partnership network, the company aimed to meet
and sustain the target cost set by its strategic price. Although there are many
partners and dimensions involved in its partnership network, a few aspects
are particularly relevant here. First, NTT DoCoMo regularly and persistently
shared know-how and technology with its handset-manufacturing partners to
help them stay ahead of their competitors. Second, the company played the
role of the portal and gateway to the wireless network, expanding and
updating the list of i-mode menu sites while attracting content providers to
join the i-mode list and create content that would boost user traffic. By
handling the billing for the content providers with a small commission fee,
for example, the company offered content providers major cost savings
associated with billing system development. At the same time DoCoMo also
obtained a growing revenue stream for itself.
More importantly, instead of using the Wireless Markup Language
(WML) under the WAP standard for site creation, i-mode used c-HTML, an
existing and already widely used language in Japan. This made i-mode more
attractive to content providers because under c-HTML, software engineers
needed no retraining to convert their existing websites, designed for the


internet environment, into sites for i-mode use, and thus they incurred no
additional costs. NTT DoCoMo also entered into collaborative arrangements
with key foreign partners, such as Microsoft, to reduce the total development
costs and shorten the time for an effective launch.
Another key aspect of the i-mode strategy was the way the project was
carried out. A team specially dedicated to the project was set up and given a
clear mandate and autonomy. The head of the i-mode team selected most of
the team members and engaged them in an open discussion on how to create
the new market of mobile data communications, making them committed to
the project. All this created a favorable corporate environment for the
adoption of i-mode. Moreover, the win-win game the company created for
its partners, as well as the readiness of the Japanese general public to use
database services, also contributed to the successful adoption of i-mode.
The i-mode service passed all four criteria on the BOI index, as shown
earlier in figure 6-7. Indeed, i-mode turned out to be an explosive success.
Having passed the blue ocean idea index, companies are ready to shift
gears from the formulation side of blue ocean strategy to its execution. The
question is, How do you bring an organization with you to execute this
strategy, even though it often represents a significant departure from the
past? This brings us to the second part of this book, and the fifth principle of
blue ocean strategy: overcoming key organizational hurdles, the subject of
our next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com


PART THREE
Executing Blue Ocean Strategy
OceanofPDF.com
