# 7 Overcome Key Organizational Hurdles

Although all companies face different degrees of these hurdles, and many
may face only some subset of the four, knowing how to triumph over them
is key to attenuating organizational risk. This brings us to the fifth principle
of blue ocean strategy: overcome key organizational hurdles to make blue
ocean strategy happen in action.
To achieve this effectively, however, companies must abandon perceived
wisdom on effecting change. Conventional wisdom asserts that the greater
the change, the greater the resources and time you will need to bring about
results. Instead, you need to flip conventional wisdom on its head using
what we call tipping point leadership. Tipping point leadership allows you
to overcome these four hurdles fast and at low cost while winning
employees’ backing in executing a break from the status quo.1
OceanofPDF.com


Tipping Point Leadership in Action
Consider the New York City Police Department (NYPD), which executed a
blue ocean strategy in the public sector. When Bill Bratton was first
appointed police commissioner of New York City, the odds were stacked
against him to an extent few executives ever face. At the time, New York
City was veering toward anarchy. Murders were at an all-time high.
Muggings, Mafia hits, and armed robberies filled the daily headlines. New
Yorkers were under siege. But Bratton’s budget was frozen. Indeed, after
three decades of mounting crime in New York City, many social scientists
had concluded that it was impervious to police intervention. The citizens of
New York City were crying out. With miserable pay, dangerous working
conditions, long hours, and little hope of advancement in a tenure promotion
system, morale among the NYPD’s thirty-six thousand officers was at rock
bottom—not to mention the debilitating effects of budget cuts, dilapidated
equipment, and corruption.
In business terms, the NYPD was a cash-strapped organization with
thirty-six thousand employees wedded to the status quo, unmotivated, and
underpaid; a disgruntled customer base—New York City’s citizens; and
rapidly declining performance as measured by the increase in crime, fear,
and disorder. Entrenched turf wars and politics topped off the cake. In short,
leading the NYPD to execute a shift in strategy was a managerial nightmare
far beyond the imaginations of most executives. The competition—the
criminals—was strong and rising.
Yet in less than two years and without an increase in his budget, Bratton
turned New York City into the safest large city in the United States. He
broke out of the red ocean with a blue ocean policing strategy that
revolutionized US policing as it was then known. The organization won as
“profits” jumped: felony crime fell 39 percent, murders 50 percent, and theft
35 percent. “Customers” won: Gallup polls reported that public confidence
in the NYPD leaped from 37 percent to 73 percent. And employees won:
internal surveys showed job satisfaction in the NYPD reaching an all-time
high. As one patrolman put it, “We would have marched to hell and back for
that guy.” Perhaps most impressively, the changes have outlasted its leader,
with crime rates continuing to fall after the leader’s departure, implying a
fundamental shift in the organizational culture and strategy of the NYPD.


While the current environmental and political circumstances the NYPD
faces differ greatly from then, Bill Bratton was reappointed police
commissioner of New York in 2014.
Few corporate leaders face organizational hurdles as steep as Bratton did
in executing a break from the status quo. And still fewer are able to
orchestrate the type of performance leap that Bratton achieved under any
organizational conditions, let alone those as stringent as he encountered.
Even Jack Welch needed some ten years and tens of millions of dollars of
restructuring and training to transform GE.
Moreover, defying conventional wisdom, Bratton achieved these
breakthrough results in record time with scarce resources while lifting
employee morale, creating a win-win for all involved. Nor was this Bratton’s
first strategic reversal. It was his fifth, with each of the others also achieved
despite his facing all four hurdles that managers consistently claim limit
their ability to execute blue ocean strategy: the cognitive hurdle that blinds
employees from seeing that radical change is necessary; the resource hurdle
that is endemic in firms; the motivational hurdle that discourages and
demoralizes staff; and the political hurdle of internal and external resistance
to change (see figure 7-1).
FIGURE 7-1
The four organizational hurdles to strategy execution


OceanofPDF.com


The Pivotal Lever: Disproportionate Influence
Factors
The key to tipping point leadership is concentration, not diffusion. Tipping
point leadership builds on the rarely exploited corporate reality that in every
organization, there are people, acts, and activities that exercise a
disproportionate influence on performance. Hence, contrary to conventional
wisdom, mounting a massive challenge is not about putting forth an equally
massive response where performance gains are achieved by proportional
investments in time and resources. Rather, it is about conserving resources
and cutting time by focusing on identifying and then leveraging the factors
of disproportionate influence in an organization.
The key questions answered by tipping point leaders are as follows: What
factors or acts exercise a disproportionately positive influence on breaking
the status quo? On getting the maximum bang out of each buck of
resources? On motivating key players to aggressively move forward with
change? And on knocking down political roadblocks that often trip up even
the best strategies? By single-mindedly focusing on points of
disproportionate influence, tipping point leaders can topple the four hurdles
that limit execution of blue ocean strategy. They can do this fast and at low
cost.
Let us consider how you can leverage disproportionate influence factors
to tip all four hurdles to move from thought to action in the execution of
blue ocean strategy.
OceanofPDF.com


Break through the Cognitive Hurdle
In many turnarounds and corporate transformations, the hardest battle is
simply to make people aware of the need for a strategic shift and to agree
on its causes. Most CEOs will try to make the case for change simply by
pointing to the numbers and insisting that the company set and achieve
better results: “There are only two performance alternatives: to make the
performance targets or to beat them.”
But as we all know, figures can be manipulated. Insisting on stretch goals
encourages abuse in the budgetary process. This, in turn, creates hostility
and suspicion between the various parts of an organization. Even when the
numbers are not manipulated, they can mislead. Salespeople on
commission, for example, are seldom sensitive to the costs of the sales they
produce.
What’s more, messages communicated through numbers seldom stick
with people. The case for change feels abstract and removed from the
sphere of the line managers, who are the very people the CEO needs to win
over. Those whose units are doing well feel that the criticism is not directed
at them; the problem is top management’s. Meanwhile, managers of poorly
performing units feel that they are being put on notice, and people who are
worried about personal job security are more likely to scan the job market
than to try to solve the company’s problems.
Tipping point leadership does not rely on numbers to break through the
organization’s cognitive hurdle. To tip the cognitive hurdle fast, tipping
point leaders such as Bratton zoom in on the act of disproportionate
influence: making people see and experience harsh reality firsthand.
Research in neuroscience and cognitive science shows that people
remember and respond most effectively to what they see and experience:
“Seeing is believing.” In the realm of experience, positive stimuli reinforce
behavior, whereas negative stimuli change attitudes and behavior. Simply
put, if a child puts a finger in icing and tastes it, the better it tastes the more
the child will taste it repetitively. No parental advice is needed to encourage
that behavior. Conversely, after a child puts a finger on a burning stove, he
or she will never do it again. After a negative experience, children will
change their behavior of their own accord; again, no parental pestering is


required.2 On the other hand, experiences that don’t involve touching,
seeing, or feeling actual results, such as being presented with an abstract
sheet of numbers, are shown to be non-impactful and easily forgotten.3
Tipping point leadership builds on this insight to inspire a fast change in
mind-set that is internally driven of people’s own accord. Instead of relying
on numbers to tip the cognitive hurdle, they make people experience the
need for change in two ways.
OceanofPDF.com


Ride the “Electric Sewer”
To break the status quo, employees must come face-to-face with the worst
operational problems. Don’t let top brass, middle brass, or any brass
hypothesize about reality. Numbers are disputable and uninspiring, but
coming face-to-face with poor performance is shocking and inescapable,
but actionable. This direct experience exercises a disproportionate influence
on tipping people’s cognitive hurdle fast.
Consider this example. In the 1990s the New York subway system reeked
of fear, so much so that it earned the epithet “electric sewer.” Revenues
were tumbling fast as citizens boycotted the system. But members of the
New York City Transit Police department were in denial. Why? Only 3
percent of the city’s major crimes happened on the subway. So no matter
how much the public cried out, their cries fell on deaf ears. There was no
perceived need to rethink police strategies.
Then Bratton was appointed chief, and in a matter of weeks he
orchestrated a complete break from the status quo in the mind-set of the
city’s police. How? Not by force, nor by arguing for numbers, but by
making top brass and middle brass—starting with himself—ride the electric
sewer day and night. Until Bratton came along, that had not been done.
Although the statistics may have told the police that the subway was safe,
what they now saw was what every New Yorker faced every day: a subway
system on the verge of anarchy. Gangs of youths patrolled the cars, people
jumped turnstiles, and the riders faced graffiti, aggressive begging, and
winos sprawled over benches. The police could no longer evade the ugly
truth. No one could argue that current police strategies didn’t require a
substantial departure from the status quo—and fast.
Showing the worst reality to your superiors can also shift their mind-set
fast. A similar approach works to help sensitize superiors to a leader’s needs
fast. Yet few leaders exploit the power of this rapid wake-up call. Rather,
they do the opposite. They try to garner support based on a numbers case
that lacks urgency and emotional impetus. Or they try to put forth the most
exemplary case of their operational excellence to garner support. Although
these alternatives may work, neither leads to tipping superiors’ cognitive
hurdle as fast and stunningly as showing the worst.


When Bratton, for example, was running the police division of the
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA), the MBTA board
decided to purchase small squad cars that would be cheaper to buy and to
run. That went against Bratton’s new policing strategy. Instead of fighting
the decision, however, or arguing for a larger budget—something that
would have taken months to reevaluate and probably would have been
rejected in the end—Bratton invited the MBTA’s general manager for a tour
of his unit to see the district.
To let the general manager see the horror he was trying to rectify, Bratton
picked him up in a small car just like the ones that were being ordered. He
jammed the seats up front to let the manager feel how little legroom a six-
foot cop would get, and then Bratton drove over every pothole he could.
Bratton also put on his belt, cuffs, and gun for the trip so that the manager
would see how little space there was for the tools of the police officer’s
trade. After two hours, the general manager wanted out. He told Bratton he
didn’t know how Bratton could stand being in such a cramped car for so
long on his own, never mind having a criminal in the backseat. Bratton got
the larger cars his new strategy demanded.
OceanofPDF.com


Meet with Disgruntled Customers
To tip the cognitive hurdle, not only must you get your managers out of the
office to see operational horror, but you also must get them to listen to their
most disgruntled customers firsthand. Don’t rely on market surveys. To
what extent does your top team actively observe the market firsthand and
meet with your most disgruntled customers to hear their concerns? Do you
ever wonder why sales don’t match your confidence in your product?
Simply put, there is no substitute for meeting and listening to dissatisfied
customers directly.
In the late 1970s, Boston’s Police District 4, which housed the Symphony
Hall, Christian Science Mother Church, and other cultural institutions, was
experiencing a serious surge in crime. The public was increasingly
intimidated; residents were selling their homes and leaving, thereby pushing
the community into a downward spiral. But even though the citizens were
leaving the area in droves, the police force under Bratton’s direction felt
they were doing a fine job. The performance indicators they historically
used to benchmark themselves against other police departments were tip-
top: 911 response times were down, and felony crime arrests were up. To
solve the paradox Bratton arranged a series of town hall meetings between
his officers and the neighborhood residents.
It didn’t take long to find the gap in perceptions. Although the police
officers took great pride in short response times and their record in solving
major crimes, these efforts went unnoticed and unappreciated by citizens;
few felt endangered by large-scale crimes. What they felt victimized by and
harassed by were the constant minor irritants: winos, panhandlers,
prostitutes, and graffiti.
The town meetings led to a complete overhaul of police priorities to
focus on the blue ocean strategy of “broken windows.”4 Crime went down,
and the neighborhood felt safe again.
When you want to wake up your organization to the need for a strategic
shift and a break from the status quo, do you make your case with numbers?
Or do you get your managers, employees, and superiors (and yourself) face-
to-face with your worst operational problems? Do you get your managers to


meet the market and listen to disenchanted customers holler? Or do you
outsource your eyes and send out market research questionnaires?
OceanofPDF.com


Jump the Resource Hurdle
After people in an organization accept the need for a strategic shift and
more or less agree on the contours of the new strategy, most leaders are
faced with the stark reality of limited resources. Do they have the money to
spend on the necessary changes? At this point, most reformist CEOs do one
of two things. Either they trim their ambitions and demoralize their
workforce all over again, or they fight for more resources from their
bankers and shareholders, a process that can take time and divert attention
from the underlying problems. That’s not to say that this approach is not
necessary or worthwhile, but acquiring more resources is often a long,
politically charged process.
How do you get an organization to execute a strategic shift with fewer
resources? Instead of focusing on getting more resources, tipping point
leaders concentrate on multiplying the value of the resources they have.
When it comes to scarce resources, there are three factors of
disproportionate influence that executives can leverage to dramatically free
resources, on the one hand, and multiply the value of resources, on the
other. These are hot spots, cold spots, and horse trading.
Hot spots are activities that have low resource input but high potential
performance gains. In contrast, cold spots are activities that have high
resource input but low performance impact. In every organization, hot spots
and cold spots typically abound. Horse trading involves trading your unit’s
excess resources in one area for another unit’s excess resources to fill
remaining resource gaps. By learning to use their current resources right,
companies often find they can tip the resource hurdle outright.
What actions consume your greatest resources but have scant
performance impact? Conversely, what activities have the greatest
performance impact but are resource starved? When the questions are
framed in this way, organizations rapidly gain insight into freeing up low-
return resources and redirecting them to high-impact areas. In this way, both
lower costs and higher value are simultaneously pursued and achieved.
OceanofPDF.com


Redistribute Resources to Your Hot Spots
At the New York Transit Police, Bratton’s predecessors argued that to make
the city’s subways safe, they had to have an officer ride every subway line
and patrol every entrance and exit. To increase profits (lower crime) would
mean increasing costs (police officers) in multiples that were not possible
given the budget. The underlying logic was that increments in performance
could be achieved only with proportional increments in resources—the
same inherent logic guiding most companies’ view of performance gains.
Bratton, however, achieved the sharpest drop in subway crime, fear, and
disorder in Transit’s history, not with more police officers but with police
officers targeted at hot spots. His analysis revealed that although the
subway system was a maze of lines and entrances and exits, the vast
majority of crimes occurred at only a few stations and on a few lines. He
also found that these hot spots were starved for police attention even though
they exercised a disproportionate impact on crime performance, whereas
lines and stations that almost never reported criminal activity were staffed
equally. The solution was a complete refocusing of cops at subway hot
spots to overwhelm the criminal element. And crime came tumbling down
while the size of the police force remained constant.
Similarly, before Bratton’s arrival at the NYPD, the narcotics unit
worked nine-to-five weekday-only shifts and made up less than 5 percent of
the department’s human resources. To search out resource hot spots, in one
of his initial meetings with the NYPD’s chiefs, Bratton’s deputy
commissioner of crime strategy, Jack Maple, asked people around the table
for their estimates of the percentage of crimes attributable to narcotics
usage. Most said 50 percent, others 70 percent; the lowest estimate was 30
percent. On that basis, as Maple pointed out, it was hard to argue that a
narcotics unit consisting of less than 5 percent of the NYPD force was not
grossly understaffed. What’s more, it turned out that the narcotics squad
largely worked Monday to Friday, even though most drugs were sold over
the weekend, when drug-related crimes persistently occurred. Why? That
was the way it had always been; it was the unquestioned modus operandi.
When these facts were presented and the hot spot identified, Bratton’s
case for a major reallocation of staff and resources within the NYPD was


quickly accepted. Accordingly, Bratton reallocated staff and resources on
the hot spot, and drug crime plummeted.
Where did he get the resources to do this? He simultaneously assessed
his organization’s cold spots.
OceanofPDF.com


Redirect Resources from Your Cold Spots
Leaders need to free up resources by searching out cold spots. Again in the
subway, Bratton found that one of the biggest cold spots was processing
criminals in court. On average, it would take an officer sixteen hours to take
someone downtown to process even the pettiest of crimes. This was time
officers were not patrolling the subway and adding value.
Bratton changed all that. Instead of bringing criminals to the court, he
brought processing centers to the criminals by using “bust buses”—roving
old buses retrofitted into miniature police stations that were parked outside
subway stations. Now instead of dragging a suspect down to the courthouse
across town, a police officer needed only to escort the suspect up to street
level to the bus. This cut processing time from sixteen hours to just one,
freeing more officers to patrol the subway and catch criminals.
OceanofPDF.com


Engage in Horse Trading
In addition to internally refocusing the resources a unit already controls,
tipping point leaders skillfully trade resources they don’t need for those of
others that they do need. Consider again the case of Bratton. The chiefs of
public-sector organizations know that the size of their budgets and the
number of people they control are often hotly debated because public-sector
resources are notoriously limited. This makes chiefs of public-sector
organizations unwilling to advertise excess resources, let alone release them
for use by other parts of the larger organization, because that would risk a
loss of control over those resources. One result is that over time, some
organizations become well endowed with resources they don’t need even
while they are short of ones they do need.
On taking over as chief of the New York Transit Police, Bratton’s general
counsel and policy adviser, Dean Esserman (now police chief of New
Haven, Connecticut), played a key horse trading role. Esserman discovered
that the Transit unit, which was starved for office space, had been running a
fleet of unmarked cars in excess of its needs. The New York Division of
Parole, on the other hand, was short of cars but had excess office space.
Esserman and Bratton offered the obvious trade, which was gratefully
accepted by the parole officials. For their part, Transit unit officers were
delighted to get the first floor of a prime downtown building. The deal
stoked Bratton’s credibility within the organization, something that later
made it easier for him to introduce more fundamental changes. At the same
time, it marked him to his political bosses as a man who could solve
problems.
Figure 7-2 illustrates how radically Bratton refocused the Transit Police
department’s resources to break out of the red ocean and execute its blue
ocean strategy. The vertical axis here shows the relative level of resource
allocation, and the horizontal axis shows the various elements of strategy in
which the investments were made. By deemphasizing or virtually
eliminating some traditional features of Transit police work while increasing
emphasis on the others or creating new ones, Bratton achieved a dramatic
shift in resource allocation.


FIGURE 7-2
The strategy canvas of Transit: How Bratton refocused resources
Whereas the actions of eliminating and reducing cut the costs for the
organization, raising certain elements or creating new ones required added
investments. As you can see on the strategy canvas, however, the overall
investment of resources remained more or less constant. At the same time,
the value to citizens went way up. Eliminating the practice of widespread
coverage of the subway system and replacing it with a targeted strategy on
hot spots enabled the Transit police to combat subway crimes more
efficiently and effectively. Reducing the involvement of officers in


processing arrests or cold spots and creating bust buses significantly raised
the value of the police force by allowing officers to concentrate their time
and attention on policing the subway. Raising the level of investment in
combating quality-of-life crimes rather than big crimes refocused the police
resources on crimes that presented constant dangers to citizens’ daily lives.
Through these moves, the New York Transit Police significantly enhanced
the performance of its officers, who were now largely freed from
administrative hassles and assigned clear duties as to what kinds of crimes
they should focus on and where to combat them.
Are you allocating resources based on old assumptions, or do you seek out
and concentrate resources on hot spots? Where are your hot spots? What
activities have the greatest performance impact but are resource starved?
Where are your cold spots? What activities are resource oversupplied but
have scant performance impact? Do you have a horse trader, and what can
you trade?
OceanofPDF.com


Jump the Motivational Hurdle
To reach your organization’s tipping point and execute blue ocean strategy,
you must alert employees to the need for a strategic shift and identify how it
can be achieved with limited resources. For a new strategy to become a
movement, people must not only recognize what needs to be done, but they
must also act on that insight in a sustained and meaningful way.
How can you motivate the mass of employees fast and at low cost? When
most business leaders want to break from the status quo and transform their
organizations, they issue grand strategic visions and turn to massive top-
down mobilization initiatives. They act on the assumption that to create
massive reactions, proportionately massive actions are required. But this is
often a cumbersome, expensive, and time-consuming process, given the
wide variety of motivational needs in most large companies. And
overarching strategic visions often inspire lip service instead of the intended
action. It would be easier to turn an aircraft carrier around in a bathtub.
Or is there another way? Instead of diffusing change efforts widely,
tipping point leaders follow a reverse course and seek massive
concentration. They focus on three factors of disproportionate influence in
motivating employees, what we call kingpins, fishbowl management, and
atomization.
OceanofPDF.com


Zoom In on Kingpins
For strategic change to have real impact, employees at every level must
move en masse. To trigger an epidemic movement of positive energy,
however, you should not spread your efforts thin. Rather, you should
concentrate your efforts on kingpins, the key influencers in the organization.
These are people inside the organization who are natural leaders, who are
well respected and persuasive, or who have an ability to unlock or block
access to key resources. As with kingpins in bowling, when you hit them
straight on, all the other pins come toppling down. This frees an
organization from tackling everyone, and yet in the end everyone is touched
and changed. And because in most organizations there are a relatively small
number of key influencers, who tend to share common problems and
concerns, it is relatively easy for the CEO to identify and motivate them.
At the NYPD, for example, Bratton zoomed in on the seventy-six
precinct heads at the time as his key influencers and kingpins. Why? Each
precinct head directly controlled two hundred to four hundred police
officers. Hence, galvanizing these seventy-six heads would have the natural
ripple effect of touching and motivating the thirty-six-thousand-deep police
force to embrace the new policing strategy.
OceanofPDF.com


Place Kingpins in a Fishbowl
At the heart of motivating the kingpins in a sustained and meaningful way
is shining a spotlight on their actions in a repeated and highly visible way.
This is what we refer to as fishbowl management, where kingpins’ actions
and inaction are made as transparent to others as are fish in a bowl of water.
By placing kingpins in a fishbowl in this way, you greatly raise the stakes of
inaction. Light is shined on who is lagging behind, and a fair stage is set for
rapid change agents to shine. For fishbowl management to work, it must be
based on transparency, inclusion, and fair process.
At the NYPD, Bratton’s fishbowl was a biweekly crime strategy review
meeting known as Compstat that brought together the city’s top brass to
review the performance of all seventy-six precinct commanders in
executing its new strategy. Attendance was mandatory for all precinct
commanders; three-star chiefs, deputy commissioners, and borough chiefs
were also required to attend. Bratton himself was there as often as possible.
As each precinct commander was questioned on decreases and increases in
crime performance in front of peers and superiors based on the
organization’s new strategic directives, enormous computer-generated
overhead maps and charts were shown, visually illustrating in inescapable
terms the commander’s performance in executing the new strategy. The
commander was responsible for explaining the maps, describing how his or
her officers were addressing the issues, and outlining why performance was
going up or down. These inclusive meetings instantly made results and
responsibilities clear and transparent for everyone.
As a result, an intense performance culture was created in weeks—forget
about months, let alone years—because no kingpin wanted to be shamed in
front of others, and they all wanted to shine in front of their peers and
superiors. In the fishbowl, incompetent precinct commanders could no
longer cover up their failings by blaming their precinct’s results on the
shortcomings of neighboring precincts because their neighbors were in the
room and could respond. Indeed, a picture of the precinct commander to be
grilled at the crime strategy meetings was printed on the front page of the
handout, emphasizing that the commander was responsible and accountable
for that precinct’s results.


By the same token, the fishbowl gave an opportunity for high achievers
to gain recognition for work in their own precincts and in helping others.
The meetings also provided an opportunity for policy leaders to compare
notes on their experiences; before Bratton’s arrival, precinct commanders
seldom got together as a group. Over time, this style of fishbowl
management filtered down the ranks, as the precinct commanders tried out
their own versions of Bratton’s meetings. With the spotlight shining brightly
on their performance in strategy execution, the precinct commanders were
highly motivated to get all the officers under their control marching to the
new strategy.
For this to work, however, organizations must simultaneously make fair
process the modus operandi. By fair process we mean engaging all the
affected people in the process, explaining to them the basis of decisions and
the reasons people will be promoted or sidestepped in the future, and setting
clear expectations of what that means to employees’ performance. At the
NYPD’s crime strategy review meetings, no one could argue that the
playing field wasn’t fair. The fishbowl was applied to all kingpins. There
was clear transparency in the assessment of every commander’s
performance and how it would tie into advancement or demotion, and clear
expectations were set in every meeting of what was expected in
performance from everyone.
In this way, fair process signals to people that there is a level playing
field and that leaders value employees’ intellectual and emotional worth
despite all the change that may be required. This greatly mitigates feelings
of suspicion and doubt that are almost necessarily present in employees’
minds when a company is trying to make a major strategic shift. The
cushion of support provided by fair process, combined with the fishbowl
emphasis on sheer performance, pushes people and supports them on the
journey, demonstrating managers’ intellectual and emotional respect for
employees. (For a fuller discussion on fair process and its motivational
implications, see chapter 8.)
OceanofPDF.com


Atomize to Get the Organization to Change Itself
The last disproportionate influence factor is atomization. Atomization
relates to the framing of the strategic challenge—one of the most subtle and
sensitive tasks of the tipping point leader. Unless people believe that the
strategic challenge is attainable, the change is not likely to succeed. On the
face of it, Bratton’s goal in New York City was so ambitious as to be
scarcely believable. Who could believe that anything an individual could do
would turn such a huge city from being the most dangerous place in the
country into the safest? And who would want to invest time and energy in
chasing an impossible dream?
To make the challenge attainable, Bratton broke it into bite-size atoms
that officers at different levels could relate to. As he put it, the challenge
facing the NYPD was to make the streets of New York City safe “block by
block, precinct by precinct, and borough by borough.” Thus framed, the
challenge was both all-encompassing and doable. For officers on the street,
the challenge was to make their beat or block safe—no more. For the
precinct commanders, the challenge was to make their precinct safe—no
more. Borough heads also had a concrete goal within their capabilities:
making their boroughs safe—no more. No one could say that what was
being asked of them was too tough. Nor could they claim that achieving it
was largely out of their hands—“It’s beyond me.” In this way, responsibility
for executing Bratton’s blue ocean strategy shifted from him to each of the
NYPD’s thirty-six thousand officers.
Do you indiscriminately try to motivate the masses? Or do you focus on
key influencers, your kingpins? Do you put the spotlight on and manage
kingpins in a fishbowl based on fair process? Or do you just demand high
performance and cross your fingers until the next quarter numbers come
out? Do you issue grand strategic visions? Or do you atomize the issue to
make it actionable to all levels?
OceanofPDF.com


Knock Over the Political Hurdle
Youth and skill will win out every time over age and treachery. True or
false? False. Even the best and brightest are regularly eaten alive by
politics, intrigue, and plotting. Organizational politics is an inescapable
reality of corporate and public life. Even if an organization has reached the
tipping point of execution, there exist powerful vested interests that will
resist the impending changes. (Also see our discussion on adoption hurdles
in chapter 6.) The more likely change becomes, the more fiercely and
vocally these negative influencers—both internal and external—will fight
to protect their positions, and their resistance can seriously damage and
even derail the strategy execution process. To overcome these political
forces, tipping point leaders focus on three disproportionate influence
factors: leveraging angels, silencing devils, and getting a consigliere on
their top management team. Angels are those who have the most to gain
from the strategic shift. Devils are those who have the most to lose from it.
And a consigliere is a politically adept but highly respected insider who
knows in advance all the land mines, including who will fight you and who
will support you.
OceanofPDF.com


Secure a Consigliere on Your Top Management Team
Most leaders concentrate on building a top management team having strong
functional skills such as marketing, operations, and finance—and that is
important. Tipping point leaders, however, also engage one role few other
executives think to include: a consigliere. To that end, Bratton, for example,
always ensured that he had a respected senior insider on his top team who
knew the land mines he would face in implementing the new policing
strategy. At NYPD, Bratton appointed John Timoney as his number two.
Timoney was a cop’s cop, respected and feared for his dedication to the
NYPD and for the more than sixty decorations and combat crosses he had
received. Twenty years in the ranks had taught him not only who all the key
players were but also how they played the political game. One of the first
tasks Timoney did was to report to Bratton on the likely attitudes of the top
staff to the NYPD’s new policing strategy, identifying those who would
fight or silently sabotage the new initiative. This led to a dramatic changing
of the guard.
OceanofPDF.com


Leverage Your Angels and Silence Your Devils
To knock down the political hurdles, you should also ask yourself two sets
of questions:
Who are my devils? Who will fight me? Who will lose the most by the
future blue ocean strategy?
Who are my angels? Who will naturally align with me? Who will gain
the most by the strategic shift?
Don’t fight alone. Get the higher and wider voice to fight with you.
Identify your detractors and supporters—forget the middle—and strive to
create a win-win outcome for both. But move quickly. Isolate your
detractors by building a broader coalition with your angels before a battle
begins. In this way, you will discourage the war before it has a chance to
start or gain steam.
One of the most serious threats to Bratton’s new policing strategy came
from New York City’s courts. Believing that Bratton’s new policing strategy
of focusing on quality-of-life crimes would overwhelm the system with
small crime cases such as prostitution and public drunkenness, the courts
opposed the strategic shift. To overcome this opposition, Bratton clearly
illustrated to his supporters, including the mayor, district attorneys, and jail
managers, that the court system could indeed handle the added quality-of-
life crimes and that focusing on them would, in the long term, actually
reduce their caseload. The mayor decided to intervene.
Then Bratton’s coalition, led by the mayor, went on the offensive in the
press with a clear and simple message: if the courts did not pull their
weight, the city’s crime rate would not go down. Bratton’s alliance with the
mayor’s office and the city’s leading newspaper successfully isolated the
courts. They could hardly be seen to publicly oppose an initiative that
would not only make New York a more attractive place to live but would
also ultimately reduce the number of cases brought before them. With the
mayor speaking aggressively in the press of the need to pursue quality-of-
life crimes and the city’s most respected—and liberal—newspaper giving
credence to the new police strategy, the costs of fighting Bratton’s strategy


were daunting. Bratton had won the battle: the courts would comply. He
also won the war: crime rates did indeed come down.
Key to winning over your detractors or devils is knowing all their likely
angles of attack and building up counterarguments backed by irrefutable
facts and reason. For example, when the NYPD’s precinct commanders
were first requested to compile detailed crime data and maps, they balked at
the idea, arguing that it would take too much time. Anticipating this
reaction, Bratton had already done a test run of the operation to see how
long it would take: no more than eighteen minutes a day, which worked out,
as he told the commanders, to less than 1 percent of their average workload.
Armed with irrefutable information, he was able to tip the political hurdle
and win the battle before it even began.
Do you have a consigliere—a highly respected insider—in your top
management team, or only a CFO and other functional heads? Do you know
who will fight you and who will align with the new strategy? Have you
built coalitions with natural allies to encircle dissidents? Do you have your
consigliere remove the biggest land mines so that you don’t have to focus
on changing those who cannot and will not change?
OceanofPDF.com


Challenging Conventional Wisdom
Figure 7-3 depicts the gist of how tipping point leadership works. As shown,
the conventional theory of organizational change rests on transforming the
mass. So change efforts are focused on moving the mass, requiring steep
resources and long time frames—luxuries few executives can afford. Tipping
point leadership, by contrast, takes a reverse course. To change the mass, it
focuses on transforming the extremes: the people, acts, and activities that
exercise a disproportionate influence on performance. By transforming the
extremes, tipping point leaders are able to change the core fast and at low
cost to execute their new strategy.
FIGURE 7-3
Conventional wisdom versus tipping point leadership


It is never easy to execute a strategic shift, and doing it fast with limited
resources is even more difficult. Yet our research suggests that it can be
achieved by leveraging tipping point leadership. By consciously addressing
the hurdles to strategy execution and focusing on factors of disproportionate
influence, you too can knock them over to actualize a strategic shift. Don’t
follow conventional wisdom. Not every challenge requires a proportionate
action. Focus on acts of disproportionate influence. This is a critical
leadership component for making blue ocean strategy happen.
The next chapter drills down one level further. It addresses the challenge
of mobilizing people’s minds and hearts for the new strategy by building a
culture of trust, commitment, and voluntary cooperation in its execution, as
well as support for the leader.
OceanofPDF.com


CHAPTER 8
Build Execution into Strategy
A COMPANY IS NOT ONLY TOP MANAGEMENT, nor is it only middle
management. A company is everyone from the top to the front lines. And it
is only when all the members of an organization are motivated to support a
strategy, for better or for worse, that a company stands apart as a great and
consistent executor. Overcoming the organizational hurdles to strategy
execution is an important step toward that end. It removes the roadblocks
that can put a halt to even the best of strategies.
But in the end, a company needs to invoke the most fundamental base of
action: the attitudes and behavior of its people deep in the organization. You
must create a culture of trust and commitment that motivates people to
execute the agreed strategy—not to the letter, but to the spirit. People’s
minds and hearts must align with the new strategy so that at the level of the
individual, people embrace it of their own accord and willingly go beyond
compulsory execution to voluntary cooperation in carrying it out.
Where blue ocean strategy is concerned, this challenge is heightened.
Trepidation builds as people are required to step out of their comfort zones
and change how they have worked in the past. They wonder, what are the
real reasons for this change? Is top management honest when it speaks of
building future growth through a change in strategic course? Or are they
trying to make us redundant and work us out of our jobs?
The more removed people are from the top and the less they have been
involved in the creation of the strategy, the more this trepidation builds. On
