# 8 Build Execution into Strategy

the front line, at the very level at which a strategy must be executed day in
and day out, people can resent having a strategy thrust upon them with little
regard for what they think and feel. Just when you think you have done
everything right, things can suddenly go very wrong on your front line.
This brings us to the sixth principle of blue ocean strategy: to build
people’s trust and commitment deep in the ranks and inspire their voluntary
cooperation, companies need to build execution into strategy from the start.
That principle allows companies to minimize the management risk of
distrust, noncooperation, and even sabotage. This management risk is
relevant to strategy execution in both red and blue oceans, but it is greater
for blue ocean strategy because its execution often requires significant
change. Hence, minimizing such risk is essential as companies execute blue
ocean strategy. Companies must reach beyond the usual suspects of carrots
and sticks. They must reach to fair process in the making and executing of
strategy.
Our research shows that fair process is a key variable that distinguishes
successful blue ocean strategic moves from those that failed. The presence
or absence of fair process can make or break a company’s best execution
efforts.
OceanofPDF.com


Poor Process Can Ruin Strategy Execution
Consider the experience of a global leader in supplying water-based liquid
coolants for metalworking industries. We’ll call this organization Lubber.
Because of the many processing parameters in metal-based manufacturing,
there are several hundred complex types of coolants to choose from.
Choosing the right coolant is a delicate process. Products must first be
tested on production machines before purchasing, and the decision often
rests on fuzzy logic. The result is machine downtime and sampling costs,
and these are expensive for customers and Lubber alike.
To offer customers a leap in value, Lubber devised a strategy to eliminate
the complexity and costs of the trial phase. Using artificial intelligence, it
developed an expert system that cut the failure rate in selecting coolants to
less than 10 percent from an industry average of 50 percent. The system
also reduced machine downtime, eased coolant management, and raised the
overall quality of work pieces produced. As for Lubber, the sales process
was dramatically simplified, giving sales representatives more time to gain
new sales and dropping the costs per sale.
This win-win value innovation strategic move, however, was doomed
from the start. It wasn’t that the strategy was not good or that the expert
system did not work; it worked exceptionally well. The strategy was
doomed because the sales force fought it.
Having not been engaged in the strategy-making process nor apprised of
the rationale for the strategic shift, sales reps saw the expert system in a
light no one on the design team or management team had ever imagined. To
them, it was a direct threat to what they saw as their most valuable
contribution—tinkering in the trial phase to find the right water-based
coolant from the long list of possible candidates. All the wonderful benefits
—having a way to avoid the hassle-filled part of their job, having more time
to pull in more sales, and winning more contracts by standing out in the
industry—went unappreciated.
With the sales force feeling threatened and often working against the
expert system by expressing doubts about its effectiveness to customers,
sales did not take off. After cursing its hubris and learning the hard way the
importance of dealing with managerial risk up front based on the proper


process, management was forced to pull the expert system from the market
and work on rebuilding trust with its sales representatives.
OceanofPDF.com


The Power of Fair Process
What, then, is fair process? And how does it allow companies to build
execution into strategy? The theme of fairness or justice has preoccupied
writers and philosophers throughout the ages. But the direct theoretical
origin of fair process traces back to two social scientists: John W. Thibaut
and Laurens Walker. In the mid-1970s, they combined their interest in the
psychology of justice with the study of process, creating the term
procedural justice.1 Focusing their attention on legal settings, they sought
to understand what makes people trust a legal system so that they will
comply with laws without being coerced. Their research established that
people care as much about the justice of the process through which an
outcome is produced as they do about the outcome itself. People’s
satisfaction with the outcome and their commitment to it rose when
procedural justice was exercised.2
Fair process is our managerial expression of procedural justice theory. As
in legal settings, fair process builds execution into strategy by creating
people’s buy-in up front. When fair process is exercised in the strategy-
making process, people trust that a level playing field exists. This inspires
them to cooperate voluntarily in executing the resulting strategic decisions.
Voluntary cooperation is more than mechanical execution, where people
do only what it takes to get by. It involves going beyond the call of duty,
wherein individuals exert energy and initiative to the best of their abilities
—even subordinating personal self-interest—to execute resulting
strategies.3 Figure 8-1 presents the causal flow we observed among fair
process, attitudes, and behavior.
FIGURE 8-1
How fair process affects people’s attitudes and behavior


OceanofPDF.com


The Three E Principles of Fair Process
There are three mutually reinforcing elements that define fair process:
engagement, explanation, and clarity of expectation.4 Whether people are
senior executives or shop floor employees, they all look to these elements.
We call them the three E principles of fair process.
Engagement means involving individuals in the strategic decisions that
affect them by asking for their input and allowing them to refute the merits
of one another’s ideas and assumptions. Engagement communicates
management’s respect for individuals and their ideas. Encouraging
refutation sharpens everyone’s thinking and builds better collective wisdom.
Engagement results in better strategic decisions by management and greater
commitment from all involved to execute those decisions.
Explanation means that everyone involved and affected should
understand why final strategic decisions are made as they are. An
explanation of the thinking that underlies decisions makes people confident
that managers have considered their opinions and have made decisions
impartially in the overall interests of the company. An explanation allows
employees to trust managers’ intentions even if their own ideas have been
rejected. It also serves as a powerful feedback loop that enhances learning.
Expectation clarity requires that after a strategy is set, managers state
clearly the new rules of the game. Although the expectations may be
demanding, employees should know up front what standards they will be
judged by and the penalties for failure. What are the goals of the new
strategy? What are the new targets and milestones? Who is responsible for
what? To achieve fair process, it matters less what the new goals,
expectations, and responsibilities are and more that they are clearly
understood. When people understand what is expected of them, political
jockeying and favoritism are minimized, and people can focus on executing
the strategy rapidly.
Taken together, these three criteria collectively lead to judgments of fair
process. This is important, because any subset of the three does not create
judgments of fair process.
OceanofPDF.com


A Tale of Two Plants
How do the three E principles of fair process work to affect strategy
execution deep in an organization? Consider the experience of an elevator
systems manufacturer we’ll call Elco that was in transition. At the time,
sales in the elevator industry were in steady decline, as excess office space
left some large US cities with vacancy rates as high as 20 percent.
With domestic demand falling, Elco set out to offer buyers a leap in value
while lowering its costs to stimulate new demand and break from the
competition. In its quest to create and execute a blue ocean strategy, the
company realized that it needed to replace its batch-manufacturing system
with a cellular approach that would allow self-directed teams to achieve
superior performance. The management team was in agreement and ready
to go. To execute this key element of its strategy, the team adopted what
looked like the fastest and smartest way to move forward.
It would first install the new system at Elco’s Chester plant and then roll
it out to its second plant, High Park. The logic was simple. The Chester
plant had exemplary employee relations, so much so that the workers had
decertified their own union. Management was certain it could count on
employee cooperation to execute the strategic shift in manufacturing. In the
company’s words, “They were the ideal workforce.” Next, Elco would roll
out the process to its plant in High Park, where a strong union was expected
to resist that, or any other, change. Management was counting on having
achieved a degree of momentum for execution at Chester that it hoped
would have positive spillover effects on High Park.
The theory was good. In practice, however, things took an unpredicted
turn. The introduction of the new manufacturing process at the Chester
plant quickly led to disorder and rebellion. Within a few months, both cost
and quality performance were in free fall. Employees were talking about
bringing back the union. Having lost control, the despairing plant manager
called Elco’s industrial psychologist for help.
In contrast, the High Park plant, despite its reputation for resistance, had
accepted the strategic shift in the manufacturing process. Every day, the
High Park manager waited for the anticipated meltdown, but it never came.
Even when people didn’t like the decisions, they felt they had been treated


fairly, and so they willingly participated in the rapid execution of the new
manufacturing process, a pivotal component of the company’s new strategy.
A closer look at the way the strategic shift was made at the two plants
reveals the reasons behind this apparent anomaly. At the Chester plant, Elco
managers violated all three of the basic principles of fair process. First, they
failed to engage employees in the strategic decisions that directly affected
them. Lacking expertise in cellular manufacturing, Elco brought in a
consulting firm to design a master plan for the conversion. The consultants
were briefed to work quickly and with minimal disturbance to employees so
that fast, painless implementation could be achieved. The consultants
followed the instructions. When Chester employees arrived at work they
discovered strangers at the plant who not only dressed differently—wearing
formal business attire—but also spoke in low tones to one another. To
minimize disturbance, they didn’t interact with employees. Instead they
quietly hovered behind people’s backs, taking notes and drawing diagrams.
The rumor circulated that after employees went home in the afternoon,
these same people would swarm across the plant floor, snoop around
people’s workstations, and have heated discussions.
During this period, the plant manager was increasingly absent. He was
spending more time at Elco’s head office in meetings with the consultants—
sessions deliberately scheduled away from the plant so as not to distract the
employees. But the plant manager’s absence produced the opposite effect.
As people grew anxious, wondering why the captain of their ship seemed to
be deserting them, the rumor mill moved into high gear. Everyone became
convinced that the consultants would downsize the plant. They were sure
they were about to lose their jobs. The fact that the plant manager was
always gone without any explanation—obviously, he was avoiding them—
could only mean that management was, they thought, “trying to put one
over on us.” Trust and commitment at the Chester plant deteriorated
quickly.
Soon, people were bringing in newspaper clippings about other plants
around the country that had been shut down with the help of consultants.
Employees saw themselves as imminent victims of management’s hidden
intention to downsize and work people out of their jobs. In fact, Elco
managers had no intention of closing the plant. They wanted to cut waste,


freeing people to produce higher-quality elevators faster at lower cost to
leapfrog the competition. But plant employees could not have known that.
Managers at Chester also didn’t explain why strategic decisions were
being made the way they were and what those decisions meant to
employees’ careers and work methods. Management unveiled the master
plan for change in a thirty-minute session with employees.
The audience heard that their time-honored way of working would be
abolished and replaced by something called “cellular manufacturing.” No
one explained why the strategic shift was needed, how the company needed
to break away from the competition to stimulate new demand, and why the
shift in the manufacturing process was a key element of that strategy.
Employees sat in stunned silence, with no understanding of the rationale
behind the change. The managers mistook this for acceptance, forgetting
how long it had taken them over the preceding few months to get
comfortable with the idea of shifting to cellular manufacturing to execute
the new strategy.
Master plan in hand, management quickly began rearranging the plant.
When employees asked what the new layout aimed to achieve, the response
was “efficiency gains.” The managers didn’t have time to explain why
efficiency had to be improved and didn’t want to worry employees. But
lacking an intellectual understanding of what was happening to them, some
employees began feeling sick as they came to work.
Managers also neglected to make clear what would be expected of
employees under the new manufacturing process. They informed employees
that they would no longer be judged on individual performance but rather
on the performance of the cell. They said that faster or more experienced
employees would have to pick up the slack for slower or less experienced
colleagues. But they didn’t elaborate. How the new cellular system was
supposed to work, managers didn’t make clear.
Violations of the principles of fair process undermined employees’ trust
in the strategic shift and in management. In fact, the new cell design offered
tremendous benefits to employees—for example, making vacations easier
to schedule and giving them the opportunity to broaden their skills and
engage in a greater variety of work. Yet employees could see only its
negative side. They began taking out their fear and anger on one another.


Fights erupted on the plant floor as employees refused to help those they
called “lazy people who can’t finish their own jobs” or interpreted offers of
help as meddling, responding with, “This is my job. You keep to your own
workstation.”
Chester’s model workforce was falling apart. For the first time in the
plant manager’s career, employees refused to do as they were asked, turning
down assignments “even if you fire me.” They felt they could no longer
trust the once popular plant manager, so they began to go around him,
taking their complaints directly to his boss at the head office. In the absence
of fair process, the Chester plant’s employees rejected the transformation
and refused to play their role in executing the new strategy.
In contrast, management at the High Park plant abided by all three
principles of fair process when introducing the strategic shift. When the
consultants came to the plant, the plant manager introduced them to all
employees. Management engaged employees by holding a series of
plantwide meetings, where corporate executives openly discussed the
declining business conditions and the company’s need for a change in
strategic course to break from the competition and simultaneously achieve
higher value at lower cost. They explained that they had visited other
companies’ plants and had seen the productivity improvements that cellular
manufacturing could bring. They explained how this would be a pivotal
determinant of the company’s ability to achieve its new strategy. They
announced a proaction-time policy to calm employees’ justifiable fears of
layoffs. As old performance measures were discarded, managers worked
with employees to develop new ones and to establish each cell team’s new
responsibilities. Goals and expectations were made clear to employees.
By practicing the three principles of fair process in tandem, management
won the understanding and support of High Park employees. The
employees spoke of their plant manager with admiration, and they
commiserated with the difficulties Elco’s managers had in executing the
new strategy and making the changeover to cellular manufacturing. They
concluded that it had been a necessary, worthwhile, and positive experience.
Elco’s managers still regard this experience as one of the most painful in
their careers. They learned that people in the front line care as much about
the proper process as those at the top. By violating fair process in making


and rolling out strategies, managers can turn their best employees into their
worst, earning their distrust of and resistance to the very strategy they
depend on them to execute. But if managers practice fair process, the worst
employees can turn into the best and can execute even difficult strategic
shifts with their willing commitment while building their trust.
OceanofPDF.com


Why Does Fair Process Matter?
Why is fair process important in shaping people’s attitudes and behavior?
Specifically, why does the observance or violation of fair process in
strategy making have the power to make or break a strategy’s execution? It
all comes down to intellectual and emotional recognition.
Emotionally, individuals seek recognition of their value, not as “labor,”
“personnel,” or “human resources” but as human beings who are treated
with full respect and dignity and appreciated for their individual worth
regardless of hierarchical level. Intellectually, individuals seek recognition
that their ideas are sought after and given thoughtful reflection, and that
others think enough of their intelligence to explain their thinking to them.
Such frequently cited expressions in our interviews as “that goes for
everyone I know” or “every person wants to feel” and constant references
to “people” and “human beings” reinforce the point that managers must see
the nearly universal value of the intellectual and emotional recognition that
fair process conveys.
OceanofPDF.com


Intellectual and Emotional Recognition Theory
Using fair process in strategy making is strongly linked to both intellectual
and emotional recognition.5 It proves through action that there is an
eagerness to trust and cherish the individual as well as a deep-seated
confidence in the individual’s knowledge, talents, and expertise.
When individuals feel recognized for their intellectual worth, they are
willing to share their knowledge; in fact, they feel inspired to impress and
confirm the expectation of their intellectual value, suggesting active ideas
and knowledge sharing.6 Similarly, when individuals are treated with
emotional recognition, they feel emotionally tied to the strategy and inspired
to give their all. Indeed, in Frederick Herzberg’s classic study on motivation,
recognition was found to inspire strong intrinsic motivation, causing people
to go beyond the call of duty and engage in voluntary cooperation.7 Hence,
to the extent that fair process judgments convey intellectual and emotional
recognition, people will better apply their knowledge and expertise, as well
as their voluntary efforts to cooperate for the organization’s success in
executing strategy.
However, there is a flip side to this that is deserving of equal, if not more,
attention: the violation of fair process and, with it, the violation of
recognizing individuals’ intellectual and emotional worth. The observed
pattern of thought and behavior can be summarized as follows. If individuals
are not treated as though their knowledge is valued, they will feel intellectual
indignation and will not share their ideas and expertise; rather, they will
hoard their best thinking and creative ideas, preventing new insights from
seeing the light of day. What’s more, they will reject others’ intellectual
worth as well. It’s as if they were saying, “You don’t value my ideas. So I
don’t value your ideas, nor do I trust in or care about the strategic decisions
you’ve reached.”
Similarly, to the extent that people’s emotional worth is not recognized,
they will feel angry and will not invest their energy in their actions; rather,
they will drag their feet and apply counter efforts, including sabotage, as in
the case of Elco’s Chester plant. This often leads employees to push for
rolling back strategies that have been imposed unfairly, even when the
strategies themselves were good ones—critical to the company’s success or


beneficial to employees and managers themselves. Lacking trust in the
strategy-making process, people lack trust in the resulting strategies. Such is
the emotional power that fair process can provoke. When people are angered
by the violation of fair process, not only do they want fair process restored,
they also seek to punish those who violated it. Theorists call this retributive
justice. Figure 8-2 shows the observed causal pattern.
FIGURE 8-2
The consequences of the presence and absence of fair process in strategy
formulation and execution
OceanofPDF.com


Fair Process and Intangible Capital of an
Organization
Commitment, trust, and voluntary cooperation are not merely attitudes or
behaviors. They are intangible capital. When people have trust, they have
heightened confidence in one another’s intentions and actions. When they
have commitment, they are even willing to override personal self-interest in
the interests of the company.
If you ask any company that has created and successfully executed a blue
ocean strategy, managers will be quick to rattle off how important this
intangible capital is to their success. Similarly, managers from companies
that have failed in executing a blue ocean strategy will point out that the
lack of this capital contributed to their failure. These companies were not
able to orchestrate strategic shifts because they lacked people’s trust and
commitment. Commitment, trust, and voluntary cooperation allow
companies to stand apart in the speed, quality, and consistency of their
execution and to implement strategic shifts fast at low cost.
The question companies wrestle with is how to create trust, commitment,
and voluntary cooperation deep in the organization. You don’t do it by
separating strategy formulation from execution. Although this disconnect
may be a hallmark of most companies’ practice, it is also a hallmark of slow
and questionable implementation, and mechanical follow-through at best.
Of course, traditional incentives of power and money—carrots and sticks—
help. But they fall short of inspiring human behavior that goes beyond
outcome-driven self-interest. Where behavior cannot be monitored with
certainty, there is still plenty of room for foot-dragging and sabotage.
The exercise of fair process gets around this dilemma. By organizing the
strategy formulation process around the principles of fair process, you can
build execution into strategy making from the start. With fair process,
people tend to be committed to support the resulting strategy even when it
is viewed as not favorable or at odds with their perception of what is
strategically correct for their unit. People realize that compromises and
sacrifices are necessary in building a strong company. They accept the need
for short-term personal sacrifices in order to advance the long-term interests
of the corporation. This acceptance is conditional, however, on the presence


of fair process. Whatever the context in which a company’s blue ocean
strategy is executed, we have consistently observed this dynamic at work.
OceanofPDF.com


Fair Process and External Stakeholders
The impact of fair process has so far been discussed largely in the context
of internal stakeholders of an organization. In this increasingly
interdependent world, however, external stakeholders play a key role in
many organizations’ success. In fact, compared with internal stakeholders,
the practice of fair process with external stakeholders could be said to play
an even greater role in strategy execution as external stakeholders are
outside of hierarchical control and often have diverging interests and
understandings. While contracts and their enforceability with external
partners are important, the information asymmetry that exists across
organizations, coupled with the natural tendency for their interests and
understandings to differ, make fair process central. Without external
stakeholders’ commitment and cooperation, execution can easily become a
slippery slope of missed deadlines, half-hearted alignment on quality, and
cost overruns. The larger and more complex the nature of reliance on
external stakeholders is, the more this is likely to occur.
Think of the F-35 program discussed in chapter 5. The F-35 represented a
conceptual breakthrough in fighter aircraft design that promised a blue
ocean of high performance and low cost. In 2001 Lockheed Martin won the
contract to build the F-35 based on the prototype aircraft it had developed.
The Pentagon was confident that the program would be an important
success.
Yet, as of 2014, the execution of the F-35 program has been anything but
good. The project has suffered significant cost escalations, schedule delays,
and compromises on the value it promised to deliver. The F-35 program is a
good example of a blue ocean idea that has performed poorly mainly due to
bad execution. A variety of reasons have been cited as possible causes of
poor execution, such as the sheer size and complexity of the program and
an overemphasis by Lockheed on short-term business goals over successful
delivery of the project. Yet these very reasons underlie what make fair
process that much more important. A close look reveals that many of the
problems that have plagued the F-35’s execution can be traced to a lack of
engagement, explanation, and expectation clarity among the military,
Lockheed, and the complex network of other external stakeholders upon


which the project’s successful execution relied. The lack of the three E
principles of fair process negatively affected both the knowledge sharing
and voluntary cooperation that were needed.
At the time the F-35 project got underway, the Pentagon was operating
according to a relatively hands-off management policy, an outgrowth of the
deregulation wave of the 1990s. The aim was to reduce costly government
oversight and give contractors more autonomy once a contract was
awarded. In the case of the F-35 project, however, this went a few steps too
far and resulted in a lack of effective engagement with Lockheed. The
outcome is that Lockheed ended up making as much as two-thirds of key
decisions in design, development, testing, fielding, and production of the F-
35 without the Pentagon’s active engagement and input. With technical
experts from the Army, Navy, and Marines not actively sought nor fully
utilized in key design decisions that arose, opportunities to share, explain,
refute, and synthesize different ideas and knowledge among stakeholders to
enhance the quality of execution were minimal. Such lack of engagement
and explanation further dampened the three military branches’ willingness
to compromise on their own specifications as such needs arose, putting
further pressure on the costs of the project.
Moreover, expectations remained unclear, to the extent that
interpretations of the contract differed among the stakeholders. Lockheed
was given very broad guidelines, such as the airplane had to be
maintainable, able to operate from airfields, stealthy, and able to drop
weapons.8 Without detailed specifications, the Pentagon increasingly found
that the contractor had a very different view of how to interpret the
contractual document. According to Lieutenant General Christopher
Bogdan, who has been in charge of the Pentagon’s F-35 program since
December 2012, the result is that while the military would say the F-35
needs to do X, Y, and Z, Lockheed Martin would respond that it was only
given a general mandate to do something general like Z.9 Mixed
expectations meant further revisions, costs, and mutual accusations. In
addition, clear expectations were also absent for the complex network of
subcontractors. For example, while the inspector general of the Pentagon
faulted the office in charge of the F-35 program for not adequately passing
down key safety, quality, and technical requirements to the contractors and
subcontractors, the program office expected Lockheed Martin to be


responsible for ensuring compliance of its subcontractors. The result was
nonconforming hardware and software, with Lockheed Martin and its
subcontractors not applying the rigor to design, manufacturing, and quality
assurance processes that the Pentagon expected and counted on. The lack of
definitive requirements affected suppliers’ ability to qualify its processes
and ensure delivery of compliant products. The negative effect of this was
magnified exponentially as accelerated concurrent production was used
whereby the initial production of the F-35 began even before flight tests had
begun. As the F-35 program continued to discover an alarming rate of
problems in specifications, quality, and standards, this has meant a
continuing high need for very costly, time-intensive rework of aircraft.
While the violation of fair process and bad communication among
internal and external stakeholders have contributed to the poor execution of
the F-35 project, attempts are being made to face up to the problem and
rectify it through more engagement and explanation with clearer
agreements. In September 2013, Bogdan said, “I’m encouraged by where
we are today. I can tell you that when you start communicating and you
start listening to each other, you start finding solutions to problems instead
of finding blame.”10
Of course, only time will tell if the Pentagon will be able establish and
maintain a culture of active engagement, explanation, and expectation
clarity among the complex web of internal and external stakeholders needed
to finally pull off the F-35 project. One thing is certain, however. As
experience to date shows, the Pentagon cannot afford to let fair process and
the voluntary cooperation and knowledge sharing that goes with it slip any
longer.
We are now ready to put our learning all together to address the
important issue of strategy alignment in our next chapter. Strategy
alignment is an integral concept that embraces and synthesizes our core
points and discussions in the previous chapters. It closes the loop, ensuring
that all parts of an organization’s strategy from value to profit to people
presented so far are mutually reinforcing so that it becomes a high-
performing and sustainable strategy.
OceanofPDF.com


CHAPTER 9
Align Value, Profit, and People Propositions
WHEN WE ASK PEOPLE to define what blue ocean strategy is and what
drives its success, we typically get one of three answers. Some see it as
fundamentally about how to reconstruct market boundaries and offer a leap
in value to buyers. Others see the essence of blue ocean strategy as about
unlocking business model innovation through strategic pricing, target
costing, and the like so a company can seize new customers profitably. And
still others see it as fundamentally about releasing the creativity, knowledge
sharing, and voluntary cooperation of people through the proper approach
to employees and partners. All three are correct answers. Indeed, we have
so far discussed each of these in turn, laying out tools and frameworks that
companies can apply to make each happen in a risk-minimizing and
opportunity-maximizing manner. However, while all three are correct, they
are also only partial answers. This brings us to the next to last principle of
blue ocean strategy, alignment, where we close the loop between creating
and capturing blue oceans so that it becomes a high-performing and
sustainable strategy.
OceanofPDF.com
