# 9 Align Value, Profit, and People Propositions

The Three Strategy Propositions
At the highest level, there are three propositions essential to the success of
strategy: the value proposition, the profit proposition, and the people
proposition.1 For any strategy to be successful and sustainable, an
organization must develop an offering that attracts buyers; it must create a
business model that enables the company to make money out of its offering;
and it must motivate the people working for or with the company to execute
the strategy. While good strategy content is based on a compelling value
proposition for buyers with a robust profit proposition for the organization,
sustainable strategy execution is based largely on a motivating-people
proposition. Motivating people requires more than overcoming
organizational hurdles and winning people’s trust with fair process. It also
rests on aligned and fair incentives.
In this sense, the three strategy propositions provide an organizing
framework to ensure an organization is taking a holistic approach to the
formulation and execution of strategy.2 If a strategy does not fully develop
and align the three strategy propositions, short-lived success or failure
typically results. This is a trap many companies fall into. Lacking a holistic
understanding of strategy, it is easy for an organization to focus
overridingly on one or two strategy propositions to the exclusion of the
other(s). For example, think of an organization that zealously focuses on
getting the value or profit proposition right, but pays little heed to getting
the people proposition aligned. Corporate graveyards are filled with such
examples. This is a classic case of execution failure. Likewise, good
strategy execution via a motivating-people proposition with poor strategy
content as reflected in the value or profit proposition is also a path to poor
performance.
In some situations, there may be more than one group of stakeholders
that a strategy proposition must address. For example, if successful strategy
execution rests on the buy-in of only employees, there is only a need for
one people proposition. But when a company needs the support of a supply
chain partner, for example, it must also give the potential partner a
compelling reason to back the strategy. In that case, a company would be
required to have a distinct people proposition for both employees and the


supply chain partner. Similarly, in a business-to-business environment, there
might have to be two value propositions: one for the business customer and
another for the business customer’s customers.
Strategic alignment is the responsibility of an organization’s top
executives versus those in charge of marketing, manufacturing, human
resources, or other functions. Executives with a strong functional bias
typically cannot successfully fulfill this important role because they tend to
focus on a part, not the whole, of the three strategy propositions, hence
missing the alignment. A manufacturing department, for example, might
neglect buyer needs or treat people as a cost variable. Similarly, a marketing
department might focus on the value proposition and pay insufficient heed
to the other two propositions. However, when the three disparate strategy
propositions that cut across an organization are fully developed and aligned,
a high-performing and sustainable strategy is achieved.
Creating a full set of consistent strategy propositions is, of course,
essential, whether a firm follows blue ocean or red ocean strategy. Where
the two approaches really diverge is how organizations achieve alignment
around the strategy propositions. Under red ocean strategy, an
organization’s three strategy propositions need to be aligned with the
distinctive choice of pursuing either differentiation or low cost within given
industry conditions. Here, differentiation and low cost represent alternative
strategic positions in an industry.
In contrast, under blue ocean strategy, an organization achieves high
performance when all three strategy propositions pursue both differentiation
and low cost. It is this alignment in support of differentiation and low cost
that ensures a successful blue ocean strategy that has sustainability. (See
figure 9-1). While one or two strategy propositions can be imitated,
imitating all three is difficult, especially the people proposition because it is
embedded in human relationships that take time to cultivate. When external
stakeholders are involved and important, getting the people proposition
right takes even more time and effort for potential imitators, hence typically
prolonging the aligned strategy’s sustainability.
FIGURE 9-1


Achieving strategy alignment
OceanofPDF.com


Achieving Blue Ocean Strategic Alignment
To understand how an organization achieves alignment to produce a high-
performing and sustainable blue ocean strategy, let’s look at Comic Relief, a
UK fund-raising charity. Founded in 1985, Comic Relief leapfrogged
existing UK fund-raising charities and emerged as one of the most
distinctive charities in the UK that also enjoys the lowest costs. In an
overcrowded industry that suffered rising costs, declining demand, and a
public confused by the sheer number of fund-raising charities, Comic Relief
rapidly achieved 96 percent national brand awareness and has raised over
£950 million by inspiring everyone from traditional wealthy donors to
previous nondonors to give. What’s more, while UK charities get, on
average, only 45 percent of their funds from the public—the rest coming
from government grants and corporations—Comic Relief has raised 100
percent of its donations directly from the public and has done so with no
paid marketing or mail solicitations. Now, nearly thirty years on, there are
still no credible imitators in the blue ocean it created. Let’s see how it has
achieved this sustained high performance through alignment.
In the case of Comic Relief, customers are donors whom it needs to
attract with a compelling value proposition. Its profit proposition is about
the business model it built to maximize its “profit,” which for Comic Relief
is its revenue surplus over costs that can ultimately flow to charities. And its
people proposition is about the positive incentives and motivations put in
place for its employees and network of volunteer fund-raisers, corporate
partners, and celebrities.
Consider the differences between Comic Relief and other UK charities’
value, profit, and people propositions. As we go through these, you will see
that when the three strategy propositions are aligned around differentiation
and low cost, key factors from one proposition often support and reinforce
the other two propositions, creating a strong, positive cycle. For example,
organizations can leverage a compelling value proposition to strengthen its
profit and people propositions or build on a powerful people proposition to
create a strong value proposition, which in turn strengthens the profit
proposition, which makes imitation that much more difficult. Here’s how
Comic Relief’s value, profit, and people propositions work.


OceanofPDF.com




The Value Proposition
Traditional fund-raising charities in the UK use sad or shocking images in
their campaigns, stimulating negative feelings of guilt and pity to trigger
donations. Their focus is on securing and recognizing large gifts mainly
from high-income, educated, older donors through year-round campaigns
and solicitations of funds.
Comic Relief, in contrast, has eliminated pity and guilt. It uses a
breakthrough new fund-raising approach, Red Nose Day, a double-
whammy combination of a national day of whacky, community “fun”
draising when people volunteer to perform zany antics to raise money, and a
star-studded comedy telethon, Red Nose Night. Forget pity. It’s all about
doing something funny for money to change the world.
With Comic Relief, donors don’t need to write a big check. Taking part is
cheap, easy, and fun. People can contribute by buying a little plastic red
nose that costs a £1, is sold everywhere, and can’t help but make you smile.
Over 66 million have been purchased so far; everyone wears them. Or you
can donate by sponsoring the silly antics of friends, family, neighbors, or
colleagues, thereby giving money while having a great laugh. For example,
friends and colleagues sponsored a London travel agent with a reputation as
a chatterbox to stay silent for twenty-four hours; they collectively donated
over £500 in sponsorship while having a blast watching the chatterbox
struggle to stay silent.
Comic Relief’s unique use of community fund-raising not only leverages
people’s fondness to have fun. It’s also personal. It is not some unknown
person asking for donations as at most other charities. Rather it’s a friend,
loved one, or colleague who you care about and want to support.
Unlike traditional charities, Comic Relief values and recognizes even the
tiniest donation, for example, when Red Nose Night explains that the
generous donation of one little girl, who gave “all her pocket money” of
£1.90, will feed seven children in Africa. People know their every cent
counts and makes a difference. This opens the door for even the poorest and
youngest person to realize that even he can make a major contribution and
become part of a greater cause of personally contributing to “changing the
world.”


While traditional charities solicit funds from a regular base of supporters
year-round and every year, Comic Relief focuses on creating this unique
experience once every two years to avoid boredom and nagging. Instead of
feeling donor fatigue, as with other charities’ continuous solicitations,
people actually look forward to the excitement of the next Red Nose Day,
which has nearly become a national holiday in the UK.
Lastly, Comic Relief donates 100 percent of all funds raised with its
golden pound promise that it spends none of the funds on its own overhead
or operating costs, as the average UK charity does. This transparency is
reassuring to people who often wonder what percent of funds actually
makes its way to charity. The result is a value proposition that not only is
fun, exciting, and clear but also allows donors to make a huge difference
with a small donation. In other words, it is differentiated and low cost,
affordable to everyone from the very young to the very old and from low to
high income.
OceanofPDF.com




The Profit Proposition
How does Comic Relief raise such extraordinary sums and support its
operations while maintaining the golden pound promise? It has done so by
complementing its compelling value proposition with an unbeatable profit
proposition that simultaneously achieves a low-cost structure while
generating funds in a differentiated way.
Traditional charities use a variety of methods to raise funds from several
sources such as writing grant proposals to governments, trusts, and
foundations; holding fund-raising galas for wealthy influential people and
corporations; directly soliciting via mail and telemarketing; and operating
charity shops. Almost all these activities entail significant overhead costs in
staff, management, and administration as well as the possible renting or
purchase of facilities.
Comic Relief, by contrast, eliminated all of these. It doesn’t plow time
and money into expensive fund-raising galas, it doesn’t write grants to
solicit funds from governments and foundations, and it doesn’t have charity
shops. Instead it leverages existing high street retail outlets from
supermarkets to fashion stores to sell its little red noses. And because
Comic Relief makes grants to other charities, rather than introducing
competing programs into an already crowded market, the costs of
administering the funds it raises are cut dramatically. By some estimates,
Comic Relief has stripped away more than 75 percent of traditional fund-
raising operations.
Comic Relief can afford to keep costs low due to the unique way it raises
money. What Comic Relief understood is that with community “fun”
draising, it is no longer the charity pushing the donor to make a
contribution, but the cause pulling the donor in. And with people
volunteering to do the bulk of fund-raising by engaging in silly antics that
others sponsor, Comic Relief’s staff costs stay very low. Whereas traditional
charities’ use of community fund-raising is completely accidental and
infrequent, through Red Nose Day, Comic Relief focuses on community
fund-raising, making it the systematic, dominant channel through which to
get contributions.


While traditional fund-raising charities tend to focus on wealthy older
donors, Red Nose Day is all about targeting the mass and raising funds via
lots of small increments. On Red Nose Day, ordinary people do
extraordinary things and raise huge amounts of money, from a large number
of small contributions.
What’s more Red Nose Night—the star-studded comedy extravaganza
that makes people laugh to raise money for charity—doesn’t cost a penny.
Everyone gives his or her services for free (the network, the studios, the
stars). Unlike traditional charities that engage in costly marketing to stand
out in the overcrowded industry, Comic Relief avoids large advertising
costs, thanks to the widespread media attention and free word-of-mouth
advertising that all the excitement of Red Nose Day generates.
To help Comic Relief realize its golden pound promise, corporate
partners cover its operating costs in cash or in kind. The overall result is
that Comic Relief has not only a compelling value proposition, but a
differentiated, low-cost profit proposition.
OceanofPDF.com




The People Proposition
At Comic Relief, all the people involved win, not just those they help. With
a small number of motivated staff members who are inspired by its value
proposition, Comic Relief’s people proposition focuses on inspiring
volunteer fund-raisers, corporate sponsors, and celebrities whose buy-in is
needed to make the value and profit propositions sustainable.
Toward this end, Comic Relief begins by creating a legitimate platform,
Red Nose Day, for everyone to go a bit mad and have an outrageous time
volunteering in order to raise money. Next, Comic Relief makes
participating easy: its website offers all sorts of zany ideas to fire up your
imagination for funny antics and tips on how to get people you know to
easily sponsor you. By taking part and becoming an actor in fund-raising,
people earn the respect of friends, family, and colleagues, while feeling a
sense of pride that they are visibly part of a group working to better the
world.
By offering people the opportunity to be actively involved in raising
money through silly antics, not only are people having fun, but they become
part of a greater cause of personally contributing to bettering the world.
With Comic Relief, volunteers are the actors in fund-raising and part of a
large one-day event where everyone is doing his or her share to positively
change the world while having a great time.
All of this is achieved while conserving volunteers’ most valuable
resource, time; participating in Comic Relief doesn’t take a lot as you only
have to do something silly every other year. In this way, Comic Relief
creates a compelling, low-cost people proposition that inspires people
across the nation to volunteer and fund-raise on behalf of Comic Relief.
Contrast this with traditional charities where volunteering can be a drag and
people often silently feel they are sacrificing to help out.
Comic Relief’s low-cost and differentiated people proposition extends to
corporations and celebrities as well. Only in this case, in addition to the
benefits that ordinary citizens get for volunteering, sponsoring corporations
and participating celebrities get tremendous free publicity across the UK.
That’s because Comic Relief’s differentiated, low-cost value proposition
triggers enormous free press, including over two hundred hours of TV time,


hundreds of hours of radio coverage, and over ten thousand press articles.
The result is that Comic Relief does not have to beg corporate sponsors or
celebrities to take part. Instead it has corporate sponsors and celebrities
eager to volunteer to help it realize its golden pound promise of giving 100
percent of donations to great causes, creating a win all around. As the
Comic Relief case illustrates, the aligned value, profit, and people
propositions around differentiation and low cost create powerful,
reinforcing synergies and a win-win for all.
OceanofPDF.com


When a Strategy Is Not Properly Aligned
While a properly aligned blue ocean strategy like Comic Relief’s has an
inherent sustainability because it is hard to imitate, when not properly
aligned, even a compelling blue ocean idea with an impressive market entry
may not sustain its appeal and struggle to get back its initial momentum or
end up failing in some cases. This is why so many innovations to create
new markets generate initial market excitement but fizzle out. Take the case
of the Tata Nano. At its launch, the Tata Nano was hailed as the people’s
car. It garnered more media attention than any other car launch in the world
at the time. It also achieved the biggest sales uptake in the history of the
global automobile industry. After it was officially introduced in March
2009, more than two hundred thousand orders poured in within two weeks.
There is reason.
Its value proposition had the hallmarks of a blue ocean. Tata Motors
reconstructed key buyer value factors across the passenger car market and
the two-wheeler market to offer the Tata Nano. Like the passenger car, the
Tata Nano offered a safe, comfortable, reliable, and respectable all-weather
means of transportation for Indian families. At the same time, however, the
Nano was priced against the far-lower-cost, two-wheeled vehicle market
that most Indian families relied on for their daily transportation needs. In
this way, Tata Nano’s value proposition offered buyers both differentiation
and low cost, putting an automobile within reach of most Indians for the
first time.
Tata Motors matched its compelling value proposition with a compelling
profit proposition. Under the guidance of Ratan Tata, chairman of the Tata
Group, the Nano team introduced a series of cost innovations in design,
manufacturing, marketing, and maintenance that resulted in a profit
proposition that was both differentiated and low cost. The Nano, for
example, used a two-cylinder rear engine combined with rear-wheel drive
to not only lower costs but also provide better fuel efficiency and more
interior space without an increase in the size of the car. The Nano’s two-
cylinder engine was also made of aluminium instead of the steel of
conventional engines, which was lighter, cost less to build, and also
provided better fuel efficiency. And the component parts were dramatically


simplified; for example, its door handles were designed with 70 percent
fewer parts.
While the Nano team eliminated nonessential luxury features in its profit
proposition, it did not reduce costs across the board. For example, making
the Nano a two-door car could have achieved substantial cost savings, but it
would have greatly inconvenienced the typical multigenerational Indian
family and therefore was not adopted. It would be hard, for example, for a
grandmother in a sari to get in the backseat. In this way, Tata Nano’s cost-
reduction efforts reinforced rather than compromised its value proposition,
resulting in a well-aligned, differentiated, and low-cost profit proposition.
Yet, despite its compelling value proposition and a viable profit
proposition, the Tata Nano’s initial success was not sustained and ended up
failing to meet sales targets and public expectations. What went wrong? A
closer look reveals that this setback arose largely from a major weakness in
the people proposition for a critical external stakeholder group whose
cooperation Tata depended on. Despite its good will and intentions, Tata
was unable to secure the cooperation of the Singur community in West
Bengal where Tata set out to establish its manufacturing facilities. The focal
dispute was mainly about the leasing of arable land for industrial use and
the negotiation process and level of compensation for the local owners in
the community. This misalignment caused Tata Nano’s massive facility
relocation and dampened the Nano’s initial success. While Tata has since
put a new team together to get the Nano back on track, it is a good example
of how a misaligned proposition can bring about negative performance
consequences.
To produce a high-performing and sustainable blue ocean strategy, you
need to ask the following questions. Are your three strategy propositions
aligned in pursuit of differentiation and low cost? Have you identified all
the key stakeholders, including external ones on which the effective
execution of your blue ocean strategy will depend? Have you developed
compelling people propositions for each of these to ensure they are
motivated and behind the execution of your new idea?
OceanofPDF.com


Putting It All Together
The examples of Napster and Apple’s iTunes in the digital music industry
allow us to put this all together: two strategic moves, both seeking to create
and capture uncontested market space with digital music. Napster had the
clear first-mover advantage, pulled in over 80 million registered users, and
was generally loved for its value proposition, but its strategy ultimately
failed. It had no sustainability. In contrast, iTunes achieved sustainable
success and both dominated and grew the blue ocean of digital music.
Fundamentally, what separates the outcomes of these two strategic moves is
alignment.
The Napster team, lacking a holistic view of strategy, failed to align its
external people proposition for its partners to support the compelling value
it unlocked. When the record labels approached Napster to work out a
revenue-sharing model for the digital download of music that would create
a win-win for both sides, Napster balked. The excitement over Napster’s
spectacular growth prevented it from appreciating that it needed an external
people proposition that offered differentiation and low cost for its key
partners, the record labels. Rather than work to build a compelling people
proposition that would strike a win-win arrangement with record labels,
Napster took a belligerent approach, declaring it would advance with or
without the record labels’ support. The rest is history; Napster was forced to
shut down due to copyright infringement. This prevented Napster from ever
developing a profit proposition that could benefit from its huge user base.
Lacking strategy alignment, Napster’s success was short-lived.
Apple by contrast created a set of fully developed and aligned strategy
propositions. Its compelling value proposition for buyers was
complemented by a compelling people proposition for its external partners,
major music companies, allowing Apple to gain the support of all five
major music companies—BMG, EMI Group, Sony, Universal Music
Group, and Warner Brothers Records. With iTunes, music companies
receive 70 percent of the purchase price of every song downloaded, creating
a win-win proposition for both Apple and business partners. And since
Apple’s iTunes also drove sales of its already hot iPod, iTunes multiplied
the company’s profit proposition, creating a positive reinforcing cycle of


profit across the two platforms. The result: the alignment across iTunes’
value, profit, and people propositions ushered in a new era of music,
allowing Apple to create, capture, and dominate a new market space in
digital music.
Do you have a holistic understanding of strategy? Has your new strategy
fully developed and aligned the three strategy propositions for sustained
success? The continuing success of your company’s strategy depends on it.
This brings us to our discussion of the last principle of blue ocean
strategy in which we address the important issue of the renewal of blue
oceans over time.
OceanofPDF.com


CHAPTER 10
Renew Blue Oceans
CREATING A BLUE OCEAN is not a static achievement but a dynamic
process. Once a company creates a blue ocean and its powerful
performance consequences are known, sooner or later imitators appear on
the horizon. Here, the questions are: How soon or late will they come? How
easy or difficult is a blue ocean strategy to imitate? Put differently, what are
the barriers to imitation?
As the company and its early imitators succeed and expand the blue
ocean, more and more companies jump in, eventually turning the color of
the ocean red. This raises a related question: When should a company reach
out to create another blue ocean to renew its business or its portfolio of
businesses? In this chapter, we address the issues of imitation and the
renewal of blue ocean strategy by answering these questions.
Understanding the process of renewal is key to ensure that the creation of
blue oceans is not a one-off occurrence but is institutionalized as a
repeatable process in an organization.
OceanofPDF.com
