# 10 Renew Blue Oceans

Barriers to Imitation
A blue ocean strategy brings with it considerable barriers to imitation that
effectively prolong sustainability. They range from alignment to cognitive,
organizational, brand, economic, and legal barriers. More often than not, a
blue ocean strategy will go without credible challenges for many years.
Cirque du Soleil’s blue ocean endured over twenty years; Comic Relief’s,
nearly thirty years; Apple’s iTunes’, now more than ten years. The list goes
on from JCDecaux to Intuit’s Quicken to Salesforce.com. This sustainability
can be traced to the following imitation barriers:
The alignment barrier. As discussed in chapter 9, the alignment of the
three strategy propositions—value, profit, and people—into an integral
system around both differentiation and low cost builds sustainability
and hence forms a formidable barrier to imitation.
The cognitive and organizational barrier. A value innovation move
does not make sense based on conventional strategic logic. When CNN
was introduced, for example, NBC, CBS, and ABC ridiculed the idea of
twenty-four-hour, seven-day, real-time news without star broadcasters.
CNN was referred to as Chicken Noodle News by the industry. Ridicule
does not inspire rapid imitation as it creates a cognitive barrier.
Moreover, because imitation often requires companies to make
substantial changes to their existing business practices, organizational
politics often kick in, delaying for years a company’s commitment to
imitate a blue ocean strategy. When Southwest Airlines, for example,
created a service that offered the speed of air travel with the cost and
flexibility of driving, imitating this blue ocean strategy would have
meant major revisions in routing planes, retraining staff, and changing
marketing and pricing, not to mention culture—significant
organizational changes that the politics of few companies can bear in
the short term.
The brand barrier. Brand image conflict prevents companies from
imitating a blue ocean strategy. The blue ocean strategy of The Body
Shop, for example—which shunned beautiful models, promises of
eternal beauty and youth, and expensive packaging—left major
cosmetic houses the world over actionless for years because imitation
would signal an invalidation of their current business models. Also,


when a company offers a leap in value, it rapidly earns brand buzz and
a loyal following in the marketplace. Even large advertising budgets by
an aggressive imitator rarely have the strength to overtake the brand
buzz earned by the value innovator. Microsoft, for example, tried for
years to dislodge Intuit’s value innovation, Quicken. After nearly thirty
years of efforts and investment, it finally threw in the towel and ceased
operations of its contender, Microsoft Money, in 2009.
The economic and legal barrier. Natural monopoly blocks imitation
when the size of a market cannot support another player. For example,
the Belgian cinema company Kinepolis created the first megaplex in
Europe in the city of Brussels and has not been imitated in Brussels for
nearly thirty years despite its enormous success. The reason is that the
size of Brussels could not support a second megaplex, which would
cause both Kinepolis and its imitator to suffer. Moreover, the high
volume generated by a value innovation leads to rapid cost advantages,
placing potential imitators at an ongoing cost disadvantage. The huge
economies of scale in purchasing enjoyed by Walmart, for example,
have significantly discouraged other companies from imitating its blue
ocean strategy. Network externalities also block companies from easily
and credibly imitating a blue ocean strategy, much as Twitter has
enjoyed in social media. In short, the more users a site has online, the
more attractive it generally becomes to everyone, creating scant
incentive for people to switch to a potential imitator. Other than these
economic factors, patents or legal permits also block imitation as they
grant a value innovator an exclusive legal right.
Figure 10-1 provides a snapshot of these barriers to imitation. As the
figure shows, the barriers are numerous and nontrivial. This is why in many
industries, companies that created blue oceans do not face credible
challenges for many years, while the speed of imitation varies across
industries.
FIGURE 10-1
Imitation barriers to blue ocean strategy


OceanofPDF.com


Renewal
Eventually, however, almost every blue ocean strategy will be imitated. As
imitators try to grab a share of the blue ocean an organization created, it
typically launches offenses to defend its hard-earned customer base. But
imitators often persist. Obsessed with hanging on to market share, the
organization tends to fall into the trap of competing, racing to beat the new
competition. Over time, the competition, and not the buyer, all too often
comes to occupy the center of its strategic thought and actions. If an
organization stays on this course, the basic shape of its strategic profile or
value curve will begin to converge with those of the competition. To avoid
the trap of competing, renewal is needed. The questions here are: When
should a single-business firm value-innovate again? And, how can a
multibusiness firm renew its portfolio of businesses in blue ocean terms as
competition heats up?
OceanofPDF.com




Renewal at the Individual Business Level
To avoid the trap of competing at the individual business level, monitoring
value curves on the strategy canvas is essential. Monitoring value curves
signals when to value-innovate and when not to. It alerts an organization to
reach out for another blue ocean when its value curve begins to converge
with those of the competition.
It also keeps a company from pursuing another blue ocean when there is
still a huge profit stream to be collected from its current offering. When a
company’s value curve still has focus, divergence, and a compelling tagline,
it should resist the temptation to value-innovate the business again and
instead should focus on lengthening, widening, and deepening its rent
stream through operational improvements and geographical expansion to
achieve maximum economies of scale and market coverage. It should swim
as far as possible in the blue ocean, making itself a moving target,
distancing itself from early imitators, and discouraging them in the process.
The aim here is to dominate the blue ocean over imitators for as long as
possible.
As rivalry intensifies and total supply exceeds demand, bloody
competition commences and the ocean will turn red. As competitors’ value
curves converge, an organization should begin reaching out for another
value innovation to create a new blue ocean. Hence, by charting a
company’s value curve on the strategy canvas and intermittently replotting
its competitors’ value curves versus its own, a company will be able to
visually see the degree of imitation and, hence, of value curve convergence
and the extent to which its blue ocean is turning red.
The Body Shop, for example, dominated the blue ocean it had created for
more than a decade. The company, however, is now in the middle of a
bloody red ocean, with declining performance. It did not reach out for
another value innovation when competitors’ value curves converged with its
own. [yellow tail] has also dominated the blue ocean it created for more
than a decade and has since been successfully rolling out across the globe.
It made the competition irrelevant and has enjoyed strong, profitable growth
as a result. However, today, numerous other players have since jumped into
the blue waters of new market space. The test of Casella Wines’ long-run


profitable growth will be its ability to value-innovate again before imitators
are able to compete both aggressively and credibly with converging value
curves. It’s also time for others like Cirque du Soleil and Curves to reach
for a new blue ocean. Hence, understanding how to manage the dynamic
process of continuous renewal is key.
A good example to illustrate this dynamic renewal process is
Salesforce.com. Salesforce.com made a series of successful strategic moves
to renew its blue ocean in the B2B customer relationship management
(CRM) industry. Since its initial strategic move in the early 2000s,
Salesforce.com has sustained undisputed market leadership in the blue
ocean of on-demand CRM automation that it created for nearly fifteen
years. This is all the more impressive as it operates in the fast-moving high-
tech sector. While numerous competitors, both large, established
incumbents with deep pockets and new upstarts, have tried to dislodge it
over the years, Salesforce.com has repeatedly broken away from the pack
by value-innovating again as other companies’ value curves began to
converge toward its own. In this way, it has successfully avoided the trap of
competing and kept itself in the blue. Consider:
In 2001, Salesforce.com redefined the traditional CRM software industry,
by effectively making traditional packaged software largely irrelevant.
Gone were the needs for expensive software, complicated and time-
consuming client-side installation, difficulty and risk in use, and the
constant need for costly maintenance and upgrades. Instead, Salesforce.com
offered business users web-based CRM solutions that focused on core
functionalities, worked instantaneously upon subscription, and had high
reliability and usability with ubiquitous access at a small fraction of the cost
of traditional CRM software. In this way, Salesforce.com created a blue
ocean of all new demand that captured small and medium-sized companies
that had effectively been noncustomers of the industry.
Over time, however, competitors jumped in to reap profits from the new
market space of on-demand CRM automation that Salesforce.com created.
Large players offered hybrid solutions, and an increasing number of small
players entered the on-demand CRM market in an attempt to provide
similar offerings. To break away from the competition, Salesforce.com
made a new blue ocean strategic move to renew its initial value innovation
offering.


With the launch of Force.com, a cloud-based development tool for
creating add-on applications, and AppExchange, a web-based applications
marketplace, Salesforce.com allowed corporate clients to obtain a range of
on-demand customized programs at low cost while still retaining the
simplicity, convenience, reliability, and low risk of its original offering,
achieving both differentiation and low cost.
To discourage imitation and further deepen its blue ocean that
competitors continued to eye, Salesforce.com went a step further and
extended its value curve by launching Chatter, a private social networking
service that allowed coworkers within a company to send, receive, and
follow information updates in real time, thereby enhancing collaboration
and resolving the problem of fragmentation that plagued the
implementation and use of traditional CRM systems. In this way, not only
has Salesforce.com been able to maintain a gap between its value curve and
those of others over time, but it has also continued to expand the size of the
blue ocean, with large corporations now equally eager to deploy on-demand
web-based CRM applications due to its successive value innovation moves.
OceanofPDF.com




Renewal at the Corporate Level for a Multibusiness
Firm
While the renewal issue for companies with a single business offering or
product can be addressed by charting a business’s value curve against
competitors’ on the strategy canvas over time as described, a complementary
tool is needed for companies that have a portfolio of diverse business
offerings, as executives responsible for corporate strategy should monitor
and plan the renewal of their business portfolios from the corporate
perspective. A dynamic extension of the pioneer-migrator-settler (PMS) map
introduced in chapter 4 serves this purpose well. It can be used to visually
depict the movement of a corporate portfolio in one picture by capturing a
corporation’s portfolio of business offerings over time.
By plotting the corporate portfolio as pioneers, migrators, and settlers on
the dynamic PMS map, executives can see at a glance where the gravity of
its current portfolio of businesses is, how this has shifted over time, and
when there is a need to create a new blue ocean to renew the portfolio. As
explained in chapter 4, settlers are me-too businesses, migrators represent
value improvements, and pioneers are a company’s value innovations. While
settlers are today’s cash generators that typically have marginal growth
potential, pioneers have high growth potential but often consume cash at the
outset as they expand; migrators’ profitable growth potential lies somewhere
in between.
To maximize growth prospects then, a company’s portfolio should have a
healthy balance between pioneers for future growth and migrators and
settlers for cash flow at a given point in time. Over time, however, a
company’s current pioneers will eventually become migrators and then
ultimately settlers as imitation begins and intensifies. To maintain strong
profitable growth, executives need to ensure that as current pioneers become
migrators, the company is set to launch a new blue ocean either by
regenerating an existing business or via a new business offering. Consider
Apple Inc. in this regard.
FIGURE 10-2


Apple’s portfolio of businesses on the dynamic PMS map
While the size of named circles roughly represents the relative revenues of
Apple’s main businesses, that of unnamed dots does not as they simply
represent Apple’s peripheral products and services.
The Apple Store is not plotted, although it is recognized as a blue ocean in
the retail industry, as its sales are already captured in all existing products.
Figure 10-2 depicts Apple’s portfolio of businesses on the dynamic PMS
map. A series of blue ocean strategic moves led Apple to become America’s
most admired and valuable company within a decade. The iMac, iPod,
iTunes Store, iPhone, and iPad were created by different business units
serving different industry sectors, yet they shared a common strategic
approach—reconstructing the existing markets and creating new demand.
Although these strategic moves were planned and executed by individual


business units, it was Apple Inc. that planned and orchestrated its business
portfolio at the corporate level.
As seen in figure 10-2, Apple has maintained strong profitable growth by
keeping a successful balance across its pioneers, migrators, and settlers over
time, even as once pioneers lost their pioneer status. This was achieved by
launching new blue ocean businesses as previous pioneer businesses were
starting to be imitated. In looking at Apple’s portfolio across time, its
profitable growth was first lifted in 1998 when it dramatically simplified its
Macintosh product range and launched the value-innovative iMac, the first
colorful, friendly desktop computer that made it easy for the first time to
connect to the internet. The iMac literally made people smile and introduced
fashion and aesthetics into computers. While the iMac transformed Apple’s
Macintosh division into a high migrator, Apple quickly followed this with
the launch of the iPod. The iPod revolutionized the digital music market,
creating an uncontested blue ocean, which was strengthened further with its
launch of the iTunes Music Store two years later. As the iPod was eventually
imitated and sank toward migrator status, Apple reached out and launched its
next blue ocean, the iPhone.
Apple continued to launch subsequent blue oceans over time, including its
app store and the iPad to ensure the next chunk of growth at the corporate
level as others began to encroach on the blue oceans it was creating in its
individual businesses. As the dynamic PMS map also makes clear, that is not
to say that Apple is only about blue oceans; nor should any company’s
corporate portfolio be. Companies with a diverse portfolio of businesses,
such as Apple, General Electric, Johnson & Johnson, or Procter & Gamble,
will always need to swim in both red and blue oceans at a given point in time
and succeed in both oceans at the corporate level. This means that
understanding and applying the competition-based principles of red ocean
strategy are also needed. Once Apple’s iPod began to be imitated, for
example, to counter competition it rapidly launched a range of iPod variants
at various price points with the iPod mini, shuffle, nano, touch, and so on.
This not only served to keep encroaching competitors at arm’s length, but
also expanded the size of the ocean it created, allowing Apple, not imitators,
to capture the lion’s share of the profit and growth of this new market space.
By the time the iPod’s blue ocean became crowded with more imitators,
Apple had created another blue ocean by introducing the iPhone.


In this way, Apple has been successfully managing its corporate portfolio
for strong profitable growth. The challenge for Apple in going forward will
be to continue to renew its portfolio, as current pioneers eventually become
migrators and settlers, so that it can maintain a healthy balance between the
profit of today and the growth of tomorrow. This is the precise challenge
Microsoft has been facing for several years. Despite relatively strong profit,
Microsoft has failed to maintain a healthy balance across pioneers,
migrators, and settlers. While it has proven to be adept at knowing how to
compete and get profit out of settler businesses, Microsoft has launched no
new pioneers, whether a search engine like Google, a social network site like
Facebook, a video game console like the Wii, or popular web services like
Twitter to renew its corporate portfolio. Its deep dependence on the settler
businesses of Office and Windows that dominate its portfolio has severely
penalized Microsoft. Profit aside, its stock price has been unimpressive for
more than a decade and, even more telling, it has lost its luster in attracting
top talent. For Microsoft to get out of its slump, it needs to work toward
creating a better balanced portfolio across businesses that not only compete
in red oceans but also create blue oceans, which renew, expand, and build its
brand value.
The eight principles of blue ocean strategy proposed in this book should
serve as essential pointers for every company thinking about its future
strategy if it aspires to lead the increasingly overcrowded business world.
This is not to suggest that companies will suddenly stop competing or that
the competition will suddenly come to a halt. On the contrary, the
competition will be more present and will remain a critical factor of market
reality. As captured on the dynamic PMS map, red ocean and blue ocean
strategies are complementary strategic perspectives, with each serving
different and important purposes.
Because blue and red oceans have always coexisted, practical reality
demands that companies succeed in both oceans and master the strategies for
both. But because companies already understand how to compete in red
oceans, what they need to learn is how to make the competition irrelevant.
This book aims to help balance the scales so that formulating and executing
blue ocean strategy can become as systematic and actionable as competing
in the red oceans of known market space.
OceanofPDF.com


CHAPTER 11
Avoid Red Ocean Traps
IN THE ORIGINAL VERSION OF OUR BOOK, we focused on defining what blue
ocean strategy is and offering frameworks and analytic tools for creating
commercially relevant new market space as expressed by the strategy
canvas, four actions framework, the six paths, and so on. At the time, we
felt reassured that we had reached a level of articulation and clarity on blue
ocean strategy that would prevent misunderstandings from arising by all
who chose to dive into the book. Over the ensuing years, however, we
found that our assumption was not fully correct. People’s mental models,
coming from their backgrounds and preexisting knowledge, led them to
often interpret blue ocean strategy through old conceptual lenses that
inadvertently trapped them in the red ocean. In particular, we identified ten
common red ocean traps that work against the creation of blue oceans.
Understanding these red ocean traps is critical; they have powerful
implications for practice. If any one of these red ocean traps raises its head
in your organization, beat it down. You have to get your framing right to
create blue oceans. Perspective is critical to success. Your mind-set is more
ingrained than you realize. Hence, we end this expanded edition by laying
out the ten common red ocean traps that keep organizations locked in the
red ocean even as they attempt to sail into clear waters. To get the most out
of the blue ocean strategy methodologies and tools as they are used in
practice, an accurate understanding on the underpinning concepts that guide
their proper application is essential.
