# 11 Avoid Red Ocean Traps

Red Ocean Trap One: The belief that blue ocean strategy is a
customer-oriented strategy that’s about being customer led.
A blue ocean strategist gains insights about reconstructing market
boundaries not by looking at existing customers, but by exploring
noncustomers. When organizations mistakenly assume that blue ocean
strategy is about being customer led, they reflexively focus on what they’ve
always focused on: existing customers and how to make them happier.
While such a perspective may shed insight on ways to improve value for
current industry customers, it is not the path to create new demand. To
create new demand, an organization needs to turn its focus to noncustomers
and why they refuse to patronize an industry. Noncustomers, not customers,
hold the greatest insight into an industry’s pain points and points of
intimidation that limit the size and boundary of the industry. This is why to
create new demand, analyzing and understanding the three tiers of
noncustomers are essential components of blue ocean strategy. A focus on
existing customers, by contrast, tends to drive organizations to do more of
the same for less, thereby anchoring companies in the red ocean irrespective
of their blue ocean intent.
Red Ocean Trap Two: The belief that to create blue oceans, you must
venture beyond your core business.
There is a common misperception that to create a blue ocean and break out
of the red, organizations must venture into industries outside their core,
which understandably appears to multiply risk. And a select few do. Virgin
is a classic example, and Apple in recent years metamorphosed from a
computer maker to a consumer electronics and media giant. These,
however, are exceptions, not the rule. Blue oceans can just as easily and
more readily be created smack in the middle of an organization’s existing
core businesses. Think of Casella Wines with [yellow tail] in the wine
industry, Nintendo with the Wii, Chrysler with the minivan, Apple with its
iMac, Philips with Alto in the professional lighting industry, or even the
New York City Police Department with Bratton’s blue ocean strategic move
in policing. All come from within, not beyond, red oceans of existing
industries. This challenges the view that new markets are in distant waters.
Blue oceans are right next to you in every industry. Understanding this is
key. When companies mistakenly believe that they must venture beyond


their core business to create blue oceans, they tend to either shy away from
venturing beyond the red ocean or, to the contrary, look far afield to other
industries that have little overlap with their knowledge, skills, and
competencies, which makes success that much more difficult, with failed
attempts keeping them locked in the red ocean.
Red Ocean Trap Three: The misconception that blue ocean strategy
is about new technologies.
A blue ocean strategic move is not about technology innovation per se.
Think of Comic Relief, [yellow tail], JCDecaux, or Starbucks for starters—
all made blue ocean strategic moves that involved no bleeding-edge new
technologies. Even where technology is heavily involved, as with
Salesforce.com, Intuit’s Quicken, or Apple’s iPhone, the reason buyers love
these blue ocean offerings isn’t because they involve bleeding-edge
technology per se, but because these offerings make the technology
essentially disappear from buyers’ minds. The products and services are so
simple, easy to use, fun, and productive that buyers fall in love with them.
So technology is not a defining feature. You can create blue oceans with or
without it. However, where technology is involved, it’s key that you link it
to value. Ask: How does your product or service offer a leap in productivity,
simplicity, ease of use, convenience, fun, and/or environmental
friendliness? Without that, bleeding-edge technology notwithstanding, you
won’t open up a blue ocean of commercial opportunity. Value innovation,
not technology innovation, is what opens up commercially compelling new
markets. When companies mistakenly assume blue ocean strategy hinges on
new technologies, their organizations tend to push for products or services
that are either too out there, too complicated, or lacking the complementary
ecosystem needed to open up a new market space.
Red Ocean Trap Four: The belief that to create a blue ocean, you
must be first to market.
Blue ocean strategy is not about being first to market. Rather it’s about
being first to get it right by linking innovation to value. One need only look
to Apple here. The iMac wasn’t the first PC, the iPod wasn’t the first MP3
player, iTunes wasn’t the first digital music store, and the iPhone certainly
wasn’t the first smart phone, nor for that matter was the iPad the first smart


tablet. But what they all successfully did was link innovation to value.
Organizations that mistakenly assume blue ocean strategy is about being
first to market all too often get their priorities wrong. They inadvertently
put speed before value. While speed is important, speed alone will not
unlock a blue ocean. Corporate graveyards are full of companies that got to
market first with innovative offerings not linked to value.1 To avoid this
trap, companies need to continuously drive home the idea that while speed
may be important, even more important is linking innovation to value. No
company should rest easy until it achieves value innovation.
Red Ocean Trap Five: The misconception that blue ocean strategy
and differentiation strategy are synonymous.
Under traditional competitive strategy, differentiation is achieved by
providing premium value at a higher cost to the company and at a higher
price for customers. Think Mercedes Benz. Differentiation is a strategic
choice that reflects the value-cost trade-off in a given market structure. Blue
ocean strategy, by contrast, is about breaking the value-cost trade-off to
open up new market space. It is about pursuing differentiation and low cost
simultaneously. Is Casella Wine’s [yellow tail] or Comic Relief’s Red Nose
Day differentiated in terms of having a different strategic profile than other
players’? You bet. But are they also low cost? Yes again. Blue ocean
strategy is an “and-and,” not an either-or, strategy. When companies
mistakenly assume that blue ocean strategy is synonymous with
differentiation, they all too often miss the and-and of blue ocean strategy.
Instead they tend to focus on what to raise and create to stand apart and pay
scant heed to what they can eliminate and reduce to simultaneously achieve
low cost. In this way, organizations inadvertently become either premium
competitors or differentiated niche players in existing industry space rather
than creating value innovation that makes the competition irrelevant.
Red Ocean Trap Six: The misconception that blue ocean strategy is a
low-cost strategy that focuses on low pricing.
This red ocean trap is the obvious flip side of red ocean trap five and pops
up just as often. Again, blue ocean strategy pursues differentiation and low
cost simultaneously by reconstructing market boundaries. Instead of
focusing on low cost per se, it seeks to create a leap in buyer value at a


lower cost. Further, a blue ocean strategic move captures the mass of target
buyers not through low-cost pricing, but through strategic pricing. The key
here is not to pursue pricing against the competition within an industry but
to pursue pricing against substitutes and alternatives that are currently
capturing the noncustomers of your industry.
Using strategic pricing, a blue ocean does not have to be created at the
low end of the market. Instead it can be created at the high end, as Cirque
du Soleil, Starbucks, or Dyson did; at the low end, as Southwest Airlines or
Swatch did; or in the middle range of a market. Even where blue oceans are
created at the low end, as in the case of Southwest Airlines or Swatch,
which have among the lowest price points and cost structures in the airline
and watch industries, respectively, ask yourself, do you think of these as
low cost alone? If you are like most, your answer is no. True, they are low
cost and low priced, but they also stand out and are clearly differentiated in
the eyes of buyers. Southwest Airlines stands out for its friendly, fast,
ground-transportation-in-the-air feel, while Swatch’s stylish, fun designs set
it apart and make it a fashion statement. That is, they are perceived as being
both differentiated and low cost even at the low end of the market. When
organizations miss this point and mistakenly see blue ocean strategy as
synonymous with low cost and low pricing, they inadvertently focus on
what to eliminate and reduce in the current industry offering to offer rock-
bottom prices. In doing so, they fail to simultaneously focus on what they
should raise and create to also achieve the differentiation needed to stand
apart and set sail into the blue ocean.
Red Ocean Trap Seven: The belief that blue ocean strategy is the
same as innovation.
Blue ocean strategy is not synonymous with innovation per se. Unlike blue
ocean strategy, innovation is a very broad concept that is based on an
original and useful idea regardless of whether that idea is linked to a leap in
value that can appeal to the mass of buyers. Take Motorola’s Iridium. Was it
an innovation? Sure. It was the first global phone and it was useful. But was
it a value innovation? No. As Motorola learned, a breakthrough in
technology is not necessarily synonymous with a breakthrough in value that
can attract the target mass of buyers. The Iridium was a useful technological
feat that worked around the world, including the far reaches of the Gobi


desert, but did not work in buildings and cars, the precise places that global
executives on the move most needed them to work. It failed to create a leap
in value for its target mass of buyers—business executives.
In fact, many technology innovators fail to create and capture blue
oceans by confusing innovation with value innovation, the cornerstone of
blue ocean strategy. Value innovation, not innovation per se, is the singular
focus of blue ocean strategy. Simply creating something original and useful
through innovation is not enough to create and capture a blue ocean, even if
the innovation wins the company accolades and its researchers a Nobel
Prize. To capture a commercially compelling blue ocean, companies need a
strategy that can align their value, profit, and people propositions in pursuit
of both differentiation and low cost. When organizations fail to register the
difference between value innovation and innovation per se, they all too
often end with an innovation that breaks new ground but does not unlock
the mass of target buyers, keeping them by and large stuck in the red ocean.
Red Ocean Trap Eight: The belief that blue ocean strategy is a
theory of marketing and a niche strategy.
Certainly, the blue ocean strategy frameworks and tools can be effectively
deployed to reframe, analyze, and resolve the marketing issues of an
organization as it strives to break out of the red ocean. Especially relevant
are those issues related to developing a blue ocean value proposition, as
discussed in the beginning chapters of the book. However, blue ocean
strategy requires more than a compelling value proposition. As we discuss
in the second half of the book, sustainable success can only be achieved
when a company’s value proposition is supported by key internal and
external people involved in its execution and is complemented by a strong
profit proposition. Hence, to equate blue ocean strategy with a theory of
marketing myopically masks the holistic approach needed to create a
sustainable high-performance strategy, including overcoming organizational
hurdles, winning people’s trust and commitment, and creating the proper
incentives via a compelling people proposition. This inaccurate
understanding of blue ocean strategy can often lead to a lack of alignment
across the three strategy propositions of value, profit, and people.
Blue ocean strategy should also not be confused with a niche strategy.
While the field of marketing has placed significant emphasis on finer


segmentation to effectively capture niche markets, blue ocean strategy
works in the reverse direction. It is more about desegmenting markets by
focusing on key commonalities across buyer groups to open up and capture
the largest catchment of demand. When practitioners confuse the two, they
all too often are driven to look for customer differences for niche markets in
the existing industry space rather than the commonalities that cut across
buyer groups in search of blue oceans of new demand.
Red Ocean Trap Nine: The belief that blue ocean strategy sees
competition as bad when in fact it can be good for companies.
Blue ocean strategy does not see competition as bad. However, unlike
traditional economic thought, it does not see competition as always good.
Historically, economists argued that absent competition, companies have no
incentive to improve their product or service, but with competition,
companies are pushed to up their game, lower their prices, and improve
their products and services. At the level of the firm, however, competition is
only good up to a point. When supply exceeds demand, as it does in an
increasing array of industries, the intensity of competition tends to have
deleterious effects on the profitable growth of organizations, as more and
more firms fight to win a slice of a given pool of customers, triggering
intense price pressure, razor-thin margins, commoditization of offerings,
and slower growth. If companies continue to compete further to grab a
bigger share of the existing pie without expanding it or creating a new one,
such competitive actions are bound to produce negative economic
consequences for firms. This is why blue ocean strategy argues that firms
need to go beyond competing and the mere improvement of product or
services in overcrowded industries and pursue value innovation to open up
new market space and make the competition irrelevant. Hence, while
understanding how to compete in existing market space is important, blue
ocean strategy addresses the critical challenge of how to redefine industry
boundaries and create new market space when structural conditions work
against you. This is how blue ocean strategy deals with competition to
produce continuous renewal and the growth of industries.
Red Ocean Trap Ten: The belief that blue ocean strategy is
synonymous with creative destruction or disruption.


Creative destruction or disruption occurs when an innovation disrupts an
existing market by displacing an earlier technology or existing product or
service. The word “displacement” is important here, as without
displacement, disruption would not occur. In the case of photography, for
example, the innovation of digital photography disrupted the photographic
film industry by effectively displacing it. So today digital photography is
the norm, and photographic film is seldom used. Disruption is, hence,
largely consonant with Schumpeter’s concept of creative destruction,
whereby the old is incessantly destroyed or replaced by the new. Unlike
disruption, however, blue ocean strategy does not necessitate displacement
or destruction. Blue ocean strategy is a broader concept that goes beyond
creative destruction to embrace nondestructive creation, which is its
overriding emphasis.
Take Viagra, which created a blue ocean in lifestyle drugs. Did Viagra
effectively disrupt an existing industry by displacing an earlier technology
or existing product or service? No. It created a blue ocean via
nondestructive creation. By reconstructing existing market boundaries, blue
ocean strategy creates new market space within and beyond existing
industries. When new market space is created beyond existing industry
boundaries, as with Viagra, reconstruction tends to bring about
nondestructive creation. When, on the other hand, new market space is
created within an existing industry, like disruptive innovation, displacement
tends to occur. However, in many cases, even when the reconstruction
occurs within industries, blue ocean strategy also produces nondestructive
creation. Nintendo’s Wii, for example, created a blue ocean in the video
game industry. It had an element of creative destruction. However, the new
market space it created of physically active, family-centered video gaming
had an even larger element of nondestructive creation that complemented,
more than disrupted or displaced, existing video games.
The important question for practice is, What drives blue ocean strategy to
go beyond creative destruction to nondestructive creation, which is a key
goal of most companies as well as of governments in their quest to
stimulate economic growth? The essential point here is that blue ocean
strategy is not about finding a better or lower-cost solution to the existing
problem of an industry, both of which trigger disruption and displacement
of existing products and services. Instead, blue ocean strategy is about


redefining the problem itself, which tends to create new demand or an
offering that often complements rather than displaces existing products and
services. The six paths framework in chapter 3 is critical in this regard as it
provides systematic ways to redefine industry problems to open up new
market space.
To put the ideas and methodologies contained in this book into proper
practice, you need to have a robust understanding not only of the building
blocks of blue ocean strategy, but also of the assumptions that lurk behind
the red ocean traps. While some of these misconceptions are more
conceptual than others, they all matter if you are to use the blue ocean
strategy tools and methodologies to achieve their intended objectives in
practice. This is why we felt the need to end this expanded edition by
clarifying the red ocean traps. Only then can we move one step closer to
achieving our ultimate goal of bringing blue ocean strategy theory closer to
practice.
OceanofPDF.com


APPENDIX A
A Sketch of the Historical Pattern of Blue
Ocean Creation
AT THE RISK OF OVERSIMPLIFICATION, here we present a snapshot overview
of the history of three American industries—automobiles, computers, and
movie theaters—from the perspective of major product and service
offerings that opened new market space and generated significant new
demand. This review, which spans the start of these industries until roughly
2005, intends to be neither comprehensive in its coverage nor exhaustive in
its content. Its aim is limited to identifying the common strategic elements
across key blue ocean offerings. US industries are chosen here because they
represent the largest and least regulated free market during our study period.
Although the review is only a sketch of the historical pattern of blue
ocean creation, several patterns stand out across these three representative
industries.
There is no permanently excellent industry. The attractiveness of all
industries rose and fell over the study period.
There are no permanently excellent companies. Companies, like
industries, rose and fell over time. These first two findings both
confirm and add further evidence that permanently excellent
companies and industries do not exist.
A key determinant of whether an industry or a company was on a
rising trajectory of strong, profitable growth was the strategic move of
blue ocean creation. The creation of blue oceans was a key catalyst in
