# Appendix A

setting an industry on an upward growth and profit trajectory. It was
also a pivotal determinant driving a company’s rise in profitable
growth, as well as its fall when another company gained the lead and
created a new blue ocean.
Blue oceans were created by both industry incumbents and new
entrants, challenging the lore that start-ups have natural advantages
over established companies in creating new market space. Moreover,
the blue oceans created by incumbents were usually within their core
businesses. In fact, most blue oceans are created from within, not
beyond, red oceans of existing boundaries. Issues of perceived
cannibalization or creative destruction for established companies
proved to be exaggerated.1 Blue oceans created profitable growth for
every company launching them, start-ups and incumbents alike.
The creation of blue oceans was not about technology innovation per
se. Sometimes leading-edge technology was present, but often it was
not a defining feature of blue oceans. This was true even when the
industry under examination was technology intensive, such as
computers. Rather, the key defining feature of blue oceans was value
innovation—innovation that was linked to what buyers value.
The creation of blue oceans did more than contribute to strong,
profitable growth; this strategic move exercised a strong, positive
effect on establishing a company’s standing brand name in buyers’
minds.
Let’s now turn to these three representative industries to let the history of
blue ocean creation speak for itself. Here we begin with the auto industry, a
central form of transportation in the developed world.
OceanofPDF.com


The Automobile Industry
The US auto industry dates back to 1893, when the Duryea brothers
launched the first one-cylinder auto in the United States. At the time, the
horse and buggy was the primary means of US transportation. Soon after
the auto’s US debut, there were hundreds of auto manufacturers building
custom-made automobiles in the country.
The autos of the time were a luxurious novelty. One model even offered
electric curlers in the backseat for on-the-go primping. They were
unreliable and expensive, costing around $1,500, twice the average annual
family income. And they were enormously unpopular. Anticar activists tore
up roads, ringed parked cars with barbed wire, and organized boycotts of
car-driving businessmen and politicians. Public resentment of the
automobile was so great that even future president Woodrow Wilson
weighed in, saying, “Nothing has spread socialistic feeling more than the
automobile . . . a picture of the arrogance of wealth.”2 Literary Digest
suggested, “The ordinary ‘horseless carriage’ is at present a luxury for the
wealthy; and although its price will probably fall in the future, it will never,
of course, come into as common use as the bicycle.”3
The industry, in short, was small and unattractive. Henry Ford, however,
didn’t believe it had to be this way.
OceanofPDF.com




The Model T
In 1908, while America’s five hundred automakers built custom-made
novelty automobiles, Henry Ford introduced the Model T. He called it the
car “for the great multitude, constructed of the best materials.” Although it
came in only one color (black) and one model, the Model T was reliable,
durable, and easy to fix. And it was priced so that the majority of Americans
could afford one. In 1908 the first Model T cost $850, half the price of
existing automobiles. In 1909 it dropped to $609, and by 1924 it was down
to $290.4 In comparison, the price of a horse-driven carriage, the car’s
closest alternative at the time, was around $400. A 1909 sales brochure
proclaimed, “Watch the Ford Go By, High Priced Quality in a Low Priced
Car.”
Ford’s success was underpinned by a profitable business model. By
keeping the cars highly standardized and offering limited options and
interchangeable parts, Ford’s revolutionary assembly line replaced skilled
craftsmen with ordinary unskilled laborers who worked one small task
faster and more efficiently, cutting the time to make a Model T from
twenty-one days to four days and cutting labor hours by 60 percent.5 With
lower costs, Ford was able to charge a price that was accessible to the mass
market.
Sales of the Model T exploded. Ford’s market share surged from 9
percent in 1908 to 61 percent in 1921, and by 1923, a majority of American
households owned an automobile.6 Ford’s Model T exploded the size of the
automobile industry, creating a huge blue ocean. So great was the blue
ocean Ford created that the Model T replaced the horse-drawn carriage as
the primary means of transport in the United States.
OceanofPDF.com




General Motors
By 1924, the car had become an essential household item, and the wealth of
the average American household had grown. That year, General Motors
(GM) unveiled a line of automobiles that would create a new blue ocean in
the auto industry. In contrast to Ford’s functional, one-color, single-model
strategy, GM introduced “a car for every purse and purpose”—a strategy
devised by chairman Alfred Sloan to appeal to the emotional dimensions of
the US mass market, or what Sloan called the “ mass-class” market.7
Whereas Ford stuck with the functional “horseless carriage” concept of
the car, GM made the car fun, exciting, comfortable, and fashionable. GM
factories pumped out a broad array of models, with new colors and styles
updated every year. The “annual car model” created new demand as buyers
began to trade up for fashion and comfort. Because cars were replaced more
frequently, the used car market was also formed.
Demand for GM’s fashionable and emotionally charged cars soared.
From 1926 to 1950, the total number of cars sold in the United States
increased from two million to seven million a year, and General Motors
increased its overall market share from 20 percent to 50 percent, while
Ford’s fell from 50 percent to 20 percent.8
But the rapid growth in the US auto industry unleashed by this new blue
ocean could not last forever. Following GM’s surging success, Ford and
Chrysler jumped into the blue ocean GM had created, and the Big Three
pursued the common strategy of launching new car models yearly and
hitting an emotional chord with consumers by building a wide range of car
styles to meet various lifestyles and needs. Slowly, bloody competition
began as the Big Three imitated and matched one another’s strategies.
Collectively, they captured more than 90 percent of the US auto market.9 A
period of complacency set in.
OceanofPDF.com




Small, Fuel-Efficient Japanese Cars
The auto industry, however, did not stand still. In the 1970s, the Japanese
created a new blue ocean, challenging the US automobile industry with
small, efficient cars. Instead of following the implicit industry logic “the
bigger, the better” and focusing on luxuries, the Japanese altered the
conventional logic, pursuing ruthless quality, small size, and the new utility
of highly gas-efficient cars.
When the oil crisis occurred in the 1970s, US consumers flocked to fuel-
efficient, robust Japanese cars made by Honda, Toyota, and Nissan (then
called Datsun). Almost overnight the Japanese became heroes in consumers’
minds. Their compact, fuel-efficient cars created a new blue ocean of
opportunity, and again, demand soared. With the Big Three focused on
benchmarking and matching one another, none had taken the initiative to
produce functional, compact, fuel-efficient cars, even though they did see
the market potential for such vehicles. Hence, instead of creating a new
blue ocean, the Big Three were dragged into a new round of competitive
benchmarking, only this time with the Japanese; they began to invest
heavily in the production of smaller, fuel-efficient vehicles.
Nevertheless, the Big Three were still hit by a dive in car sales, with
aggregate losses amounting to $4 billion in 1980.10 Chrysler, the little
brother among the Big Three, suffered the hardest hit and narrowly escaped
bankruptcy by virtue of a government bailout. The Japanese car producers
had been so effective at creating and capturing this blue ocean that the US
automakers found it hard to make a real comeback; their competitiveness
and long-run viability were thrown into serious question by industry experts
across the world.
OceanofPDF.com




Chrysler’s Minivan
Fast-forward to 1984. A beleaguered Chrysler, on the edge of bankruptcy,
unveiled the minivan, creating a new blue ocean in the auto industry. The
minivan broke the boundary between car and van, creating an entirely new
type of vehicle. Smaller than the traditional van and yet more spacious than
the station wagon, the minivan was exactly what the nuclear family needed
to hold the entire family plus its bikes, dogs, and other necessities. And the
minivan was easier to drive than a truck or van.
Built on the Chrysler K car chassis, the minivan drove like a car but
provided more interior room and could still fit in the family garage.
Chrysler, however, was not the first to work on this concept. Ford and GM
had had the minivan on their drawing boards for years, but they had worried
that the design would cannibalize their own station wagons. Undoubtedly
they passed a golden opportunity to Chrysler. Within its first year, the
minivan became Chrysler’s bestselling vehicle, helping the company regain
its position as one of the Big Three auto manufacturers. Within three years,
Chrysler gained $1.5 billion from the minivan’s introduction alone.11
The success of the minivan ignited the sports utility vehicle (SUV) boom
in the 1990s, which expanded the blue ocean Chrysler had unlocked. Built
on a truck chassis, the SUV continued the progression from car to utility
truck. First designed for off-road driving and towing boat trailers, the SUV
became wildly popular with young families for its carlike handling,
increased passenger and cargo space over the minivan, and comfortable
interiors combined with the increased functionality of four-wheel drive,
towing capabilities, and safety. By 1998, total sales of new light trucks
(minivans, SUVs, and pickups) reached 7.5 million, nearly matching the 8.2
million new car sales.12 And by 2005, total sales of new light trucks reached
9.3 million, going much beyond the 7.7 million sales of new cars.13
In assessing the US auto industry from its inception until 2005, we see
that GM, the Japanese automakers, and Chrysler were established players
when they created blue oceans. For the most part, the blue oceans that were
created were not triggered by technological innovations. Even Ford’s
revolutionary assembly line can be traced to the US meatpacking industry.14


The attractiveness of the auto industry was continuously rising and falling
and rising again, driven, to no small extent, by blue ocean strategic moves.
The same is true for the profitable growth trends of companies in the
industry. Companies’ profit and growth were linked in no small way to the
blue oceans they created or failed to create.
Almost all these companies are remembered for the blue oceans they
have created across time. Ford, for example, has suffered significantly at
times, but its brand still stands out largely for the Model T it created some
one hundred years ago.
OceanofPDF.com


The Computer Industry
Let’s now turn to the computer industry, which supplies a central
component of work environments across the globe. The US computer
industry traces back to 1890, when Herman Hollerith invented the punch
card tabulating machine to shorten the process of data recording and
analysis for the US census. Hollerith’s tabulator completed the census
tabulations five years sooner than the preceding census.
Soon after, Hollerith left the census office to form Tabulating Machine
Company (TMC), which sold its tabulators to US and foreign government
agencies. At the time, there was no real market for Hollerith’s tabulators in
business settings, where data processing was accomplished with pencils and
ledgers that were easy to use, inexpensive, and accurate. Although
Hollerith’s tabulator was very fast and accurate, it was expensive and
difficult to use, and it required continuous upkeep. Facing new competition
after the expiration of his patent and frustrated after the US government
dropped TMC due to its steep prices, Hollerith sold the company, which
was then merged with two other companies to form CTR in 1911.
OceanofPDF.com




The Tabulating Machine
In 1914, CTR’s tabulating business remained small and unprofitable. In an
attempt to turn the company around, CTR turned to Thomas Watson, a
former executive at National Cash Register Company, for help. Watson
recognized that there was enormous untapped demand for tabulators to help
businesses improve their inventory and accounting practices. Yet he also
realized that the cumbersome new technology was too expensive and
complicated for businesses when their pencils and ledgers worked just fine.
In a strategic move that would launch the computer industry, Watson
combined the strengths of the tabulator with the ease and lower costs of
pencils and ledgers. Under Watson, CTR’s tabulators were simplified and
modularized, and the company began to offer on-site maintenance and user
education and oversight. Customers would get the speed and efficiency of
the tabulator without the need to hire specialists to train employees or
technicians to fix the machines when they broke down.
Next, Watson decreed that tabulators would be leased and not sold, an
innovation that helped establish a new pricing model for the tabulating
machine business. On the one hand, it allowed businesses to avoid large
capital expenditures, while giving them the flexibility to upgrade as
tabulators improved. On the other hand, it gave CTR a recurring revenue
stream while precluding customers from buying used machines from one
another.
Within six years, the firm’s revenues more than tripled.15 By the mid-
1920s, CTR held 85 percent of the tabulating market in the United States. In
1924, to reflect the company’s growing international presence, Watson
changed CTR’s name to International Business Machines Corp. (IBM). The
blue ocean of tabulators was unlocked.
OceanofPDF.com




The Electronic Computer
Skip ahead thirty years to 1952. Remington Rand delivered the UNIVAC,
the world’s first commercial electronic computer, to the census bureau. Yet
that year only three UNIVACs were sold. A blue ocean was not in sight
until IBM’s Watson—this time his son Thomas Watson Jr.—would see the
untapped demand in what looked like a small, lackluster market. Watson Jr.
realized the role electronic computers could play in business and pushed
IBM to meet the challenge.
In 1953, IBM introduced the IBM 650, the first intermediate-sized
computer for business use. Recognizing that if businesses were going to use
the electronic computer, they wouldn’t want a complicated machine and
would pay only for the computing power they would use, IBM had made
the IBM 650 much simpler to use and less powerful than the UNIVAC, and
it priced the machine at only $200,000, compared with the UNIVAC’s $1
million price tag. As a result, by the end of the 1950s IBM had captured 85
percent of the business electronic computer market. Revenues almost
tripled between 1952 and 1959, from $412 million to $1.16 billion.16
IBM’s expansion of the blue ocean was greatly accentuated in 1964, with
the introduction of the System/360, the first large family of computers to
use interchangeable software, peripheral equipment, and service packages.
It was a bold departure from the monolithic, one-size-fits-all mainframe.
Later, in 1969, IBM changed the way computers were sold. Rather than
offer hardware, services, and software exclusively in packages, IBM
unbundled the components and offered them for sale individually.
Unbundling gave birth to the multibillion-dollar software and services
industries, with IBM becoming the world’s largest computer services
company.
OceanofPDF.com




The Personal Computer
The computer industry continued its evolution through the 1960s and
1970s. IBM, Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), Sperry, and others that
had jumped into the computer industry expanded operations globally and
improved and extended product lines to add peripherals and service
markets. Yet in 1978, when the major computer manufacturers were intent
on building bigger, more powerful machines for the business market, Apple
Computer, Inc., created an entirely new market space with its Apple II home
computer.
However, contrary to conventional wisdom, the Apple was not the first
personal computer on the market. Two years earlier, Micro Instrumentation
and Telemetry Systems (MITS) had unveiled the Altair 8800. The Altair
was released with high expectations in computer hobbyist circles.
BusinessWeek quickly called MITS the “IBM of home computers.”
Yet MITS did not create a blue ocean. Why? The machine had no
monitor, no permanent memory, only 256 characters of temporary memory,
no software, and no keyboard. To enter data, users manipulated switches on
the front of the box, and program results were displayed in a pattern of
flashing lights on the front panel. Unsurprisingly, no one saw much of a
market for such difficult-to-use home computers. Expectations were so low
that in that same year Ken Olsen, president of Digital Equipment, famously
said, “There is no reason for any individual to have a computer in their
home.”
Two years later, the Apple II would make Olsen eat his words, creating a
blue ocean of home computing. Based largely on existing technology, the
Apple II offered a solution with an all-in-one design in a plastic casing,
including the keyboard, power supply, and graphics, that was easy to use.
The Apple II came with software ranging from games to businesses
programs such as the Apple Writer word processor and the VisiCalc
spreadsheet, making the computer accessible to the mass of buyers.
Apple changed the way people thought about computers. Computers
were no longer products for technological “geeks”; they became, like the
Model T before them, a staple of the American household. Only two years
after the birth of the Apple II, Apple sales were more than 200,000 units a


year, with Apple placed on the Fortune 500 list three years after going
public, an unprecedented feat at the time.17 In 1980 some two dozen firms
sold 724,000 personal computers, bringing in more than $1.8 billion.18 By
the next year, twenty other companies entered the market, and sales doubled
to 1.4 million units, racking in almost $3 billion.19
Like a stalking horse, IBM waited out the first couple of years to study
the market and the technology and to plan the launch of its home computer.
In 1982, IBM dramatically expanded the blue ocean of home computing by
offering a far more open architecture that allowed other parties to write
software and develop peripherals. By offering a standardized operating
system for which outsiders could create the software and peripheral
components, IBM was able to keep its cost and price low while offering
customers greater utility. The company’s scale and scope advantages
allowed it to price its PC at a level accessible to the mass of buyers.20
During its first year, IBM sold 200,000 PCs, nearly matching its five-year
projection; by 1983 consumers had bought 1.3 million IBM PCs.21
OceanofPDF.com




Compaq PC Servers
With corporations across the United States buying and installing PCs
throughout their organizations, there was a growing need to connect PCs for
simple but important tasks such as sharing files and printers. The business
computer industry spawned by the IBM 650—and jumped into by HP,
DEC, and Sequent, to name a few—offered high-end enterprise systems to
run corporations’ critical missions, as well as numerous operating systems
and application software. But these machines were too expensive and
complex to justify handling simple but important needs such as file and
printer sharing. This was especially true in small to midsize companies that
needed to share printers and files but did not yet require the huge
investment of a complex minicomputer architecture.
In 1992, Compaq changed all that by effectively creating the blue ocean
of the PC server industry with its launch of the ProSignia, a radically
simplified server that was optimized for the most commonly used functions
of file and printer sharing. It eliminated interoperability with a host of
operating systems, ranging from SCO UNIX to OS/3 to DOS, which were
extraneous to these basic functions. The new PC server gave buyers twice a
minicomputer’s file and print sharing capability and speed at one-third the
price. As for Compaq, the dramatically simplified machines translated into
much lower manufacturing costs. Compaq’s creation of the ProSignia, and
three subsequent offerings in the PC server industry, not only fueled PC
sales but also grew the PC server industry into a $3.8 billion industry in less
than four years.22
OceanofPDF.com




Dell Computer
In the mid-1990s, Dell Computer Corporation created another blue ocean in
the computer industry. Traditionally, computer manufacturers competed on
offering faster computers having more features and software. Dell,
however, challenged this industry logic by changing the purchasing and
delivery experiences of buyers. With its direct sales to customers, Dell was
able to sell its PCs for 40 percent less than IBM dealers while still making
money.
Direct sales further appealed to customers because Dell offered
unprecedented delivery time. For example, the time it took from order to
customer delivery at Dell was four days, compared with its competitors’
average of more than ten weeks. Moreover, through Dell’s online and
telephone ordering system, customers were given the option to customize
their machines to their liking. In the meantime, the built-to-order model
allowed Dell to significantly reduce inventory costs.
With Dell’s blue ocean, it became the undisputed market leader in PC
sales. Its revenues skyrocketed from $5.3 billion in 1995 to $43 billion in
2006.23 Since then, new blue oceans have continued to be created in the
computer industry, from the tablet with Apple’s iPad to cloud computing
services, leapfrogging Dell. To remain relevant, Dell’s challenge is to create
a new blue ocean to capture the imagination and wallets of buyers again.
Without this, it will be hard for Dell to get out of the red ocean of bloody
competition it now finds itself in.
As with the auto industry, the blue oceans in the computer industry have
not been unleashed by technology innovations per se but by linking
technology to elements valued by buyers. As in the case of the IBM 650 and
the Compaq PC server, the value innovation often rested on simplifying the
technology. We also see industry incumbents—CTR, IBM, Compaq—
launching blue oceans as much as we see new entrants, such as Apple and
Dell. Each blue ocean has gone a long way to enhance the originating
company’s brand name and has led to a surge not only in its profitable
growth but in the profitable growth of the computer industry overall.
OceanofPDF.com


The Movie Theater Industry
Now let’s turn to the movie theater industry, which offers a way for many of
us to relax after work or on weekends. The US movie theater industry can
be traced back to 1893, when Thomas Edison unveiled the Kinetoscope, a
wooden cabinet inside which light was projected through a reel of film.
Viewers saw the action through a peephole one at a time, and the
performance was called a “peep show.”
Two years later, Edison’s staff developed a projecting kinetoscope, which
showed motion pictures on a screen. The projecting kinetoscope, however,
did not take off in any meaningful way. The clips, each several minutes
long, were introduced between vaudeville acts and at theaters. The aim was
to lift the value of live entertainment performances, the focus of the theater
industry, rather than to provide a discrete entertainment form. The
technology was there for the movie theater industry to ignite, but the idea to
create a blue ocean had not yet been planted.
OceanofPDF.com




Nickelodeons
Harry Davis changed all that by opening his first nickelodeon theater in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in 1905. The nickelodeon is widely credited with
launching the movie theater industry in the United States, creating a huge
blue ocean. Consider the differences. Although most Americans belonged to
the working class at the beginning of the twentieth century, the theater
industry until then concentrated on offering live entertainment, such as
theater, operas, and vaudeville, to the social elite.
With the average family earning only $12 a week, live entertainment
simply wasn’t an option. It was too expensive. Average ticket prices for an
opera were $2, and vaudeville was 50 cents. For the majority, theater was
too serious. With little education, the theater or opera just wasn’t appealing
to the working class. It was also inconvenient. Productions played only a
few times a week, and with most theaters located in the well-heeled parts of
the city, they were difficult to get to for the mass of working-class people.
When it came to entertainment, most Americans were left in the dark.
In contrast, the price of admission to Davis’s nickelodeon theater was 5
cents (thus explaining the name). Davis kept the price at a nickel by
stripping the theater venue to its bare essentials—benches and the screen—
and placing his theaters in lower-rent, working-class neighborhoods. Next
he focused on volume and convenience, opening his theaters at eight in the
morning and playing reels continuously until midnight. The nickelodeons
were fun, playing slapstick comedies accessible to most people regardless
of their education, language, or age.
Working-class people flocked to nickelodeons, which entertained some
seven thousand customers per day. In 1907 the Saturday Evening Post
reported that daily attendance at nickelodeons exceeded two million.24 Soon
nickelodeons set up shop across the country. By 1914 the United States had
eighteen thousand nickelodeons, with seven million daily admissions.25 The
blue ocean had grown into a $3 billion industry in today’s dollar terms.
OceanofPDF.com




The Palace Theaters
As the nickelodeon’s blue ocean reached its peak, in 1914 Samuel “Roxy”
Rothapfel set out to bring the appeal of motion pictures to the emerging
middle and upper classes by opening the country’s first Palace Theater in
New York City. Until that point, Rothapfel had owned a number of
nickelodeons in the United States and was best known for turning around
struggling theaters across the country. Unlike nickelodeons, which were
considered lowbrow and simplistic, Rothapfel’s Palace Theaters were
elaborate affairs, with extravagant chandeliers, mirrored hallways, and
grand entranceways. With valet parking, plush “love seats,” and longer
films with theatrical plots, these theaters made going to the movies an event
worthy of theater-or operagoers, but at an affordable price.
The picture palaces were a commercial success. Between 1914 and 1922,
four thousand new Palace Theaters opened in the United States.
Moviegoing became an increasingly important entertainment event for
Americans of all economic levels. As Roxy pointed out, “Giving the people
what they want is fundamentally and disastrously wrong. The people don’t
know what they want . . . [Give] them something better.” Palace Theaters
effectively combined the viewing environment of opera houses with the
viewing contents of nickelodeons—films—to unlock a new blue ocean in
the cinema industry and attract a whole new mass of moviegoers: the upper
and middle classes.26
As the wealth of the nation increased and Americans headed for the
suburbs to fulfill the dream of a house with a picket fence, a chicken in
every pot, and a car in every garage, the limitations of further growth in the
Palace Theater concept began to be felt in the late 1940s. Suburbs, unlike
major cities or metropolitan areas, could not support the large size and
opulent interiors of the Palace Theater concept. The result of competitive
evolution was the emergence of small theaters in suburban locations
running one movie per week. Although the small theaters were “cost
leaders” compared with Palace Theaters, they failed to capture people’s
imaginations. They gave people no special feeling of a night out, and their
success depended solely on the quality of the film being played. If a film
was unsuccessful, customers saw no reason to come, and the theater owner


lost money. With the industry increasingly taking on a has-been status, its
profitable growth was flagging.
OceanofPDF.com




The Multiplex
Yet, once again, the industry was set on a new profitable growth trajectory
through the creation of a new blue ocean. In 1963, Stan Durwood undertook
a strategic move that turned the industry on its head. Durwood’s father had
opened his family’s first movie theater in Kansas City in the 1920s, and
Stan Durwood revitalized the movie theater industry with the creation of the
first multiplex in a Kansas City shopping center.
The multiplex was an instant hit. On the one hand, the multiplex gave
viewers a greater choice of films; on the other, with different-sized theaters
in one place, theater owners could make adjustments to meet varying
demands for movies, thereby spreading their risk and keeping costs down.
As a result, Durwood’s company, American Multi-Cinema, Inc. (AMC),
grew from a small-town theater to become the second-largest movie
company in the nation, as the blue ocean of the multiplex spread across
America.
OceanofPDF.com




The Megaplex
The launch of the multiplex created a blue ocean of new profitable growth
in the industry, but by the 1980s the spread of videocassette recorders and
satellite and cable television had reduced movie attendance. To make
matters worse, in an attempt to capture a greater share of a shrinking
market, theater owners split their theaters into smaller and smaller viewing
rooms so that they could show more features. Unwittingly, they undermined
one of the industry’s distinctive strengths over home entertainment: large
screens. With first-run movies available on cable and videocassette only
weeks after release, the benefit of paying more money to see movies on a
slightly larger screen was marginal. The movie theater industry fell into a
steep decline.
In 1995, AMC again re-created the movie theater industry by introducing
the first twenty-four-screen megaplex in the United States. Unlike the
multiplexes, which were often cramped, dingy, and unspectacular, the
megaplex had stadium seating (for unobstructed views) and comfortable
easy chairs, and it offered more films and superior sight and sound. Despite
these improved offerings, the megaplex’s operating costs are still lower than
the multiplex’s. This is because the megaplex’s location outside city centers
—the key cost factor—is much cheaper; its size gives it economies in
purchasing and operations and more leverage with film distributors. And
with twenty-four screens playing every available movie on the market, the
place, and not the movie, becomes the draw.
In the late 1990s, average per-customer revenues at AMC megaplexes
were 8.8 percent above those of the average multiplex theater. The cinema
clearance zones of movie theaters—the radius of the area from which
people will come to the cinema—jumped from two miles in the mid-1990s
to five miles for AMC’s megaplex.27 Between 1995 and 2001, overall
motion picture attendance grew from 1.26 billion to 1.49 billion.
Megaplexes constituted only 15 percent of US movie screens, but they
accounted for 38 percent of all box-office revenues.
The success of the blue ocean created by AMC caused other industry
players to imitate it. Too many megaplexes were built in too short a time,
however, and many of them had closed by 2000 because of a slowing


economy. Again the industry is ripe for a new blue ocean to be created.
People love to go out and generally enjoy being entertained. With the
increasing prevalence of easily downloadable films from the likes of
Netflix, iTunes, and Amazon, the pressure is on for movie theaters to once
again reinvent themselves to recapture people’s love for an enjoyable
entertainment experience.
This is only a sketch of the American movie theater industry, but the
same general patterns appear as in the other examples. This has not been a
perpetually attractive industry. There has not been a perpetually excellent
company. The creation of blue oceans has been a key driving factor in a
company’s and the industry’s profitable growth trajectory, with blue oceans
being created here mainly by incumbents such as AMC and Palace
Theaters. As history reveals, AMC created a blue ocean in the US movie
theater industry first with the multiplex and then with megaplex, twice
resetting the course of development for the entire industry and twice
bringing its own profitability and growth to a new level. At the heart of
these blue oceans was not technology innovation per se but value-driven
innovation, what we call value innovation.
Looking across the sketches of these three industries, we find that whether
or not a company can attain sustained profitable growth depends largely on
whether it can continuously stay in the forefront during consecutive rounds
of blue ocean creation. Lasting excellence has scarcely been achievable for
any company; to date, no company has been able to lead journeys into blue
oceans continuously over the long run. However, companies with powerful
names are often those that have been capable of reinventing themselves by
repeatedly creating new market space. In this sense, there have been no
perpetually excellent companies up until now, but companies can hope to
maintain excellence by adhering to excellent strategic practice. With
marginal deviations, the pattern of blue ocean creation exemplified by these
three representative industries is consistent with what we observed in the
other industries in our study. By articulating the logic of blue ocean strategy
and providing systematic tools and frameworks to act on, this book aims to
help alter business history by making the creation of blue oceans a
systematic process that is repeatable.


OceanofPDF.com


APPENDIX B
Value Innovation
A Reconstructionist View of Strategy
THERE ARE BASICALLY TWO DISTINCT VIEWS on how industry structure is
related to strategic actions of industrial players.
The structuralist view of strategy has its roots in industrial organization
(IO) economics.1 The model of industrial organization analysis proposes a
structure-conduct-performance paradigm, which suggests a causal flow
from market structure to conduct and performance. Market structure, given
by supply and demand conditions, shapes sellers’ and buyers’ conduct,
which, in turn, determines end performance.2 Systemwide changes are
induced by factors that are external to the market structure, such as
fundamental changes in basic economic conditions and technological
breakthroughs.3
The reconstructionist view of strategy, on the other hand, is built on the
theory of endogenous growth. The theory traces back to Joseph A.
Schumpeter’s initial observation that the forces that change economic
structure and industry landscapes can come from within the system.4
Schumpeter argues that innovation can happen endogenously and that its
main source is the creative entrepreneur.5 Schumpeterian innovation is still
black-boxed, however, because it is the product of the ingenuity of
entrepreneurs and cannot be reproduced systematically. Schumpeterian
