# Appendix B

innovation also assumes destruction in that it sees the new incessantly
destroying the old.
More recently, the new growth theory made advances on this front by
showing that innovation can be replicable endogenously via an
understanding of the patterns or recipes behind innovation.6 In essence, this
theoretical advancement separated the recipe for innovation—or the pattern
of knowledge and ideas behind it—from Schumpeter’s lone entrepreneur,
opening the way for the systematic reproduction of innovation. However,
despite this important advance, we still lack an understanding of what those
recipes or patterns are. Absent this, knowledge and ideas cannot be
deployed in action to produce innovation and growth at the firm level.
The reconstructionist view takes off where the new growth theory left
off. Building on the new growth theory, the reconstructionist view suggests
how knowledge and ideas are deployed in the process of creation to
produce endogenous growth for the firm. In particular, it proposes that such
a process of creation can occur in any organization at any time by the
cognitive reconstruction of existing data and market elements in a
fundamentally new way.
These two views—the structuralist and the reconstructionist—have
important implications for how companies act on strategy. The structuralist
view (or environmental determinism) often leads to competition-based
strategic thinking. Taking market structure as given, it drives companies to
try to carve out a defensible position against the competition in the existing
market space. To sustain themselves in the marketplace, practitioners of
strategy focus on building advantages over the competition, usually by
assessing what competitors do and striving to do it better. Here, grabbing a
bigger share of the market is seen as a zero-sum game in which one
company’s gain is achieved at another company’s loss. Hence, competition,
the supply side of the equation, becomes the defining variable of strategy.
Such strategic thinking leads firms to divide industries into attractive and
unattractive ones and to decide accordingly whether or not to enter. After it
is in an industry, a firm chooses a distinctive cost or differentiation position
that best matches its internal systems and capabilities to counter the
competition.7 Here, cost and value are seen as trade-offs. Because the total
profit level of the industry is also determined exogenously by structural


factors, firms principally seek to capture and redistribute wealth instead of
creating wealth. They focus on dividing up the red ocean, where growth is
increasingly limited.
To reconstructionist eyes, however, the strategic challenge looks very
different. Recognizing that structure and market boundaries exist only in
managers’ minds, practitioners who hold this view do not let existing
market structures limit their thinking. To them, extra demand is out there,
largely untapped. The crux of the problem is how to create it. This, in turn,
requires a shift of attention from supply to demand, from a focus on
competing to a focus on value innovation—that is, the creation of
innovative value to unlock new demand. With this new focus in mind, firms
can hope to accomplish the journey of discovery by looking systematically
across established boundaries of competition and reordering existing
elements in different markets to reconstruct them into a new market space
where a new level of demand is generated.8
In the reconstructionist view, there is scarcely any attractive or
unattractive industry per se because the level of industry attractiveness can
be altered through companies’ conscientious efforts of reconstruction. As
market structure is changed in the reconstruction process, so are best-
practice rules of the game. Competition in the old game is therefore
rendered irrelevant. By stimulating the demand side of the economy, the
strategy of value innovation expands existing markets and creates new ones.
Value innovators achieve a leap in value by creating new wealth rather than
necessarily at the expense of competitors in the traditional sense. In this
way, value innovation goes beyond creative destruction that displaces and,
hence, destructs the players in existing markets. It also brings
nondestructive creation through which it either expands the existing market
boundaries or creates new market spaces. Such a strategy therefore allows
firms to largely play a non– zero-sum game, with high payoff possibilities.
How, then, does reconstruction, such as what we see in Cirque du Soleil,
differ from the “combination” and “recombination” that have been
discussed in the innovation literature?9 Schumpeter, for example, sees
innovation as a “new combination of productive means.”
We have seen in the example of Cirque du Soleil a focus on the demand
side, whereas recombination is about recombining existing technologies or


productive means, often focusing on the supply side. The basic building
blocks for reconstruction are buyer value elements that reside across
existing industry boundaries. They are not technologies nor methods of
production.
By focusing on the supply side, recombination tends to seek an
innovative solution to the existing problem, which, when achieved, leads to
displacement and hence creative destruction. Looking at the demand side,
in contrast, reconstruction breaks away from the cognitive bounds set by the
existing rules of competition. It focuses on redefining the existing problem
itself, which tends to produce creative destruction along with
nondestructive creation.10 Cirque du Soleil, for example, is not about
offering a better circus by recombining existing knowledge or technologies
about acts and performances. Rather, it is about reconstructing existing
buyer value elements to create a new form of entertainment that offers the
fun and thrill of the circus with the intellectual sophistication of the theater.
Reconstruction reshapes the boundary and the structure of an industry
and creates a blue ocean of new market space. Recombination, on the other
hand, tends to maximize technological possibilities to discover innovative
solutions to a given and known problem.11
OceanofPDF.com


APPENDIX C
The Market Dynamics of Value Innovation
THE MARKET DYNAMICS OF VALUE INNOVATION stand in stark contrast with
the conventional practice of technology innovation. The latter typically sets
high prices, limits access, and initially engages in price skimming to earn a
premium on the innovation and only later focuses on lowering prices and
costs to retain market share and discourage imitators.
However, in a world of nonrival and nonexcludable goods, such as
knowledge and ideas that are imbued with the potential of economies of
scale, learning, and increasing returns, the importance of volume, price, and
cost grows in an unprecedented way.1 Under these conditions, companies
would do well to capture the mass of target buyers from the outset and
expand the size of the market by offering radically superior value at price
points accessible to them.
As shown in figure C-1, value innovation radically increases the appeal of
a good, shifting the demand curve from D1 to D2. The price is set
strategically and, as with the Swatch example, is shifted from P1 to P2 to
capture the mass of buyers in the expanded market. This increases the
quantity sold from Q1 to Q2 and builds strong brand recognition, for
unprecedented value.
FIGURE C-1
The market dynamics of value innovation
