# Appendix C

The company, however, engages in target costing to simultaneously
reduce the long-run average cost curve from LRAC1 to LRAC2 to expand
its ability to profit and to discourage free riding and imitation. Hence, buyers
receive a leap in value, shifting the consumer surplus from axb to eyf. And
the company earns a leap in profit and growth, shifting the profit zone from
abcd to efgh.
The rapid brand recognition built by the company as a result of the
unprecedented value offered in the marketplace, combined with the
simultaneous drive to lower costs, makes the competition nearly irrelevant
and makes it hard to catch up, as economies of scale, learning, and
increasing returns kick in.2 What follows is the emergence of win-win


market dynamics, where companies earn dominant positions while buyers
also come out big winners.
Traditionally, firms with monopolistic positions have been associated with
two social welfare loss activities. First, to maximize their profits, companies
set prices high. This prohibits those customers who, although desiring the
product, cannot afford to buy it. Second, lacking viable competition, firms
with monopolistic positions often do not focus on efficiency and cost
reduction and hence consume more scarce resources. As figure C-2 shows,
under conventional monopolistic practice, the price level is raised from P1
under perfect competition to P2 under monopoly. Consequently, demand
drops from Q1 to Q2. At this level of demand, the monopolist increases its
profits by the area R, as opposed to the situation of perfect competition.
Because of the artificially high price imposed on consumers, the consumer
surplus decreases from area C+R+D to area C. Meanwhile, the monopolistic
practice, by consuming more of the society’s resources, also incurs a
deadweight loss of area D for the society at large. Monopolistic profits,
therefore, are achieved at the expense of consumers and society at large.
FIGURE C-2
From perfect competition to monopolist practice


Blue ocean strategy, on the other hand, works against this sort of price
skimming, which is common to traditional monopolists. The focus of blue
ocean strategy is not on restricting output at a high price but rather on
creating new aggregate demand through a leap in buyer value at an
accessible price. This creates a strong incentive not only to reduce costs to
the lowest possible level at the start but also to keep it that way over time to
discourage potential free-riding imitators. In this way, buyers win and the
society benefits from improved efficiency. This creates a win-win scenario.
A breakthrough in value is achieved for buyers, for the company, and for
society at large.
OceanofPDF.com


Notes
OceanofPDF.com
