

---PAGE BREAK---

Thank you for purchasing this Free Press eBook.
Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books from
Free Press and Simon & Schuster.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com


---PAGE BREAK---



---PAGE BREAK---

Contents
Introduction
Preface
Chapter 1 Competitive Strategy: The Core Concepts
THE STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS OF INDUSTRIES
Industry Structure and Buyer Needs
Industry Structure and the Supply/Demand Balance
GENERIC COMPETITIVE STRATEGIES
Cost Leadership
Differentiation
Focus
Stuck in the Middle
Pursuit of More Than One Generic Strategy
Sustainability
Generic Strategies and Industry Evolution
Generic Strategies and Organizational Structure
Generic Strategies and the Strategic Planning Process
OVERVIEW OF THIS BOOK
PART I PRINCIPLES OF COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
Chapter 2 The Value Chain and Competitive Advantage
THE VALUE CHAIN
Identifying Value Activities
Deﬁning the Value Chain
Linkages within The Value Chain


---PAGE BREAK---

Vertical Linkages
The Buyer’s Value Chain
COMPETITIVE SCOPE AND THE VALUE CHAIN
Segment Scope
Vertical Scope
Geographic Scope
Industry Scope
Coalitions and Scope
Competitive Scope and Business Deﬁnition
The Value Chain and Industry Structure
THE VALUE CHAIN AND ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
Chapter 3 Cost Advantage
THE VALUE CHAIN AND COST ANALYSIS
Deﬁning the Value Chain for Cost Analysis
Assigning Costs and Assets
First Cut Analysis of Costs
COST BEHAVIOR
Cost Drivers
The Cost of Purchased Inputs
Segment Cost Behavior
Cost Dynamics
COST ADVANTAGE
Determining the Relative Cost of Competitors
Gaining Cost Advantage
Sustainability of Cost Advantage
Implementation and Cost Advantage
Pitfalls in Cost Leadership Strategies
STEPS IN STRATEGIC COST ANALYSIS
Chapter 4 Differentiation


---PAGE BREAK---

SOURCES OF DIFFERENTIATION
Differentiation and The Value Chain
Drivers of Uniqueness
THE COST OF DIFFERENTIATION
BUYER VALUE AND DIFFERENTIATION
Buyer Value
The Value Chain and Buyer Value
Lowering Buyer Cost
Raising Buyer Performance
Buyer Perception of Value
Buyer Value and the Real Buyer
Buyer Purchase Criteria
Identifying Purchase Criteria
DIFFERENTIATION STRATEGY
Routes to Differentiation
The Sustainability of Differentiation
Pitfalls in Differentiation
STEPS IN DIFFERENTIATION
Chapter 5 Technology and Competitive Advantage
TECHNOLOGY AND COMPETITION
Technology and The Value Chain
Technology and Competitive Advantage
Technology and Industry Structure
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY
The Choice of Technologies to Develop
Technological Leadership or Followership
Licensing of Technology
TECHNOLOGICAL EVOLUTION


---PAGE BREAK---

Continuous Versus Discontinuous Technological Evolution
Forecasting Technological Evolution
FORMULATING TECHNOLOGICAL STRATEGY
Chapter 6 Competitor Selection
THE STRATEGIC BENEFITS OF COMPETITORS
Increasing Competitive Advantage
Improving Current Industry Structure
Aiding Market Development
Deterring Entry
WHAT MAKES A “GOOD” COMPETITOR?
Tests of a Good Competitor
“Good” Market Leaders
Diagnosing Good Competitors
INFLUENCING THE PATTERN OF COMPETITORS
Damaging Good Competitors in Battling Bad Ones
Changing Bad Competitors into Good Ones
THE OPTIMAL MARKET CONFIGURATION
The Optimal Competitor Conﬁguration
Maintaining Competitor Viability
Moving toward the Ideal Competitor Conﬁguration
Maintaining Industry Stability
PITFALLS IN COMPETITOR SELECTION
PART II COMPETITIVE SCOPE WITHIN AN INDUSTRY
Chapter 7 Industry Segmentation and Competitive Advantage
BASES FOR INDUSTRY SEGMENTATION
Structural Bases For Segmentation
Segmentation Variables


---PAGE BREAK---

Finding New Segments
THE INDUSTRY SEGMENTATION MATRIX
Relationships Among Segmentation Variables
Combining Segmentation Matrices
INDUSTRY SEGMENTATION AND COMPETITIVE STRATEGY
The Attractiveness of a Segment
Segment Interrelationships
Segment Interrelationships and Broadly-Targeted Strategies
The Choice of Focus
The Feasibility of New Segments to Focus On
The Sustainability of a Focus Strategy
Pitfalls and Opportunities for Focusers and Broadly-Targeted
Competitors
INDUSTRY SEGMENTATION AND INDUSTRY DEFINITION
Chapter 8 Substitution
IDENTIFYING SUBSTITUTES
THE ECONOMICS OF SUBSTITUTION
Relative Value/Price
Switching Costs
Buyer Propensity to Substitute
Segmentation and Substitution
CHANGES IN THE SUBSTITUTION THREAT
Substitution and Overall Industry Demand
Substitution and Industry Structure
THE PATH OF SUBSTITUTION
Segmentation and the Substitution Path
Substitution Forecasting Models
SUBSTITUTION AND COMPETITIVE STRATEGY


---PAGE BREAK---

Promoting Substitution
Defense Against Substitutes
Industry Versus Firm Substitution Strategy
Pitfalls in Strategy Against Substitutes
PART 
III 
CORPORATE 
STRATEGY 
AND 
COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGE
Chapter 9 Interrelationships among Business Units
THE GROWING IMPORTANCE OF HORIZONTAL STRATEGY
INTERRELATIONSHIPS AMONG BUSINESS UNITS
TANGIBLE INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Sharing and Competitive Advantage
The Costs of Sharing
Difﬁculty of Matching
Identifying Tangible Interrelationships
INTANGIBLE INTERRELATIONSHIPS
COMPETITOR INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Multipoint Competitors in Unrelated Industries
Multipoint Competition in Related Industries
Competitors with Different Patterns of Interrelationships
Forecasting Potential Competitors
Chapter 10 Horizontal Strategy
THE NEED FOR EXPLICIT HORIZONTAL STRATEGY
Formulating Horizontal Strategy
INTERRELATIONSHIPS AND DIVERSIFICATION STRATEGY
Diversiﬁcation Based on Tangible Interrelationships
Diversiﬁcation Through Beachheads
Diversiﬁcation and Corporate Resources


---PAGE BREAK---

PITFALLS IN HORIZONTAL STRATEGY
Pitfalls in Ignoring Interrelationships
Pitfalls in Pursuing Interrelationships
Chapter 11 Achieving Interrelationships
IMPEDIMENTS TO ACHIEVING INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Sources of Impediments
Interrelationships and Equity
Differences in Impediments among Firms
ORGANIZATIONAL MECHANISMS FOR ACHIEVING INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Horizontal Structure
Horizontal Systems
Horizontal Human Resource Practices
Horizontal Conﬂict Resolution Processes
The Corporate Role in Facilitating Interrelationships
Interrelationships and the Mode of Diversiﬁcation
MANAGING HORIZONTAL ORGANIZATION
Promising Examples
Japanese Firms and Interrelationships
A New Organizational Form
Chapter 12 Complementary Products and Competitive Advantage
CONTROL OVER COMPLEMENTARY PRODUCTS
Competitive Advantages From Controlling Complements
Problems of Controlling Complements
Control Over Complements and Industry Evolution
Identifying Strategically Important Complements
BUNDLING
Competitive Advantages of Bundling
Risks of Bundling


---PAGE BREAK---

Bundled Versus Unbundled Strategies
Bundling and Industry Evolution
Strategic Implications of Bundling
CROSS SUBSIDIZATION
Conditions Favoring Cross Subsidization
Risks of Cross Subsidization
Cross Subsidization and Industry Evolution
Strategic Implications of Cross Subsidization
COMPLEMENTS AND COMPETITIVE STRATEGY
PART IV IMPLICATIONS FOR OFFENSIVE AND DEFENSIVE
COMPETITIVE STRATEGY
Chapter 13 Industry Scenarios and Competitive Strategy under
Uncertainty
Scenarios as a Planning Tool
Industry Scenarios
CONSTRUCTING INDUSTRY SCENARIOS
Identifying Industry Uncertainties
Independent Versus Dependent Uncertainties
Identifying a Set of Scenarios
Consistency of Assumptions
Analyzing Scenarios
Introducing Competitor Behavior into Scenarios
The Number of Scenarios To Analyze
Attaching Probabilities to Scenarios
Summary Characteristics of Industry Scenarios
INDUSTRY SCENARIOS AND COMPETITIVE STRATEGY
Strategic Approaches Under Scenarios
Combined and Sequenced Strategies
The Choice of Strategy Under Industry Scenarios
Scenario Variables and Market Intelligence


---PAGE BREAK---

SCENARIOS AND THE PLANNING PROCESS
Corporate Role in Constructing Industry Scenarios
Industry Scenarios and Creativity
Chapter 14 Defensive Strategy
THE PROCESS OF ENTRY OR REPOSITIONING
DEFENSIVE TACTICS
Raising Structural Barriers
Increasing Expected Retaliation
Lowering the Inducement for Attack
EVALUATING DEFENSIVE TACTICS
DEFENSIVE STRATEGY
Deterrence
Response
Response to Price Cutting
Defense or Disinvest
Pitfalls in Defense
Chapter 15 Attacking an Industry Leader
CONDITIONS FOR ATTACKING A LEADER
AVENUES FOR ATTACKING LEADERS
Reconﬁguration
Redeﬁnition
Pure Spending
Alliances To Attack Leaders
IMPEDIMENTS TO LEADER RETALIATION
SIGNALS OF LEADER VULNERABILITY
Industry Signals
Leader Signals


---PAGE BREAK---

ATTACKING LEADERS AND INDUSTRY STRUCTURE
About the Author
Bibliography
Index


---PAGE BREAK---

To
C. Roland Christensen
and
Richard E. Caves


---PAGE BREAK---

Introduction
Competitive Advantage was published in 1985 as the essential companion to
Competitive Strategy. While Competitive Strategy concentrates on the
industry, Competitive Advantage concentrates on the ﬁrm. My quest was to
ﬁnd a way to conceptualize the ﬁrm that would expose the underpinnings of
competitive advantage and its sustainability.
At the book’s core is an activity-based theory of the ﬁrm. To compete in
any industry, companies must perform a wide array of discrete activities
such as processing orders, calling on customers, assembling products, and
training employees. Activities, narrower than traditional functions such as
marketing or R&D, are what generate cost and create value for buyers; they
are the basic units of competitive advantage.1
Competitive Advantage introduces the concept of the value chain, a
general framework for thinking strategically about the activities involved in
any business and assessing their relative cost and role in differentiation. The
difference between value, that is, what buyers are willing to pay for a
product or service, and the cost of performing the activities involved in
creating it, determines proﬁts. The value chain provides a rigorous way to
understand the sources of buyer value that will command a premium price,
and why one product or service substitutes for another. A strategy is an
internally consistent conﬁguration of activities that distinguishes a ﬁrm
from its rivals.
The activity-based view of the ﬁrm also provides the foundation for
thinking about strategy across multiple businesses. Competitive Advantage
explores the role of complementary products or services in competition and
competitive advantage in some industries.2 Activities also provide the basic
tool for examining the competitive advantages or disadvantages of


---PAGE BREAK---

diversiﬁcation. The ability to add value through competing in multiple
businesses can be understood in terms of sharing activities or transferring
proprietary skills across activities. This allows the elusive notion of synergy
to be made concrete and rigorous. Competitive Advantage explores these
questions as well as the organizational challenges of cross-business
collaboration.3 These questions are front and center again as a new wave of
mergers with questionable competitive value is occurring.
Finally, the activity-based view of the ﬁrm offers a powerful framework
for examining international strategy, or, more generally, competing across
locations. In competing internationally, a ﬁrm can spread activities to
different and multiple locations (I term this conﬁguration), while also
gaining potential competitive advantages by coordinating activities across
locations in a global network. I developed the international issues in a
separate book because of Competitive Advantage’s already formidable
length and complexity.4 This line of thinking led naturally to an interest in
the role of location itself in competitive advantage. The third book in this
trilogy, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, explores this question.5
Reﬂecting on Competitive Advantage 13 years after its publication, I am
ﬁrst and foremost heartened by the widespread acceptance of its essential
concepts. The phrases competitive advantage and sustainable competitive
advantage have become commonplace. The concept of activities has not
only been prominent in treatments of competition and strategy but also in
exploring more functional issues such as service management and the role
of information technology in competition. Activity-based costing is
becoming a new standard in management accounting, even though it has yet
to achieve its potential as a tool for strategy.
Looking back, Competitive Advantage is also a source of particular
satisfaction to me as a scholar. While Competitive Strategy drew on a rich
tradition in industrial economics, Competitive Advantage had no clear
antecedents in the literature on management or economics. Instead, it
emerged more from my attempt to solve a puzzle. How could we ﬁnd a
systematic way to examine the roots of competitive advantage that tied
directly to cost and differentiation and revealed the essential differences
between ﬁrms without intractable complexity? I am more persuaded now
than ever that activities provide the essential tool. As my work has
progressed, the concept has proven even more powerful than I anticipated.


---PAGE BREAK---

Why? Competitive Advantage offers a way to go beyond broad or
unidimensional characterizations of competitive advantage. Much early
work in the ﬁeld ascribed advantage to overall size or market share. This
was clearly too simple for several reasons. First, size and share are far more
important to cost or differentiation in some parts of the business than others.
Moreover, small- and medium-sized ﬁrms outperform larger ﬁrms in many
industries. Finally, even where size and share are associated with superior
performance, they are often outcomes of other competitive advantages, not
the causes.
Other attempts to explain competitive advantage—e.g., strengths and
weaknesses, key success factors, or distinctive competencies—all rightly
recognize that a ﬁrm is multidimensional, but offer no way to explore the
sources of advantage systematically or rigorously, much less link them to
proﬁtability. Competitive Advantage starts with the premise that competitive
advantage can arise from many sources, and shows how all advantage can
be connected to speciﬁc activities and the way that activities relate to each
other, to supplier activities, and to customer activities. The book also
addresses the underlying causes of advantage in an activity: why ﬁrms
achieve lower cost and how activities create tangible buyer value. It
highlights the fact that the most robust competitive positions often cumulate
from many activities. Advantage resting on a few activities is easier to
diagnose and often easier to imitate. Finally, activities and the value chain
provide a view of the ﬁrm as an interdependent system in which individual
parts must be internally consistent.
More broadly, Competitive Advantage has helped make strategy more
concrete and actionable. Activities, because they are what ﬁrms do, are
observable, tangible, and can be managed. Strategy is no longer just a broad
vision, but the particular conﬁguration of activities a ﬁrm adopts compared
to its rivals. A lowest-cost strategy involves one set of activity choices,
differentiation another.
Activities provide the bridge between strategy and implementation.
When strategy was deﬁned in terms of broad positioning concepts, a clear
separation between strategy and structure was meaningful and useful.
“What” and “how” were comparatively distinct. Armed with the recognition
that a ﬁrm is a collection of discrete activities, however, previously common
distinctions between strategy, tactics, and organization blur. Strategy


---PAGE BREAK---

becomes the particular array of activities aligned to deliver a particular mix
of value to a chosen array of customers. The conﬁguration of each activity
embodies the way that activity is performed, including the types of human
and physical assets employed and the associated organizational
arrangements. Competencies, then, become part of speciﬁc activities rather
than abstract and disconnected from cost and buyer value.
Functions that are normally thought of as organizational, such as
compensation systems, training, and even overall decisionmaking
architecture, are also activities—I call them support activities to distinguish
them from activities directly involved in producing, delivering, marketing,
or servicing a ﬁrm’s product. Support activities can be sources of
competitive advantage in their own right. The conﬁguration of activities for
competing in a particular way also shapes the appropriate contractual
relations with employees and other ﬁrms. Activities also provide a
framework for drawing appropriate organizational boundaries.
Activities, then, make strategy operational. Said differently, seeing the
ﬁrm as a collection of activities makes it clear that everyone in a ﬁrm is part
of strategy. It also makes clear why many employees must understand the
strategy, so that the rationale behind the conﬁguration of their activity and
how it relates to others is evident.
The ideas in Competitive Advantage are perhaps more challenging to
implement than those in Competitive Strategy, because they demand a deep
and textured look at all that the ﬁrm does. In a world where managers are
prone to look for simple prescriptions, detailed activity analysis was and is
challenging. Finding examples to illustrate the value chain at work
confronts practical limits. The complexity of a ﬁrm deﬁes capture in brief
examples. Yet in-depth case studies are hard to obtain, because of the
extraordinary disclosure required of participating companies. Most
successful companies view the detailed conﬁguration of their activities as
proprietary. Indeed, the difﬁculty of understanding activity conﬁgurations
from the outside is one important reason why competitive advantages are
sustainable.
Today, more than a decade after Competitive Advantage was published,
the ideas in the book are still percolating. In the competition and strategy
ﬁeld, where there has been a strong tendency to dichotomize external
factors (industry structure and positioning) and internal ones (core


---PAGE BREAK---

competencies, critical resources), some argue that the internal factors are
more 
important. 
Contrasting 
Competitive 
Strategy 
and 
core
competencies/critical resources misses the mark, and sets up a false
dichotomy.
It is simplistic to think that positions (product market competition) and
supposedly more enduring internal skills, reputation, and organizational
competencies can be disconnected. In fact, activities connect the two. Is a
ﬁrm a collection of activities or a set of resources and capabilities? Clearly,
a ﬁrm is both. But activities are what ﬁrms do, and they deﬁne the resources
and capabilities that are relevant. Activities provide the connections
between factor markets and product market positions. Activities are
observable, operational, and directly connected to cost and differentiation. It
is a particular strategy that makes most resources and capabilities valuable,
and their value is diminished by a different strategy. If resources or
capabilities are isolated from activities, strategy, and industry, companies
become inward-looking. There is much to learn from thinking about a
ﬁrm’s stock of assets, but not in isolation.
Competitive Advantage provides the architecture for describing and
assessing strategy, linking it to company behavior, and understanding the
sources of competitive advantage. It provides the foundation needed to go
deeper. Looking back, it is clear that Competitive Advantage has led me to
the next level of questions that are the subject of my current research: Why
do activity differences leading to distinct competitive positions arise? When
do tradeoffs occur between positions? What makes activities hard to
imitate? How do activities ﬁt together? How are unique positions developed
over time?6
One thing is certain. There is still more to learn about why ﬁrms
outperform one another. There is even more to be learned about the
processes by which ﬁrms discover unique strategies, put them in place, and
modify them when conditions change. The answers will be complex, and
good answers will involve integrative thinking.
Michael E. Porter
Brookline, Massachusetts
January 1998


---PAGE BREAK---

Preface
Competitive advantage is at the heart of a ﬁrm’s performance in competitive
markets. After several decades of vigorous expansion and prosperity,
however, many ﬁrms lost sight of competitive advantage in their scramble
for growth and pursuit of diversiﬁcation. Today the importance of
competitive advantage could hardly be greater. Firms throughout the world
face slower growth as well as domestic and global competitors that are no
longer acting as if the expanding pie were big enough for all.
This book is about how a ﬁrm can create and sustain a competitive
advantage. It grows out of my research and practice in competitive strategy
over the past decade. The book reﬂects my deepening belief that the failure
of many ﬁrms’ strategies stems from an inability to translate a broad
competitive strategy into the speciﬁc action steps required to gain
competitive advantage. The concepts in this book aim to build a bridge
between strategy formulation and implementation, rather than treating the
two subjects separately as has been characteristic of much of the writing in
the ﬁeld.
My earlier book, Competitive Strategy, set forth a framework for
analyzing industries and competitors. It also described three generic
strategies 
for 
achieving 
competitive 
advantage: 
cost 
leadership,
differentiation, and focus. Competitive Advantage is about how a ﬁrm
actually puts the generic strategies into practice. How does a ﬁrm gain a
sustainable cost advantage? How can it differentiate itself from
competitors? How does a ﬁrm choose a segment so that competitive
advantage grows out of a focus strategy? When and how can a ﬁrm gain
competitive advantage from competing with a coordinated strategy in
related industries? How is uncertainty introduced into the pursuit of


---PAGE BREAK---

competitive advantage? How can a ﬁrm defend its competitive position?
These are some of the questions that preoccupy this book.
Competitive advantage grows fundamentally out of the value a ﬁrm is
able to create for its buyers. It may take the form of prices lower than
competitors’ for equivalent beneﬁts or the provision of unique beneﬁts that
more than offset a premium price. This book uses a tool I call the value
chain to disaggregate buyers, suppliers, and a ﬁrm into the discrete but
interrelated activities from which value stems. The value chain will be a
recurring theme throughout the book, and with it the speciﬁc sources of
competitive advantage and how they relate to buyer value.
Competitive advantage is hardly a new subject. In one way or another,
many books about business deal directly or indirectly with it. The control of
cost has long been of concern, as has differentiation and segmentation. This
book cuts across many disciplines, because marketing, production, control,
ﬁnance, and many other activities in a ﬁrm have a role in competitive
advantage. Similarly, a long tradition of research in business policy and in
industrial economics bears on this subject. However, competitive advantage
cannot be truly understood without combining all these disciplines into a
holistic view of the entire ﬁrm. By examining all the sources of competitive
advantage in a broad and integrated way, I hope to provide a new
perspective that draws from, rather than substitutes for, previous research. It
is not possible to acknowledge all the contributions in the various
disciplines that have inﬂuenced in some way the ideas presented here. This
book, however, would not have been possible without them.
This book is written for practitioners who are responsible for a ﬁrm’s
strategy and must decide how to gain competitive advantage, as well as
those who seek to understand ﬁrms and their performance better. Potential
sources of competitive advantage are everywhere in a ﬁrm. Every
department, facility, branch ofﬁce, and other organizational unit has a role
that must be deﬁned and understood. All employees, regardless of their
distance from the strategy formulation process, must recognize their role in
helping a ﬁrm achieve and sustain competitive advantage. Scholars working
on the subject of competition outside the strategy ﬁeld also need to be able
to relate their research to some overall concept of competitive advantage. I
hope that all these audiences will ﬁnd this book valuable.


---PAGE BREAK---

I have had a great deal of help in writing this book. The Harvard
Business School has provided a uniquely fertile environment in which to
explore this topic. I have drawn heavily on the multidisciplinary tradition at
the School as well as the close connection between research and practice
that exists there. Dean John McArthur has not only been a friend and source
of encouragement to me for many years, but also extremely generous with
resources and in providing the opportunity to integrate my research closely
with my teaching responsibilities. Raymond Corey, Director of the Division
of Research, has also been a staunch and valued ally. My heritage in the
Business Policy group at Harvard has shaped my view of the subject, and I
am particularly grateful to C. Roland Christensen for his support and to
both he and Kenneth Andrews for sharing their wisdom with me. I have also
drawn heavily on my work in industrial economics, and the constant
intellectual stimulation of Richard Caves.
This book would not have been possible without the creative
contributions of a number of colleagues and friends who have worked
directly with me during the last several years. John R. Wells, Assistant
Professor at Harvard, has not only taught with me but contributed greatly to
the ideas in Chapters 3 and 9. John’s own research in competitive strategy
promises to make an important contribution to the ﬁeld. Pankaj Ghemawat,
Assistant Professor at Harvard, has also taught my strategy formulation
course with me as well as provided many useful comments. He is also doing
important research in the ﬁeld. Mark B. Fuller, formerly Assistant Professor
at Harvard and now at Monitor Company, has taught and worked with me
for many years. His ideas have had a major impact on Chapter 11 and have
inﬂuenced my thinking throughout the book. Catherine Hayden, also at
Monitor, has been a constant source of encouragement and comments. Her
ideas were of particular beneﬁt to me in Chapter 4.
Joseph B. Fuller has worked with me in research and course
development as well as in practicing in the strategy ﬁeld. He has been a
truly invaluable source of thoughtful comments and conceptual insights
throughout the writing of manuscript. Richard Rawlinson, Associates
Fellow at Harvard, has worked with me in my research as well as
commented perceptively on the entire book. Others who have given
generously of their time in commenting on the book and contributing ideas
include Mark Albion, Robert Eccles, Douglas Anderson, Elon Kohlberg,


---PAGE BREAK---

and Richard Meyer, all Harvard colleagues. Michael Bell, Thomas Craig,
Mary Kearney, and Mark Thomas have most ably worked with me in
putting these ideas into practice, and contributed greatly to my thinking in
the process. Jane Kenney Austin, Eric Evans, and Paul Rosetti were
invaluable in commenting or in researching important topic areas. Finally, I
have beneﬁted from comments from colleagues at other schools, including
Richard Schmalensee and John Stengrevics.
I could not have stood up under the demands of preparing this book
without my assistant Kathleen Svensson. She has not only organized my
activities but also supervised the preparation of the manuscript. I am also
grateful to Robert Wallace, my editor, as well as to others at The Free Press,
for their patience and support in dealing with a sometimes recalcitrant
author. I must also thank my many able Harvard MBA and doctoral students
who have both stimulated my thinking and been a source of joy in using
these ideas. I also want to thank Deborah Zylberberg for her constant
encouragement. Finally, I owe a great deal to a number of thoughtful
practitioners who have shared their concerns and problems with me.


---PAGE BREAK---

1
Competitive Strategy: The Core Concepts
Competition is at the core of the success or failure of ﬁrms. Competition
determines the appropriateness of a ﬁrm’s activities that can contribute to its
performance, such as innovations, a cohesive culture, or good
implementation. Competitive strategy is the search for a favorable
competitive position in an industry, the fundamental arena in which
competition occurs. Competitive strategy aims to establish a proﬁtable and
sustainable position against the forces that determine industry competition.
Two central questions underlie the choice of competitive strategy. The
ﬁrst is the attractiveness of industries for long-term proﬁtability and the
factors that determine it. Not all industries offer equal opportunities for
sustained proﬁtability, and the inherent proﬁtability of its industry is one
essential ingredient in determining the proﬁtability of a ﬁrm. The second
central question in competitive strategy is the determinants of relative
competitive position within an industry. In most industries, some ﬁrms are
much more proﬁtable than others, regardless of what the average
proﬁtability of the industry may be.
Neither question is sufﬁcient by itself to guide the choice of competitive
strategy. A ﬁrm in a very attractive industry may still not earn attractive
proﬁts if it has chosen a poor competitive position. Conversely, a ﬁrm in an
excellent competitive position may be in such a poor industry that it is not
very proﬁtable, and further efforts to enhance its position will be of little
beneﬁt.1 Both questions are dynamic; industry attractiveness and
competitive position change. Industries become more or less attractive over
time, and competitive position reﬂects an unending battle among


---PAGE BREAK---

competitors. Even long periods of stability can be abruptly ended by
competitive moves.
Both industry attractiveness and competitive position can be shaped by a
ﬁrm, and this is what makes the choice of competitive strategy both
challenging and exciting. While industry attractiveness is partly a reﬂection
of factors over which a ﬁrm has little inﬂuence, competitive strategy has
considerable power to make an industry more or less attractive. At the same
time, a ﬁrm can clearly improve or erode its position within an industry
through its choice of strategy. Competitive strategy, then, not only responds
to the environment but also attempts to shape that environment in a ﬁrm’s
favor.
These two central questions in competitive strategy have been at the core
of my research. My book Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing
Industries and Competitors presents an analytical framework for
understanding industries and competitors, and formulating an overall
competitive strategy. It describes the ﬁve competitive forces that determine
the attractiveness of an industry and their underlying causes, as well as how
these forces change over time and can be inﬂuenced through strategy. It
identiﬁes three broad generic strategies for achieving competitive
advantage. It also shows how to analyze competitors and to predict and
inﬂuence their behavior, and how to map competitors into strategic groups
and assess the most attractive positions in an industry. It then goes on to
apply the framework to a range of important types of industry environments
that I term structural settings, including fragmented industries, emerging
industries, industries undergoing a transition to maturity, declining
industries, and global industries. Finally, the book examines the important
strategic decisions that occur in the context of an industry, including vertical
integration, capacity expansion, and entry.
This book takes the framework in Competitive Strategy as a starting
point. The central theme of this book is how a ﬁrm can actually create and
sustain a competitive advantage in its industry—how it can implement the
broad generic strategies. My aim is to build a bridge between strategy and
implementation, rather than treat these two subjects independently or
consider implementation scarcely at all as has been characteristic of much
previous research in the ﬁeld.


---PAGE BREAK---

Competitive advantage grows fundamentally out of value a ﬁrm is able
to create for its buyers that exceeds the ﬁrm’s cost of creating it. Value is
what buyers are willing to pay, and superior value stems from offering
lower prices than competitors for equivalent beneﬁts or providing unique
beneﬁts that more than offset a higher price. There are two basic types of
competitive advantage: cost leadership and differentiation. This book
describes how a ﬁrm can gain a cost advantage or how it can differentiate
itself. It describes how the choice of competitive scope, or the range of a
ﬁrm’s activities, can play a powerful role in determining competitive
advantage. Finally, it translates these concepts, combined with those in my
earlier book, into overall implications for offensive and defensive
competitive strategy, including the role of uncertainty in inﬂuencing
strategic choices. This book considers not only competitive strategy in an
individual industry but also corporate strategy for the diversiﬁed ﬁrm.
Competitive advantage in one industry can be strongly enhanced by
interrelationships with business units competing in related industries, if
these interrelationships can actually be achieved. Interrelationships among
business units are the principal means by which a diversiﬁed ﬁrm creates
value, and thus provide the underpinnings for corporate strategy. I will
describe how interrelationships among business units can be identiﬁed and
translated into a corporate strategy, as well as how interrelationships can be
achieved in practice despite the organizational impediments to doing so that
are present in many diversiﬁed ﬁrms.
Though the emphases of this book and my earlier book are different,
they are strongly complementary. The emphasis of Competitive Strategy is
on industry structure and competitor analysis in a variety of industry
environments, though it contains many implications for competitive
advantage. This book begins by assuming an understanding of industry
structure and competitor behavior, and is preoccupied with how to translate
that understanding into a competitive advantage. Actions to create
competitive advantage often have important consequences for industry
structure and competitive reaction, however, and thus I will return to these
subjects frequently.
This book can be read independently of Competitive Strategy, but its
power to aid practitioners in formulating strategy is diminished if the reader
is not familiar with the core concepts presented in the earlier book. In this


---PAGE BREAK---

chapter, I will describe and elaborate on some of those concepts. The
discussion of the core concepts will also provide a good means of
introducing the concepts and techniques in this book. In the process, I will
address some of the most important questions that arise in applying the core
concepts in practice. Thus even readers familiar with my earlier book may
ﬁnd the review of interest.
The Structural Analysis of Industries
The ﬁrst fundamental determinant of a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability is industry
attractiveness. Competitive strategy must grow out of a sophisticated
understanding of the rules of competition that determine an industry’s
attractiveness. The ultimate aim of competitive strategy is to cope with and,
ideally, to change those rules in the ﬁrm’s favor. In any industry, whether it
is domestic or international or produces a product or a service,2 the rules of
competition are embodied in ﬁve competitive forces: the entry of new
competitors, the threat of substitutes, the bargaining power of buyers, the
bargaining power of suppliers, and the rivalry among the existing
competitors (see Figure 1–1).
The collective strength of these ﬁve competitive forces determines the
ability of ﬁrms in an industry to earn, on average, rates of return on
investment in excess of the cost of capital. The strength of the ﬁve forces
varies from industry to industry, and can change as an industry evolves. The
result is that all industries are not alike from the standpoint of inherent
proﬁtability. In industries where the ﬁve forces are favorable, such as
pharmaceuticals, soft drinks, and data base publishing, many competitors
earn attractive returns. But in industries where pressure from one or more of
the forces is intense, such as rubber, steel, and video games, few ﬁrms
command attractive returns despite the best efforts of management. Industry
proﬁtability is not a function of what the product looks like or whether it
embodies high or low technology, but of industry structure. Some very
mundane industries such as postage meters and grain trading are extremely
proﬁtable, while some more glamorous, high-technology industries such as
personal computers and cable television are not proﬁtable for many
participants.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 1–1. The Five Competitive Forces that Determine Industry Proﬁtability
The ﬁve forces determine industry proﬁtability because they inﬂuence
the prices, costs, and required investment of ﬁrms in an industry—the
elements of return on investment. Buyer power inﬂuences the prices that
ﬁrms can charge, for example, as does the threat of substitution. The power
of buyers can also inﬂuence cost and investment, because powerful buyers
demand costly service. The bargaining power of suppliers determines the
costs of raw materials and other inputs. The intensity of rivalry inﬂuences
prices as well as the costs of competing in areas such as plant, product
development, advertising, and sales force. The threat of entry places a limit
on prices, and shapes the investment required to deter entrants.
The strength of each of the ﬁve competitive forces is a function of
industry structure, or the underlying economic and technical characteristics
of an industry. Its important elements are shown in Figure 1–2.3 Industry
structure is relatively stable, but can change over time as an industry
evolves. Structural change shifts the overall and relative strength of the
competitive forces, and can thus positively or negatively inﬂuence industry
proﬁtability. The industry trends that are the most important for strategy are
those that affect industry structure.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 1–2. Elements of Industry Structure


---PAGE BREAK---

If the ﬁve competitive forces and their structural determinants were
solely a function of intrinsic industry characteristics, then competitive
strategy would rest heavily on picking the right industry and understanding
the ﬁve forces better than competitors. But while these are surely important
tasks for any ﬁrm, and are the essence of competitive strategy in some
industries, a ﬁrm is usually not a prisoner of its industry’s structure. Firms,
through their strategies, can inﬂuence the ﬁve forces. If a ﬁrm can shape
structure, it can fundamentally change an industry’s attractiveness for better
or for worse. Many successful strategies have shifted the rules of
competition in this way.
Figure 1–2 highlights all the elements of industry structure that may
drive competition in an industry. In any particular industry, not all of the
ﬁve forces will be equally important and the particular structural factors that
are important will differ. Every industry is unique and has its own unique
structure. The ﬁve-forces framework allows a ﬁrm to see through the
complexity and pinpoint those factors that are critical to competition in its
industry, as well as to identify those strategic innovations that would most
improve the industry’s—and its own—proﬁtability. The ﬁve-forces
framework does not eliminate the need for creativity in ﬁnding new ways of
competing in an industry. Instead, it directs managers’ creative energies
toward those aspects of industry structure that are most important to long-
run proﬁtability. The framework aims, in the process, to raise the odds of
discovering a desirable strategic innovation.
Strategies that change industry structure can be a double-edged sword,
because a ﬁrm can destroy industry structure and proﬁtability as readily as
it can improve it. A new product design that undercuts entry barriers or
increases the volatility of rivalry, for example, may undermine the long-run
proﬁtability of an industry, though the initiator may enjoy higher proﬁts
temporarily. Or a sustained period of price cutting can undermine
differentiation. In the tobacco industry, for example, generic cigarettes are a
potentially serious threat to industry structure. Generics may enhance the
price sensitivity of buyers, trigger price competition, and erode the high
advertising barriers that have kept out new entrants.4 Joint ventures entered
into by major aluminum producers to spread risk and lower capital cost may
have similarly undermined industry structure. The majors invited a number
of potentially dangerous new competitors into the industry and helped them


---PAGE BREAK---

overcome the signiﬁcant entry barriers to doing so. Joint ventures also can
raise exit barriers because all the participants in a plant must agree before it
can be closed down.
Often ﬁrms make strategic choices without considering the long-term
consequences for industry structure. They see a gain in their competitive
position if a move is successful, but they fail to anticipate the consequences
of competitive reaction. If imitation of a move by major competitors has the
effect of wrecking industry structure, then everyone is worse off. Such
industry “destroyers” are usually second-tier ﬁrms that are searching for
ways to overcome major competitive disadvantages, ﬁrms that have
encountered serious problems and are desperately seeking solutions, or
“dumb” competitors that do not know their costs or have unrealistic
assumptions about the future. In the tobacco industry, for example, the
Liggett Group (a distant follower) has encouraged the trend toward
generics.
The ability of ﬁrms to shape industry structure places a particular burden
on industry leaders. Leaders’ actions can have a disproportionate impact on
structure, because of their size and inﬂuence over buyers, suppliers, and
other competitors. At the same time, leaders’ large market shares guarantee
that anything that changes overall industry structure will affect them as
well. A leader, then, must constantly balance its own competitive position
against the health of the industry as a whole. Often leaders are better off
taking actions to improve or protect industry structure rather than seeking
greater competitive advantage for themselves. Such industry leaders as
Coca-Cola and Campbell’s Soup appear to have followed this principle.
Industry Structure and Buyer Needs
It has often been said that satisfying buyer needs is at the core of success
in business endeavor. How does this relate to the concept of industry
structural analysis? Satisfying buyer needs is indeed a prerequisite to the
viability of an industry and the ﬁrms within it. Buyers must be willing to
pay a price for a product that exceeds its cost of production, or an industry
will not survive in the long run. Chapter 4 will describe in detail how a ﬁrm
can differentiate itself by satisfying buyer needs better than its competitors.


---PAGE BREAK---

Satisfying buyer needs may be a prerequisite for industry proﬁtability,
but in itself is not sufﬁcient. The crucial question in determining
proﬁtability is whether ﬁrms can capture the value they create for buyers, or
whether this value is competed away to others. Industry structure
determines who captures the value. The threat of entry determines the
likelihood that new ﬁrms will enter an industry and compete away the
value, either passing it on to buyers in the form of lower prices or
dissipating it by raising the costs of competing. The power of buyers
determines the extent to which they retain most of the value created for
themselves, leaving ﬁrms in an industry only modest returns. The threat of
substitutes determines the extent to which some other product can meet the
same buyer needs, and thus places a ceiling on the amount a buyer is
willing to pay for an industry’s product. The power of suppliers determines
the extent to which value created for buyers will be appropriated by
suppliers rather than by ﬁrms in an industry. Finally, the intensity of rivalry
acts similarly to the threat of entry. It determines the extent to which ﬁrms
already in an industry will compete away the value they create for buyers
among themselves, passing it on to buyers in lower prices or dissipating it
in higher costs of competing.
Industry structure, then, determines who keeps what proportion of the
value a product creates for buyers. If an industry’s product does not create
much value for its buyers, there is little value to be captured by ﬁrms
regardless of the other elements of structure. If the product creates a lot of
value, structure becomes crucial. In some industries such as automobiles
and heavy trucks, ﬁrms create enormous value for their buyers but, on
average, capture very little of it for themselves through proﬁts. In other
industries such as bond rating services, medical equipment, and oil ﬁeld
services and equipment, ﬁrms also create high value for their buyers but
have historically captured a good proportion of it. In oil ﬁeld services and
equipment, for example, many products can signiﬁcantly reduce the cost of
drilling. Because industry structure has been favorable, many ﬁrms in the
oil ﬁeld service and equipment sector have been able to retain a share of
these savings in the form of high returns. Recently, however, the structural
attractiveness of many industries in the oil ﬁeld services and equipment
sector has eroded as a result of falling demand, new entrants, eroding
product differentiation, and greater buyer price sensitivity. Despite the fact


---PAGE BREAK---

that products offered still create enormous value for the buyer, both ﬁrm and
industry proﬁts have fallen signiﬁcantly.
Industry Structure and the Supply/Demand Balance
Another commonly held view about industry proﬁtability is that proﬁts
are a function of the balance between supply and demand. If demand is
greater than supply, this leads to high proﬁtability. Yet, the long-term
supply/demand balance is strongly inﬂuenced by industry structure, as are
the consequences of a supply/demand imbalance for proﬁtability. Hence,
even though short-term ﬂuctuations in supply and demand can affect short-
term proﬁtability, industry structure underlies long-term proﬁtability.
Supply and demand change constantly, adjusting to each other. Industry
structure determines how rapidly competitors add new supply. The height of
entry barriers underpins the likelihood that new entrants will enter an
industry and bid down prices. The intensity of rivalry plays a major role in
determining whether existing ﬁrms will expand capacity aggressively or
choose to maintain proﬁtability. Industry structure also determines how
rapidly competitors will retire excess supply. Exit barriers keep ﬁrms from
leaving an industry when there is too much capacity, and prolong periods of
excess capacity. In oil tanker shipping, for example, the exit barriers are
very high because of the specialization of assets. This has translated into
short peaks and long troughs of prices. Thus industry structure shapes the
supply/demand balance and the duration of imbalances.
The consequences of an imbalance between supply and demand for
industry proﬁtability also differs widely depending on industry structure. In
some industries, a small amount of excess capacity triggers price wars and
low proﬁtability. These are industries where there are structural pressures
for intense rivalry or powerful buyers. In other industries, periods of excess
capacity have relatively little impact on proﬁtability because of favorable
structure. In oil tools, ball valves, and many other oil ﬁeld equipment
products, for example, there has been intense price cutting during the recent
sharp downturn. In drill bits, however, there has been relatively little
discounting. Hughes Tool, Smith International, and Baker International are
good competitors (see Chapter 6) operating in a favorable industry


---PAGE BREAK---

structure. Industry structure also determines the proﬁtability of excess
demand. In a boom, for example, favorable structure allows ﬁrms to reap
extraordinary proﬁts, while a poor structure restricts the ability to capitalize
on it. The presence of powerful suppliers or the presence of substitutes, for
example, can mean that the fruits of a boom pass to others. Thus industry
structure is fundamental to both the speed of adjustment of supply to
demand and the relationship between capacity utilization and proﬁtability.
Generic Competitive Strategies
The second central question in competitive strategy is a ﬁrm’s relative
position within its industry. Positioning determines whether a ﬁrm’s
proﬁtability is above or below the industry average. A ﬁrm that can position
itself well may earn high rates of return even though industry structure is
unfavorable and the average proﬁtability of the industry is therefore modest.
The fundamental basis of above-average performance in the long run is
sustainable competitive advantage.5 Though a ﬁrm can have a myriad of
strengths and weaknesses vis-à-vis its competitors, there are two basic types
of competitive advantage a ﬁrm can possess: low cost or differentiation. The
signiﬁcance of any strength or weakness a ﬁrm possesses is ultimately a
function of its impact on relative cost or differentiation. Cost advantage and
differentiation in turn stem from industry structure. They result from a
ﬁrm’s ability to cope with the ﬁve forces better than its rivals.
The two basic types of competitive advantage combined with the scope
of activities for which a ﬁrm seeks to achieve them lead to three generic
strategies for achieving above-average performance in an industry: cost
leadership, differentiation, and focus. The focus strategy has two variants,
cost focus and differentiation focus. The generic strategies are shown in
Figure 1–3.
Each of the generic strategies involves a fundamentally different route to
competitive advantage, combining a choice about the type of competitive
advantage sought with the scope of the strategic target in which competitive
advantage is to be achieved. The cost leadership and differentiation
strategies seek competitive advantage in a broad range of industry
segments, while focus strategies aim at cost advantage (cost focus) or


---PAGE BREAK---

differentiation (differentiation focus) in a narrow segment. The speciﬁc
actions required to implement each generic strategy vary widely from
industry to industry, as do the feasible generic strategies in a particular
industry. While selecting and implementing a generic strategy is far from
simple, however, they are the logical routes to competitive advantage that
must be probed in any industry.
Figure 1–3. Three Generic Strategies
The notion underlying the concept of generic strategies is that
competitive advantage is at the heart of any strategy, and achieving
competitive advantage requires a ﬁrm to make a choice—if a ﬁrm is to
attain a competitive advantage, it must make a choice about the type of
competitive advantage it seeks to attain and the scope within which it will
attain it. Being “all things to all people” is a recipe for strategic mediocrity
and below-average performance, because it often means that a ﬁrm has no
competitive advantage at all.
Cost Leadership
Cost leadership is perhaps the clearest of the three generic strategies. In
it, a ﬁrm sets out to become the low-cost producer in its industry. The ﬁrm
has a broad scope and serves many industry segments, and may even
operate in related industries—the ﬁrm’s breadth is often important to its
cost advantage. The sources of cost advantage are varied and depend on the


---PAGE BREAK---

structure of the industry. They may include the pursuit of economies of
scale, proprietary technology, preferential access to raw materials, and other
factors I will describe in detail in Chapter 3. In TV sets, for example, cost
leadership requires efﬁcient size picture tube facilities, a low-cost design,
automated assembly, and global scale over which to amortize R&D. In
security guard services, cost advantage requires extremely low overhead, a
plentiful source of low-cost labor, and efﬁcient training procedures because
of high turnover. Low-cost producer status involves more than just going
down the learning curve. A low-cost producer must ﬁnd and exploit all
sources of cost advantage. Low-cost producers typically sell a standard, or
no-frills, product and place considerable emphasis on reaping scale or
absolute cost advantages from all sources.
If a ﬁrm can achieve and sustain overall cost leadership, then it will be
an above-average performer in its industry provided it can command prices
at or near the industry average. At equivalent or lower prices than its rivals,
a cost leader’s low-cost position translates into higher returns. A cost leader,
however, cannot ignore the bases of differentiation. If its product is not
perceived as comparable or acceptable by buyers, a cost leader will be
forced to discount prices well below competitors’ to gain sales. This may
nullify the beneﬁts of its favorable cost position. Texas Instruments (in
watches) and Northwest Airlines (in air transportation) are two low-cost
ﬁrms that fell into this trap. Texas Instruments could not overcome its
disadvantage in differentiation and exited the watch industry. Northwest
Airlines recognized its problem in time, and has instituted efforts to
improve marketing, passenger service, and service to travel agents to make
its product more comparable to those of its competitors.
A cost leader must achieve parity or proximity in the bases of
differentiation relative to its competitors to be an above-average performer,
even though it relies on cost leadership for its competitive advantage. Parity
in the bases of differentiation allows a cost leader to translate its cost
advantage directly into higher proﬁts than competitors’.6 Proximity in
differentiation means that the price discount necessary to achieve an
acceptable market share does not offset a cost leader’s cost advantage and
hence the cost leader earns above-average returns.
The strategic logic of cost leadership usually requires that a ﬁrm be the
cost leader, not one of several ﬁrms vying for this position.7 Many ﬁrms


---PAGE BREAK---

have made serious strategic errors by failing to recognize this. When there
is more than one aspiring cost leader, rivalry among them is usually ﬁerce
because every point of market share is viewed as crucial. Unless one ﬁrm
can gain a cost lead and “persuade” others to abandon their strategies, the
consequences for proﬁtability (and long-run industry structure) can be
disastrous, as has been the case in a number of petrochemical industries.
Thus cost leadership is a strategy particularly dependent on preemption,
unless major technological change allows a ﬁrm to radically change its cost
position.
Differentiation
The second generic strategy is differentiation. In a differentiation
strategy, a ﬁrm seeks to be unique in its industry along some dimensions
that are widely valued by buyers. It selects one or more attributes that many
buyers in an industry perceive as important, and uniquely positions itself to
meet those needs. It is rewarded for its uniqueness with a premium price.
The means for differentiation are peculiar to each industry.
Differentiation can be based on the product itself, the delivery system by
which it is sold, the marketing approach, and a broad range of other factors.
In construction equipment, for example, Caterpillar Tractor’s differentiation
is based on product durability, service, spare parts availability, and an
excellent dealer network. In cosmetics, differentiation tends to be based
more on product image and the positioning of counters in the stores. I will
describe how a ﬁrm can create sustainable differentiation in Chapter 4.
A ﬁrm that can achieve and sustain differentiation will be an above-
average performer in its industry if its price premium exceeds the extra
costs incurred in being unique. A differentiator, therefore, must always seek
ways of differentiating that lead to a price premium greater than the cost of
differentiating. A differentiator cannot ignore its cost position, because its
premium prices will be nulliﬁed by a markedly inferior cost position. A
differentiator thus aims at cost parity or proximity relative to its
competitors, by reducing cost in all areas that do not affect differentiation.
The logic of the differentiation strategy requires that a ﬁrm choose
attributes in which to differentiate itself that are different from its rivals’. A


---PAGE BREAK---

ﬁrm must truly be unique at something or be perceived as unique if it is to
expect a premium price. In contrast to cost leadership, however, there can
be more than one successful differentiation strategy in an industry if there
are a number of attributes that are widely valued by buyers.
Focus
The third generic strategy is focus. This strategy is quite different from
the others because it rests on the choice of a narrow competitive scope
within an industry. The focuser selects a segment or group of segments in
the industry and tailors its strategy to serving them to the exclusion of
others. By optimizing its strategy for the target segments, the focuser seeks
to achieve a competitive advantage in its target segments even though it
does not possess a competitive advantage overall.
The focus strategy has two variants. In cost focus a ﬁrm seeks a cost
advantage in its target segment, while in differentiation focus a ﬁrm seeks
differentiation in its target segment. Both variants of the focus strategy rest
on differences between a focuser’s target segments and other segments in
the industry. The target segments must either have buyers with unusual
needs or else the production and delivery system that best serves the target
segment must differ from that of other industry segments. Cost focus
exploits differences in cost behavior in some segments, while differentiation
focus exploits the special needs of buyers in certain segments. Such
differences imply that the segments are poorly served by broadly-targeted
competitors who serve them at the same time as they serve others. The
focuser can thus achieve competitive advantage by dedicating itself to the
segments exclusively. Breadth of target is clearly a matter of degree, but the
essence of focus is the exploitation of a narrow target’s differences from the
balance of the industry.8 Narrow focus in and of itself is not sufﬁcient for
above-average performance.
A good example of a focuser who has exploited differences in the
production process that best serves different segments is Hammermill
Paper. Hammermill has increasingly been moving toward relatively low-
volume, high-quality specialty papers, where the larger paper companies
with higher volume machines face a stiff cost penalty for short production


---PAGE BREAK---

runs. Hammermill’s equipment is more suited to shorter runs with frequent
setups.
A focuser takes advantage of suboptimization in either direction by
broadly-targeted competitors. Competitors may be underperforming in
meeting the needs of a particular segment, which opens the possibility for
differentiation 
focus. 
Broadly-targeted 
competitors 
may 
also 
be
overperforming in meeting the needs of a segment, which means that they
are bearing higher than necessary cost in serving it. An opportunity for cost
focus may be present in just meeting the needs of such a segment and no
more.
If a focuser’s target segment is not different from other segments, then
the focus strategy will not succeed. In soft drinks, for example, Royal
Crown has focused on cola drinks, while Coca-Cola and Pepsi have broad
product lines with many ﬂavored drinks. Royal Crown’s segment, however,
can be well served by Coke and Pepsi at the same time they are serving
other segments. Hence Coke and Pepsi enjoy competitive advantages over
Royal Crown in the cola segment due to the economies of having a broader
line.9
If a ﬁrm can achieve sustainable cost leadership (cost focus) or
differentiation (differentiation focus) in its segment and the segment is
structurally attractive, then the focuser will be an above-average performer
in its industry. Segment structural attractiveness is a necessary condition
because some segments in an industry are much less proﬁtable than others.
There is often room for several sustainable focus strategies in an industry,
provided that focusers choose different target segments. Most industries
have a variety of segments, and each one that involves a different buyer
need or a different optimal production or delivery system is a candidate for
a focus strategy. How to deﬁne segments and choose a sustainable focus
strategy is described in detail in Chapter 7.
Stuck in the Middle
A ﬁrm that engages in each generic strategy but fails to achieve any of
them is “stuck in the middle.” It possesses no competitive advantage. This
strategic position is usually a recipe for below-average performance. A ﬁrm


---PAGE BREAK---

that is stuck in the middle will compete at a disadvantage because the cost
leader, differentiators, or focusers will be better positioned to compete in
any segment. If a ﬁrm that is stuck in the middle is lucky enough to discover
a proﬁtable product or buyer, competitors with a sustainable competitive
advantage will quickly eliminate the spoils. In most industries, quite a few
competitors are stuck in the middle.
A ﬁrm that is stuck in the middle will earn attractive proﬁts only if the
structure of its industry is highly favorable, or if the ﬁrm is fortunate
enough to have competitors that are also stuck in the middle. Usually,
however, such a ﬁrm will be much less proﬁtable than rivals achieving one
of the generic strategies. Industry maturity tends to widen the performance
differences between ﬁrms with a generic strategy and those that are stuck in
the middle, because it exposes ill-conceived strategies that have been
carried along by rapid growth.
Becoming stuck in the middle is often a manifestation of a ﬁrm’s
unwillingness to make choices about how to compete. It tries for
competitive advantage through every means and achieves none, because
achieving different types of competitive advantage usually requires
inconsistent actions. Becoming stuck in the middle also afﬂicts successful
ﬁrms, who compromise their generic strategy for the sake of growth or
prestige. A classic example is Laker Airways, which began with a clear cost
focus strategy based on no-frills operation in the North Atlantic market,
aimed at a particular segment of the traveling public that was extremely
price-sensitive. Over time, however, Laker began adding frills, new
services, and new routes. It blurred its image, and suboptimized its service
and delivery system. The consequences were disastrous, and Laker
eventually went bankrupt.
The temptation to blur a generic strategy, and therefore become stuck in
the middle, is particularly great for a focuser once it has dominated its target
segments. Focus involves deliberately limiting potential sales volume.
Success can lead a focuser to lose sight of the reasons for its success and
compromise its focus strategy for growth’s sake. Rather than compromise
its generic strategy, a ﬁrm is usually better off ﬁnding new industries in
which to grow where it can use its generic strategy again or exploit
interrelationships.


---PAGE BREAK---

Pursuit of More Than One Generic Strategy
Each generic strategy is a fundamentally different approach to creating
and sustaining a competitive advantage, combining the type of competitive
advantage a ﬁrm seeks and the scope of its strategic target. Usually a ﬁrm
must make a choice among them, or it will become stuck in the middle. The
beneﬁts of optimizing the ﬁrm’s strategy for a particular target segment
(focus) cannot be gained if a ﬁrm is simultaneously serving a broad range of
segments (cost leadership or differentiation). Sometimes a ﬁrm may be able
to create two largely separate business units within the same corporate
entity, each with a different generic strategy. A good example is the British
hotel ﬁrm Trusthouse Forte, which operates ﬁve separate hotel chains each
targeted at a different segment. However, unless a ﬁrm strictly separates the
units pursuing different generic strategies, it may compromise the ability of
any of them to achieve its competitive advantage. A suboptimized approach
to competing, made likely by the spillover among units of corporate policies
and culture, will lead to becoming stuck in the middle.
Achieving cost leadership and differentiation are also usually
inconsistent, because differentiation is usually costly. To be unique and
command a price premium, a differentiator deliberately elevates costs, as
Caterpillar has done in construction equipment. Conversely, cost leadership
often requires a ﬁrm to forego some differentiation by standardizing its
product, reducing marketing overhead, and the like.
Reducing cost does not always involve a sacriﬁce in differentiation.
Many ﬁrms have discovered ways to reduce cost not only without hurting
their differentiation but while actually raising it, by using practices that are
both more efﬁcient and effective or employing a different technology.
Sometimes dramatic cost savings can be achieved with no impact on
differentiation at all if a ﬁrm has not concentrated on cost reduction
previously. However, cost reduction is not the same as achieving a cost
advantage. When faced with capable competitors also striving for cost
leadership, a ﬁrm will ultimately reach the point where further cost
reduction requires a sacriﬁce in differentiation. It is at this point that the
generic strategies become inconsistent and a ﬁrm must make a choice.
If a ﬁrm can achieve cost leadership and differentiation simultaneously,
the rewards are great because the beneﬁts are additive—differentiation leads


---PAGE BREAK---

to premium prices at the same time that cost leadership implies lower costs.
An example of a ﬁrm that has achieved both a cost advantage and
differentiation in its segments is Crown Cork and Seal in the metal
container industry. Crown has targeted the so-called “hard to hold” uses of
cans in the beer, soft drink, and aerosol industries. It manufactures only
steel cans rather than both steel and aluminum. In its target segments,
Crown has differentiated itself based on service, technological assistance,
and offering a full line of steel cans, crowns, and canning machinery.
Differentiation of this type would be much more difﬁcult to achieve in other
industry segments which have different needs. At the same time, Crown has
dedicated its facilities to producing only the types of cans demanded by
buyers in its chosen segments and has aggressively invested in modern two-
piece steel canning technology. As a result, Crown has probably also
achieved low-cost producer status in its segments.
There are three conditions under which a ﬁrm can simultaneously
achieve both cost leadership and differentiation:
Competitors are stuck in the middle. Where competitors are stuck in the
middle, none is well enough positioned to force a ﬁrm to the point where
cost and differentiation become inconsistent. This was the case with Crown
Cork. Its major competitors were not investing in low-cost steel can
production technology, so Crown achieved cost leadership without having
to sacriﬁce differentiation in the process. Were its competitors pursuing an
aggressive cost leadership strategy, however, an attempt by Crown to be
both low-cost and differentiated might have doomed it to becoming stuck in
the middle. Cost reduction opportunities that did not sacriﬁce differentiation
would have already been adopted by Crown’s competitors.
While stuck-in-the-middle competitors can allow a ﬁrm to achieve both
differentiation and low cost, this state of affairs is often temporary.
Eventually a competitor will choose a generic strategy and begin to
implement it well, exposing the tradeoffs between cost and differentiation.
Thus a ﬁrm must choose the type of competitive advantage it intends to
preserve in the long run. The danger in facing weak competitors is that a
ﬁrm will begin to compromise its cost position or differentiation to achieve
both and leave itself vulnerable to the emergence of a capable competitor.


---PAGE BREAK---

Cost is strongly affected by share or interrelationships. Cost leadership
and differentiation may also be achieved simultaneously where cost position
is heavily determined by market share, rather than by product design, level
of technology, service provided, or other factors. If one ﬁrm can open up a
big market share advantage, the cost advantages of share in some activities
allow the ﬁrm to incur added costs elsewhere and still maintain net cost
leadership, or share reduces the cost of differentiating relative to
competitors (see Chapter 4). In a related situation, cost leadership and
differentiation can be achieved at the same time when there are important
interrelationships between industries that one competitor can exploit and
others cannot (see Chapter 9). Unmatched interrelationships can lower the
cost of differentiation or offset the higher cost of differentiation.
Nonetheless, simultaneous pursuit of cost leadership and differentiation is
always vulnerable to capable competitors who make a choice and invest
aggressively to implement it, matching the share or interrelationship.
A ﬁrm pioneers a major innovation. Introducing a signiﬁcant
technological innovation can allow a ﬁrm to lower cost and enhance
differentiation at the same time, and perhaps achieve both strategies.
Introducing new automated manufacturing technologies can have this
effect, as can the introduction of new information system technology to
manage logistics or design products on the computer. Innovative new
practices unconnected to technology can also have this effect. Forging
cooperative relations with suppliers can lower input costs and improve input
quality, for example, as described in Chapter 3.
The ability to be both low cost and differentiated is a function of being
the only ﬁrm with the new innovation, however. Once competitors also
introduce the innovation, the ﬁrm is again in the position of having to make
a tradeoff. Will its information system be designed to emphasize cost or
differentiation, for example, compared to the competitor’s information
system? The pioneer may be at a disadvantage if, in the pursuit of both low
cost and differentiation, its innovation has not recognized the possibility of
imitation. It may then be neither low cost nor differentiated once the
innovation is matched by competitors who pick one generic strategy.
A ﬁrm should always aggressively pursue all cost reduction
opportunities that do not sacriﬁce differentiation. A ﬁrm should also pursue


---PAGE BREAK---

all differentiation opportunities that are not costly. Beyond this point,
however, a ﬁrm should be prepared to choose what its ultimate competitive
advantage will be and resolve the tradeoffs accordingly.
Sustainability
A generic strategy does not lead to above-average performance unless it
is sustainable vis-à-vis competitors, though actions that improve industry
structure may improve industrywide proﬁtability even if they are imitated.
The sustainability of the three generic strategies demands that a ﬁrm’s
competitive advantage resists erosion by competitor behavior or industry
evolution. Each generic strategy involves different risks which are shown in
Table 1–1.
The sustainability of a generic strategy requires that a ﬁrm possess some
barriers that make imitation of the strategy difﬁcult. Since barriers to
imitation are never insurmountable, however, it is usually necessary for a
ﬁrm to offer a moving target to its competitors by investing in order to
continually improve its position. Each generic strategy is also a potential
threat to the others—as Table 1–1 shows, for example, focusers must worry
about broadly-targeted competitors and vice versa. The factors that lead to
sustainability of each of the generic strategies will be discussed extensively
in Chapters 3, 4, and 7.
TABLE 1–1 Risks of the Generic Strategies
RISKS OF COST
LEADERSHIP
RISKS OF DIFFERENTIATION
RISKS OF FOCUS
Cost leadership is not sustained
• competitors imitate
• technology changes
• other bases for cost
leadership erode
Differentiation is not sustained
• competitors imitate
• bases for differentiation
become less important to
buyers
The focus strategy is imitated
The target segment becomes
structurally unattractive
• structure erodes
• demand disappears
Proximity in differentiation is
lost
Cost proximity is lost
Broadly-targeted competitors
overwhelm the segment
• the segment’s differences
from other segments narrow
• the advantages of a broad
line increase


---PAGE BREAK---

Cost focusers achieve even
lower cost in segments
Differentiation focusers achieve
even greater differentiation in
segments
New focusers sub-segment the
industry
Table 1–1 can be used to analyze how to attack a competitor that
employs any of the generic strategies. A ﬁrm pursuing overall
differentiation, for example, can be attacked by ﬁrms who open up a large
cost gap, narrow the extent of differentiation, shift the differentiation
desired by buyers to other dimensions, or focus. Each generic strategy is
vulnerable to different types of attacks, as discussed in more detail in
Chapter 15.
In some industries, industry structure or the strategies of competitors
eliminate the possibility of achieving one or more of the generic strategies.
Occasionally no feasible way for one ﬁrm to gain a signiﬁcant cost
advantage exists, for example, because several ﬁrms are equally placed with
respect to scale economies, access to raw materials, or other cost drivers.
Similarly, an industry with few segments or only minor differences among
segments, such as low-density polyethylene, may offer few opportunities
for focus. Thus the mix of generic strategies will vary from industry to
industry.
In many industries, however, the three generic strategies can proﬁtably
coexist as long as ﬁrms pursue different ones or select different bases for
differentiation or focus. Industries in which several strong ﬁrms are
pursuing differentiation strategies based on different sources of buyer value
are often particulary proﬁtable. This tends to improve industry structure and
lead to stable industry competition. If two or more ﬁrms choose to pursue
the same generic strategy on the same basis, however, the result can be a
protracted and unproﬁtable battle. The worst situation is where several ﬁrms
are vying for overall cost leadership. The past and present choice of generic
strategies by competitors, then, has an impact on the choices available to a
ﬁrm and the cost of changing its position.
The concept of generic strategies is based on the premise that there are a
number of ways in which competitive advantage can be achieved,
depending on industry structure. If all ﬁrms in an industry followed the
principles of competitive strategy, each would pick different bases for
competitive advantage. While not all would succeed, the generic strategies


---PAGE BREAK---

provide alternate routes to superior performance. Some strategic planning
concepts have been narrowly based on only one route to competitive
advantage, most notably cost. Such concepts not only fail to explain the
success of many ﬁrms, but they can also lead all ﬁrms in an industry to
pursue the same type of competitive advantage in the same way—with
predictably disastrous results.
Generic Strategies and Industry Evolution
Changes in industry structure can affect the bases on which generic
strategies are built and thus alter the balance among them. For example, the
advent of electronic controls and new image developing systems has greatly
eroded the importance of service as a basis for differentiation in copiers.
Structural change creates many of the risks shown in Table 1–1.10
Structural change can shift the relative balance among the generic
strategies in an industry, since it can alter the sustainability of a generic
strategy or the size of the competitive advantage that results from it. The
automobile industry provides a good example. Early in its history, leading
automobile ﬁrms followed differentiation strategies in the production of
expensive touring cars. Technological and market changes created the
potential for Henry Ford to change the rules of competition by adopting a
classic overall cost leadership strategy, based on low-cost production of a
standard model sold at low prices. Ford rapidly dominated the industry
worldwide. By the late 1920s, however, economic growth, growing
familiarity with the automobile, and technological change had created the
potential for General Motors to change the rules once more—it employed a
differentiation strategy based on a wide line, features, and premium prices.
Throughout this evolution, focused competitors also continued to succeed.
Another long-term battle among generic strategies has occurred in
general merchandising. K Mart and other discounters entered with cost
leadership strategies against Sears and conventional department stores,
featuring low overhead and nationally branded merchandise. K Mart,
however, now faces competition from more differentiated discounters who
sell fashion-oriented merchandise, such as Wal-Mart. At the same time,
focused discounters have entered and are selling such products as sporting


---PAGE BREAK---

goods (Herman’s), health and beauty aids (CVS), and books (Barnes and
Noble). Catalog showrooms have also focused on appliances and jewelry,
employing low-cost strategies in those segments. Thus the bases for K
Mart’s competitive advantage have been compromised and it is having
difﬁculty outperforming the industry average.
Another more recent example of the jockeying among generic strategies
has occurred in vodka. Smirnoff has long been the differentiated producer in
the industry, based on early positioning as a high-class brand and heavy
supporting advertising. As growth has slowed and the industry has become
more competitive, however, private label vodkas and low price brands are
undermining Smirnoff’s position. At the same time, PepsiCo’s Stolichnaya
vodka has established an even more differentiated position than Smirnoff
through focus. Smirnoff is caught in a squeeze that is threatening its long-
standing superior performance. In response, it has introduced several new
brands, including a premium brand positioned against Stolichnaya.
Generic Strategies and Organizational Structure
Each generic strategy implies different skills and requirements for
success, which commonly translate into differences in organizational
structure and culture. Cost leadership usually implies tight control systems,
overhead minimization, pursuit of scale economies, and dedication to the
learning curve; these could be counterproductive for a ﬁrm attempting to
differentiate itself through a constant stream of creative new products.11
The organizational differences commonly implied by each generic
strategy carry a number of implications. Just as there are often economic
inconsistencies in achieving more than one generic strategy, a ﬁrm does not
want its organizational structure to be suboptimal because it combines
inconsistent practices. It has become fashionable to tie executive selection
and motivation to the “mission” of a business unit, usually expressed in
terms of building, holding, or harvesting market share. It is equally—if not
more—important to match executive selection and motivation to the generic
strategy being followed.
The concept of generic strategies also has implications for the role of
culture in competitive success. Culture, that difﬁcult to deﬁne set of norms


---PAGE BREAK---

and attitudes that help shape an organization, has come to be viewed as an
important element of a successful ﬁrm. However, different cultures are
implied by different generic strategies. Differentiation may be facilitated by
a culture encouraging innovation, individuality, and risk-taking (Hewlett-
Packard), while cost leadership may be facilitated by frugality, discipline,
and attention to detail (Emerson Electric). Culture can powerfully reinforce
the competitive advantage a generic strategy seeks to achieve, if the culture
is an appropriate one. There is no such thing as a good or bad culture per se.
Culture is a means of achieving competitive advantage, not an end in itself.
The link between generic strategy and organization also has implications
for the diversiﬁed ﬁrm. There is a tendency for diversiﬁed ﬁrms to pursue
the same generic strategy in many of their business units, because skills and
conﬁdence are developed for pursuing a particular approach to competitive
advantage. Moreover, senior management often gains experience in
overseeing a particular type of strategy. Emerson Electric is well known for
its pursuit of cost leadership in many of its business units, for example, as is
H. J. Heinz.
Competing with the same generic strategy in many business units is one
way in which a diversiﬁed ﬁrm can add value to those units, a subject I will
discuss in Chapter 9 when I examine interrelationships among business
units. However, employing a common generic strategy entails some risks
that should be highlighted. One obvious risk is that a diversiﬁed ﬁrm will
impose a particular generic strategy on a business unit whose industry (or
initial position) will not support it. Another, more subtle risk is that a
business unit will be misunderstood because of circumstances in its industry
that are not consistent with the prevailing generic strategy. Worse yet, such
business units may have their strategies undermined by senior management.
Since each generic strategy often implies a different pattern of investments
and different types of executives and cultures, there is a risk that a business
unit that is “odd man out” will be forced to live with inappropriate
corporate policies and targets. For example, an across-the-board cost
reduction goal or ﬁrmwide personnel policies can be disadvantageous to a
business unit attempting to differentiate itself on quality and service, just as
policies toward overhead appropriate for differentiation can undermine a
business unit attempting to be the low-cost producer.


---PAGE BREAK---

Generic Strategies and the Strategic Planning Process
Given the pivotal role of competitive advantage in superior performance,
the centerpiece of a ﬁrm’s strategic plan should be its generic strategy. The
generic strategy speciﬁes the fundamental approach to competitive
advantage a ﬁrm is pursuing, and provides the context for the actions to be
taken in each functional area. In practice, however, many strategic plans are
lists of action steps without a clear articulation of what competitive
advantage the ﬁrm has or seeks to achieve and how. Such plans are likely to
have overlooked the fundamental purpose of competitive strategy in the
process of going through the mechanics of planning. Similarly, many plans
are built on projections of future prices and costs that are almost invariably
wrong, rather than on a fundamental understanding of industry structure and
competitive advantage that will determine proﬁtability no matter what the
actual prices and costs turn out to be.
As part of their strategic planning processes, many diversiﬁed ﬁrms
categorize business units by using a system such as build, hold, or harvest.
These categorizations are often used to describe or summarize the strategy
of business units. While such categorizations may be useful in thinking
about resource allocation in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm, it is very misleading to
mistake them for strategies. A business unit’s strategy is the route to
competitive advantage that will determine its performance. Build, hold, and
harvest are the results of a generic strategy, or recognition of the inability to
achieve any generic strategy and hence of the need to harvest. Similarly,
acquisition and vertical integration are not strategies but means of achieving
them.
Another common practice in strategic planning is to use market share to
describe a business unit’s competitive position. Some ﬁrms go so far as to
set the goal that all their business units should be leaders (number one or
number two) in their industries. This approach to strategy is as dangerous as
it is deceptively clear. While market share is certainly relevant to
competitive position (due to scale economies, for example), industry
leadership is not a cause but an effect of competitive advantage. Market
share per se is not important competitively; competitive advantage is. The
strategic mandate to business units should be to achieve competitive
advantage. Pursuit of leadership for its own sake may guarantee that a ﬁrm


---PAGE BREAK---

never achieves a competitive advantage or that it loses the one it has. A goal
of leadership per se also embroils managers in endless debates over how an
industry should be deﬁned to calculate shares, obscuring once more the
search for competitive advantage that is the heart of strategy.
In some industries, market leaders do not enjoy the best performance
because industry structure does not reward leadership. A recent example is
Continental Illinois Bank, which adopted the explicit goal of market
leadership in wholesale lending. It succeeded in achieving this goal, but
leadership did not translate into competitive advantage. Instead, the drive
for leadership led to making loans that other banks would not, and to
escalating costs. Leadership also meant that Continental Illinois had to deal
with large corporations that are extremely powerful and price-sensitive
buyers of loans. Continental Illinois will be paying the price of leadership
for some years. In many other ﬁrms, such as Burlington Industries in fabrics
and Texas Instruments in electronics, the pursuit of leadership for its own
sake seems to have sometimes diverted attention from achieving and
maintaining competitive advantage.
Overview of This Book
Competitive Advantage describes the way a ﬁrm can choose and
implement a generic strategy to achieve and sustain competitive advantage.
It addresses the interplay between the types of competitive advantage—cost
and differentiation—and the scope of a ﬁrm’s activities. The basic tool for
diagnosing competitive advantage and ﬁnding ways to enhance it is the
value chain, which divides a ﬁrm into the discrete activities it performs in
designing, producing, marketing, and distributing its product. The scope of
a ﬁrm’s activities, which I term competitive scope, can have a powerful role
in competitive advantage through its inﬂuence on the value chain. I describe
how narrow scope (focus) can create competitive advantage through
tailoring the value chain, and how broader scope can enhance competitive
advantage through the exploitation of interrelationships among the value
chains that serve different segments, industries or geographic areas. While
this book addresses competitive advantage, it also sharpens the ability of the


---PAGE BREAK---

practitioner to analyze industries and competitors and hence supplements
my earlier book.
This book is organized into four parts. Part I describes the types of
competitive advantage and how a ﬁrm can achieve them. Part II discusses
competitive scope within an industry and its affect on competitive
advantage. Part III addresses competitive scope in related industries, or how
corporate strategy can contribute to the competitive advantage of business
units. Part IV develops overall implications for competitive strategy,
including ways of coping with uncertainty and to improve or defend
position.
Chapter 2 presents the-concept of the value chain, and shows how it can
be used as the fundamental tool in diagnosing competitive advantage. The
chapter describes how to disaggregate the ﬁrm into the activities that
underlie competitive advantage, and identify the linkages among activities
that are central to competitive advantage. It also shows the role of
competitive scope in affecting the value chain, and how coalitions with
other ﬁrms can substitute for performing activities in the chain internally.
The chapter also brieﬂy considers the use of the value chain in designing
organizational structure.
Chapter 3 describes how a ﬁrm can gain a sustainable cost advantage. It
shows how to use the value chain to understand the behavior of costs and
the implications for strategy. Understanding cost behavior is necessary not
only for improving a ﬁrm’s relative cost position but also for exposing the
cost of differentiation.
Chapter 4 describes how a ﬁrm can differentiate itself from its
competitors. The value chain provides a way to identify a ﬁrm’s sources of
differentiation, and the fundamental factors that drive it. The buyer’s value
chain is the key to understanding the underlying basis of differentiation—
creating value for the buyer through lowering the buyer’s cost or improving
buyer performance. Differentiation results from both actual uniqueness in
creating buyer value and from the ability to signal that value so that buyers
perceive it.
Chapter 5 explores the relationship between technology and competitive
advantage. Technology is pervasive in the value chain and plays a powerful
role in determining competitive advantage, in both cost and differentiation.
The chapter shows how technological change can inﬂuence competitive


---PAGE BREAK---

advantage as well as industry structure. It also describes the variables that
shape the path of technological change in an industry. The chapter then
describes how a ﬁrm can choose a technology strategy to enhance its
competitive advantage, encompassing the choice of whether to be a
technological leader and the strategic use of technology licensing. The idea
of ﬁrst-mover advantages and disadvantages is developed to highlight the
potential risks and rewards of pioneering any change in the way a ﬁrm
competes.
Chapter 6 discusses competitor selection, or the role of competitors in
enhancing competitive advantage and industry structure. The chapter shows
why the presence of the right competitors can be beneﬁcial to a ﬁrm’s
competitive position. It describes how to identify “good” competitors and
how to inﬂuence the array of competitors faced. It also describes how a ﬁrm
can decide what market share it should hold, an important issue since a very
large share is rarely optimal.
Chapter 7 begins Part II of the book and examines how industries can be
segmented. It draws on Chapters 3 and 4, since segments stem from
intraindustry differences in buyer needs and cost behavior. Segmentation is
clearly pivotal to the choice of focus strategies, as well as to assessing the
risks borne by broadly-targeted ﬁrms. The chapter describes how proﬁtable
and defensible focus strategies can be identiﬁed.
Chapter 8 discusses the determinants of substitution, and how a ﬁrm can
substitute its product for another or defend against a substitution threat.
Substitution, one of the ﬁve competitive forces, is driven by the interplay of
the relative value of a substitute compared to its cost, switching costs, and
the way individual buyers evaluate the economic beneﬁts of substitution.
The analysis of substitution is of central importance in ﬁnding ways to
widen industry boundaries, exposing industry segments that face a lower
substitution risk than others, and developing strategies to promote
substitution or defend against a substitution threat. Hence understanding
substitution is important both to broadening and to narrowing scope. The
analysis of substitution draws on Chapters 3 through 7.
Chapter 9 begins Part III of the book, and is the ﬁrst of four chapters
about corporate strategy for the diversiﬁed ﬁrm. The central concern of
corporate strategy is the way in which interrelationships among business
units can be used to create a competitive advantage. Chapter 9 explains the


---PAGE BREAK---

strategic logic of interrelationships. It describes the three types of
interrelationships among industries, and why they have grown in
importance over time. It then shows how the signiﬁcance of
interrelationships for competitive advantage can be assessed.
Chapter 10 addresses the implications of interrelationships for horizontal
strategy, or strategy that encompasses multiple distinct business units. A
ﬁrm with multiple business units in related industries must formulate
strategies at the group, sector, and corporate levels that coordinate the
strategies of individual units. The chapter describes the principles for doing
so, as well as the implications of interrelationships for diversiﬁcation into
new industries.
Chapter 11 describes how interrelationships among business units can
actually be achieved. Many organizational impediments stand in the way,
ranging from the protection of turf to faulty incentives. The chapter
identiﬁes these impediments in detail, and shows how they can be overcome
through what I call horizontal organization. Firms competing in related
industries must have a horizontal organization that links business units
together, that supplements but does not replace the hierarchical organization
to manage and control them.
Chapter 12 treats a special but important case of interrelationships,
where an industry’s product is used or purchased with complementary
products. The chapter describes the circumstances in which a ﬁrm must
control complementary products rather than let other ﬁrms supply them. It
also examines the strategy of bundling, or selling separate products together
as a single package, and the circumstances in which such a strategy is
appropriate. Finally, the chapter examines cross-subsidization, or pricing
complementary products to reﬂect the relationship among them rather than
setting each price separately.
Part IV of the book draws on the concepts in this book and Competitive
Strategy to develop broad principles for offensive and defensive strategy.
Chapter 13 discusses the problem of formulating competitive strategy in the
face of signiﬁcant uncertainty. It describes the concept of industry
scenarios, and shows how scenarios can be constructed to illuminate the
range of future industry structures that might occur. The chapter then
outlines the alternative ways in which a ﬁrm can cope with uncertainty in its
choice of strategy. Competitive strategy is more effective if there is explicit


---PAGE BREAK---

consideration of the range of industry scenarios that might occur, and
recognition of the extent to which strategies for dealing with different
scenarios are consistent or inconsistent.
Competitive Advantage concludes with a treatment of defensive and
offensive strategy. Chapters 14 and 15 serve to pull together many of the
other chapters. Chapter 14, on defensive strategy, describes the process by
which a ﬁrm’s position is challenged and the defensive tactics available to
deter or block a competitor. The chapter then develops the implications of
these ideas for a defensive strategy. Chapter 15 shows how to attack an
industry leader. It lays out the conditions a ﬁrm must meet to challenge a
leader, and the approaches to changing the rules of competition in order to
do so successfully. The same principles involved in attacking a leader can
be used in offensive strategy against any competitor.


---PAGE BREAK---

I
Principles of Competitive Advantage


---PAGE BREAK---

2
The Value Chain and Competitive Advantage
Competitive advantage cannot be understood by looking at a ﬁrm as a
whole. It stems from the many discrete activities a ﬁrm performs in
designing, producing, marketing, delivering, and supporting its product.
Each of these activities can contribute to a ﬁrm’s relative cost position and
create a basis for differentiation. A cost advantage, for example, may stem
from such disparate sources as a low-cost physical distribution system, a
highly efﬁcient assembly process, or superior sales force utilization.
Differentiation can stem from similarly diverse factors, including the
procurement of high quality raw materials, a responsive order entry system,
or a superior product design.
A systematic way of examining all the activities a ﬁrm performs and how
they interact is necessary for analyzing the sources of competitive
advantage. In this chapter, I introduce the value chain as the basic tool for
doing so. The value chain disaggregates a ﬁrm into its strategically relevant
activities in order to understand the behavior of costs and the existing and
potential sources of differentiation. A ﬁrm gains competitive advantage by
performing these strategically important activities more cheaply or better
than its competitors.
A ﬁrm’s value chain is embedded in a larger stream of activities that I
term the value system, illustrated in Figure 2–1. Suppliers have value chains
(upstream value) that create and deliver the purchased inputs used in a
ﬁrm’s chain. Suppliers not only deliver a product but also can inﬂuence a
ﬁrm’s performance in many other ways. In addition, many products pass
through the value chains of channels (channel value) on their way to the


---PAGE BREAK---

buyer. Channels perform additional activities that affect the buyer, as well
as inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s own activities. A ﬁrm’s product eventually becomes
part of its buyer’s value chain. The ultimate basis for differentiation is a
ﬁrm and its product’s role in the buyer’s value chain, which determines
buyer needs. Gaining and sustaining competitive advantage depends on
understanding not only a ﬁrm’s value chain but how the ﬁrm ﬁts in the
overall value system.
The value chains of ﬁrms in an industry differ, reﬂecting their histories,
strategies, and success at implementation. One important difference is that a
ﬁrm’s value chain may differ in competitive scope from that of its
competitors, representing a potential source of competitive advantage.
Serving only a particular industry segment may allow a ﬁrm to tailor its
value chain to that segment and result in lower costs or differentiation in
serving that segment compared to competitors. Widening or narrowing the
geographic markets served can also affect competitive advantage. The
extent of integration into activities plays a key role in competitive
advantage. Finally, competing in related industries with coordinated value
chains can lead to competitive advantage through interrelationships. A ﬁrm
may exploit the beneﬁts of broader scope internally or it may form
coalitions with other ﬁrms to do so. Coalitions are long-term alliances with
other ﬁrms that fall short of outright merger, such as joint ventures, licenses,
and supply agreements. Coalitions involve coordinating or sharing value
chains with coalition partners that broadens the effective scope of the ﬁrm’s
chain.
This chapter describes the fundamental role of the value chain in
identifying sources of competitive advantage. I begin by describing the
value chain and its component parts. Every ﬁrm’s value chain is composed
of nine generic categories of activities which are linked together in
characteristic ways. The generic chain is used to demonstrate how a value
chain can be constructed for a particular ﬁrm, reﬂecting the speciﬁc
activities it performs. I also show how the activities in a ﬁrm’s value chain
are linked to each other and to the activities of its suppliers, channels, and
buyers, and how these linkages affect competitive advantage. I then describe
how scope of a ﬁrm’s activities affects competitive advantage through its
impact on the value chain. Subsequent chapters will illustrate in detail how
the value chain can be used as a strategic tool to analyze relative cost


---PAGE BREAK---

position, differentiation, and the role of competitive scope in achieving
competitive advantage.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 2–1. The Value System


---PAGE BREAK---

The Value Chain
Every ﬁrm is a collection of activities that are performed to design,
produce, market, deliver, and support its product. All these activities can be
represented using a value chain, shown in Figure 2–2. A ﬁrm’s value chain
and the way it performs individual activities are a reﬂection of its history, its
strategy, its approach to implementing its strategy, and the underlying
economics of the activities themselves.1
The relevant level for constructing a value chain is a ﬁrm’s activities in a
particular industry (the business unit). An industry- or sector-wide value
chain is too broad, because it may obscure important sources of competitive
advantage. Though ﬁrms in the same industry may have similar chains the
value chains of competitors often differ. People Express and United Airlines
both compete in the airline industry, for example, but they have very
different value chains embodying signiﬁcant differences in boarding gate
operations, crew policies, and aircraft operations. Differences among
competitor value chains are a key source of competitive advantage. A ﬁrm’s
value chain in an industry may vary somewhat for different items in its
product line, or different buyers, geographic areas, or distribution channels.
The value chains for such subsets of a ﬁrm are closely related, however, and
can only be understood in the context of the business unit chain.2


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 2–2. The Generic Value Chain


---PAGE BREAK---

In competitive terms, value is the amount buyers are willing to pay for
what a ﬁrm provides them. Value is measured by total revenue, a reﬂection
of the price a ﬁrm’s product commands and the units it can sell. A ﬁrm is
proﬁtable if the value it commands exceeds the costs involved in creating
the product. Creating value for buyers that exceeds the cost of doing so is
the goal of any generic strategy. Value, instead of cost, must be used in
analyzing competitive position since ﬁrms often deliberately raise their cost
in order to command a premium price via differentiation.
The value chain displays total value, and consists of value activities and
margin. Value activities are the physically and technologically distinct
activities a ﬁrm performs. These are the building blocks by which a ﬁrm
creates a product valuable to its buyers. Margin is the difference between
total value and the collective cost of performing the value activities. Margin
can be measured in a variety of ways. Supplier and channel value chains
also include a margin that is important to isolate in understanding the
sources of a ﬁrm’s cost position, since supplier and channel margin are part
of the total cost borne by the buyer.
Every value activity employs purchased inputs, human resources (labor
and management), and some form of technology to perform its function.
Each value activity also uses and creates information, such as buyer data
(order entry), performance parameters (testing), and product failure
statistics. Value activities may also create ﬁnancial assets such as inventory
and accounts receivable, or liabilities such as accounts payable.
Value activities can be divided into two broad types, primary activities
and support activities. Primary activities, listed along the bottom of Figure
2–2, are the activities involved in the physical creation of the product and its
sale and transfer to the buyer as well as after-sale assistance. In any ﬁrm,
primary activities can be divided into the ﬁve generic categories shown in
Figure 2–2. Support activities support the primary activities and each other
by providing purchased inputs, technology, human resources, and various
ﬁrmwide functions. The dotted lines reﬂect the fact that procurement,
technology development, and human resource management can be
associated with speciﬁc primary activities as well as support the entire
chain. Firm intrastructure is not associated with particular primary activities
but supports the entire chain.


---PAGE BREAK---

Value activities are therefore the discrete building blocks of competitive
advantage. How each activity is performed combined with its economics
will determine whether a ﬁrm is high or low cost relative to competitors.
How each value activity is performed will also determine its contribution to
buyer needs and hence differentiation. Comparing the value chains of
competitors exposes differences that determine competitive advantage.3
An analysis of the value chain rather than value added is the appropriate
way to examine competitive advantage. Value added (selling price less the
cost of purchased raw materials) has sometimes been used as the focal point
for cost analysis because it was viewed as the area in which a ﬁrm can
control costs. Value added is not a sound basis for cost analysis, however,
because it incorrectly distinguishes raw materials from the many other
purchased inputs used in a ﬁrm’s activities. Also, the cost behavior of
activities cannot be understood without simultaneously examining the costs
of the inputs used to perform them. Moreover, value added fails to highlight
the linkages between a ﬁrm and its suppliers that can reduce cost or enhance
differentiation.
Identifying Value Activities
Identifying value activities requires the isolation of activities that are
technologically and strategically distinct. Value activities and accounting
classiﬁcations are rarely the same. Accounting classiﬁcations (e.g., burden,
overhead, direct labor) group together activities with disparate technologies,
and separate costs that are all part of the same activity.
PRIMARY ACTIVITIES
There are ﬁve generic categories of primary activities involved in
competing in any industry, as shown in Figure 2–2. Each category is
divisible into a number of distinct activities that depend on the particular
industry and ﬁrm strategy:
•  Inbound Logistics. Activities associated with receiving, storing, and
disseminating inputs to the product, such as material handling,


---PAGE BREAK---

warehousing, inventory control, vehicle scheduling, and returns to
suppliers.
•  Operations. Activities associated with transforming inputs into the
ﬁnal product form, such as machining, packaging, assembly,
equipment maintenance, testing, printing, and facility operations.
• Outbound Logistics. Activities associated with collecting, storing, and
physically distributing the product to buyers, such as ﬁnished goods
warehousing, material handling, delivery vehicle operation, order
processing, and scheduling.
• Marketing and Sales. Activities associated with providing a means by
which buyers can purchase the product and inducing them to do so,
such as advertising, promotion, sales force, quoting, channel selection,
channel relations, and pricing.
•  Service. Activities associated with providing service to enhance or
maintain the value of the product, such as installation, repair, training,
parts supply, and product adjustment.
Each of the categories may be vital to competitive advantage depending
on the industry. For a distributor, inbound and outbound logistics are the
most critical. For a service ﬁrm providing the service on its premises such
as a restaurant or retailer, outbound logistics may be largely nonexistant and
operations the vital category. For a bank engaged in corporate lending,
marketing and sales are a key to competitive advantage through the
effectiveness of the calling ofﬁcers and the way in which loans are
packaged and priced. For a high speed copier manufacturer, service
represents a key source of competitive advantage. In any ﬁrm, however, all
the categories of primary activities will be present to some degree and play
some role in competitive advantage.
SUPPORT ACTIVITIES
Support value activities involved in competing in any industry can be
divided into four generic categories, also shown in Figure 2–2. As with
primary activities, each category of support activities is divisible into a
number of distinct value activities that are speciﬁc to a given industry. In


---PAGE BREAK---

technology development, for example, discrete activities might include
component design, feature design, ﬁeld testing, process engineering, and
technology selection. Similarly, procurement can be divided into activities
such as qualifying new suppliers, procurement of different groups of
purchased inputs, and ongoing monitoring of supplier performance.
Procurement. Procurement refers to the function of purchasing inputs
used in the ﬁrm’s value chain, not to the purchased inputs themselves.
Purchased inputs include raw materials, supplies, and other consumable
items as well as assets such as machinery, laboratory equipment, ofﬁce
equipment, and buildings. Though purchased inputs are commonly
associated with primary activities, purchased inputs are present in every
value activity including support activities. For example, laboratory supplies
and independent testing services are common purchased inputs in
technology development, while an accounting ﬁrm is a common purchased
input in ﬁrm infrastructure. Like all value activities, procurement employs a
“technology,” such as procedures for dealing with vendors, qualiﬁcation
rules, and information systems.
Procurement tends to be spread throughout a ﬁrm. Some items such as
raw materials are purchased by the traditional purchasing department, while
other items are purchased by plant managers (e.g., machines), ofﬁce
managers (e.g., temporary help), salespersons (e.g., meals and lodging), and
even the chief executive ofﬁcer (e.g., strategic consulting). I use the term
procurement rather than purchasing because the usual connotation of
purchasing is too narrow among managers. The dispersion of the
procurement function often obscures the magnitude of total purchases, and
means that many purchases receive little scrutiny.
A given procurement activity can normally be associated with a speciﬁc
value activity or activities which it supports, though often a purchasing
department serves many value activities and purchasing policies apply
ﬁrmwide. The cost of procurement activities themselves usually represents
a small if not insigniﬁcant portion of total costs, but often has a large impact
on the ﬁrm’s overall cost and differentiation. Improved purchasing practices
can strongly affect the cost and quality of purchased inputs, as well as of
other activities associated with receiving and using the inputs, and
interacting with suppliers. In chocolate manufacturing and electric utilities,


---PAGE BREAK---

for example, procurement of cocoa beans and fuel respectively is by far the
most important determinant of cost position.
Technology Development. Every value activity embodies technology, be
it know-how, procedures, or technology embodied in process equipment.
The array of technologies employed in most ﬁrms is very broad, ranging
from those technologies used in preparing documents and transporting
goods to those technologies embodied in the product itself. Moreover, most
value activities use a technology that combines a number of different
subtechnologies involving different scientiﬁc disciplines. Machining, for
example, involves metallurgy, electronics, and mechanics.
Technology development consists of a range of activities that can be
broadly grouped into efforts to improve the product and the process. I term
this category of activities technology development instead of research and
development because R&D has too narrow a connotation to most managers.
Technology development tends to be associated with the engineering
department or the development group. Typically, however, it occurs in many
parts of a ﬁrm, although this is not explicitly recognized. Technology
development may support any of the numerous technologies embodied in
value activities, including such areas as telecommunications technology for
the order entry system, or ofﬁce automation for the accounting department.
It does not solely apply to technologies directly linked to the end product.
Technology development also takes many forms, from basic research and
product design to media research, process equipment design, and servicing
procedures. Technology development that is related to the product and its
features supports the entire chain, while other technology development is
associated with particular primary or support activities.
Technology development is important to competitive advantage in all
industries, holding the key in some. In steel, for example, a ﬁrm’s process
technology is the single greatest factor in competitive advantage. The
competitive implications of the array of technologies in the value chain are
treated in Chapter 5.
Human Resource Management. Human resource management consists of
activities involved in the recruiting, hiring, training, development, and
compensation of all types of personnel. Human resource management


---PAGE BREAK---

supports both individual primary and support activities (e.g., hiring of
engineers) and the entire value chain (e.g., labor negotiations). Human
resource management activities occur in different parts of a ﬁrm, as do other
support activities, and the dispersion of these activities can lead to
inconsistent policies. Moreover, the cumulative costs of human resource
management are rarely well understood nor are the tradeoffs in different
human resource management costs, such as salary compared to the cost of
recruiting and training due to turnover.
Human resource management affects competitive advantage in any ﬁrm,
through its role in determining the skills and motivation of employees and
the cost of hiring and training. In some industries it holds the key to
competitive advantage. The world’s leading accounting ﬁrm Arthur
Andersen, for example, draws a signiﬁcant competitive advantage from its
approach to recruiting and training its tens of thousands of professional
staff. Arthur Andersen has bought a former college campus near Chicago,
and has invested heavily in codifying its practice and regularly bringing
staff from around the world to its college for training in the ﬁrmwide
methodology. Having a deeply understood methodology throughout the ﬁrm
not only makes all engagements more effective but also greatly facilitates
the servicing of national and multinational clients.
Firm Infrastructure. Firm infrastructure consists of a number of activities
including general management, planning, ﬁnance, accounting, legal,
government affairs, and quality management. Infrastructure, unlike other
support activities, usually supports the entire chain and not individual
activities. Depending on whether a ﬁrm is diversiﬁed or not, ﬁrm
infrastructure may be self-contained or divided between a business unit and
the parent corporation.4 In diversiﬁed ﬁrms, infrastructure activities are
typically split between the business unit and corporate levels (e.g., ﬁnancing
is often done at the corporate level while quality management is done at the
business unit level). Many infrastructure activities occur at both the business
unit and corporate levels, however.
Firm infrastructure is sometimes viewed only as “overhead,” but can be a
powerful source of competitive advantage. In a telephone operating
company, for example, negotiating and maintaining ongoing relations with
regulatory bodies can be among the most important activities for


---PAGE BREAK---

competitive advantage. Similarly, proper management information systems
can contribute signiﬁcantly to cost position, while in some industries top
management plays a vital role in dealing with the buyer.
ACTIVITY TYPES
Within each category of primary and support activities, there are three
activity types that play a different role in competitive advantage:
• Direct. Activities directly involved in creating value for the buyer, such
as assembly, parts machining, sales force operation, advertising,
product design, recruiting, etc.
• Indirect. Activities that make it possible to perform direct activities on
a continuing basis, such as maintenance, scheduling, operation of
facilities, sales force administration, research administration, vendor
record keeping, etc.
• Quality Assurance. Activities that ensure the quality of other activities,
such as monitoring, inspecting, testing, reviewing, checking, adjusting,
and reworking. Quality assurance is not synonymous with quality
management, because many value activities contribute to quality, as
will be discussed in Chapter 4.
Every ﬁrm has direct, indirect, and quality assurance value activities. All
three types are present not only among primary activities but also among
support activities. In technology development, for example, actual
laboratory teams are direct activities, while research administration is an
indirect activity.
The role of indirect and quality assurance activities is often not well
understood, making the distinction among the three activity types an
important one for diagnosing competitive advantage. In many industries,
indirect activities represent a large and rapidly growing proportion of cost
and can play a signiﬁcant role in differentiation through their effect on
direct activities. Despite this, indirect activities are frequently lumped
together with direct activities when managers think about their ﬁrms,
though the two often have very different economics. There are often
tradeoffs between direct and indirect activities—more spending on


---PAGE BREAK---

maintenance lowers machine costs. Indirect activities are also frequently
grouped together into “overhead” or “burden” accounts, obscuring their cost
and contribution to differentiation.
Quality assurance activities are also prevalent in nearly every part of a
ﬁrm, though they are seldom recognized as such. Testing and inspection are
associated with many primary activities. Quality assurance activities outside
of operations are often less apparent though equally prevalent. The
cumulative cost of quality assurance activities can be very large, as recent
attention to the cost of quality has demonstrated. Quality assurance
activities often affect the cost or effectiveness of other activities, and the
way other activities are performed in turn affects the need for and types of
quality assurance activities. The possibility of simplifying or eliminating the
need for quality assurance activities through performing other activities
better is at the root of the notion that quality can be “free.”
Deﬁning the Value Chain
To diagnose competitive advantage, it is necessary to deﬁne a ﬁrm’s
value chain for competing in a particular industry. Starting with the generic
chain, individual value activities are identiﬁed in the particular ﬁrm. Each
generic category can be divided into discrete activities, as illustrated for one
generic category in Figure 2–3. An example of a complete value chain is
shown in Figure 2–4, the value chain of a copier manufacturer.
Deﬁning relevant value activities requires that activities with discrete
technologies and economics be isolated. Broad functions such as
manufacturing or marketing must be subdivided into activities. The product
ﬂow, order ﬂow or paper ﬂow can be useful in doing so. Subdividing
activities can proceed to the level of increasingly narrow activities that are
to some degree discrete. Every machine in a factory, for example, could be
treated as a separate activity. Thus the number of potential activities is often
quite large.
The appropriate degree of disaggregation depends on the economics of
the activities and the purposes for which the value chain is being analyzed.
Though I will return to this question in later chapters, the basic principle is
that activities should be isolated and separated that (1) have different


---PAGE BREAK---

economics, (2) have a high potential impact of differentiation, or (3)
represent a signiﬁcant or growing proportion of cost. In using the value
chain, successively ﬁner disaggregations of some activities are made as the
analysis exposes differences important to competitive advantage; other
activities are combined because they prove to be unimportant to competitive
advantage or are governed by similar economics.
Selecting the appropriate category in which to put an activity may
require judgment and can be illuminating in its own right. Order processing,
for example, could be classiﬁed as part of outbound logistics or as part of
marketing. In a distributor, the role of order processing is more a marketing
function. Similarly, the sales force often performs service functions. Value
activities should be assigned to categories that best represent their
contribution to a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage. If order processing is an
important way in which a ﬁrm interacts with its buyers, for example, it
should be classiﬁed under marketing. Similarly, if inbound material
handling and outbound material handling use the same facilities and
personnel, then both should probably be combined into one value activity
and classiﬁed wherever the function has the greatest competitive impact.
Firms have often gained competitive advantage by redeﬁning the roles of
traditional activities—Vetco, an oil ﬁeld equipment supplier, uses customer
training as a marketing tool and a way to build switching costs, for example.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 2–3. Subdividing a Generic Value Chain


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 2–4. Value Chain for a Copier Manufacturer


---PAGE BREAK---

Everything a ﬁrm does should be captured in a primary or support
activity. Value activity labels are arbitrary and should be chosen to provide
the best insight into the business. Labeling activities in service industries
often causes confusion because operations, marketing, and after-sale
support are often closely tied. Ordering of activities should broadly follow
the process ﬂow, but ordering is judgmental as well. Often ﬁrms perform
parallel activities, whose order should be chosen to enhance the intuitive
clarity of the value chain to managers.
Linkages within the Value Chain
Although value activities are the building blocks of competitive
advantage, the value chain is not a collection of independent activities but a
system of interdependent activities. Value activities are related by linkages
within the value chain. Linkages are relationships between the way one
value activity is performed and the cost or performance of another. For
example, purchasing high-quality, precut steel sheets can simplify
manufacturing and reduce scrap. In a fast food chain, the timing of
promotional campaigns can inﬂuence capacity utilization. Competitive
advantage frequently derives from linkages among activities just as it does
from the individual activities themselves.
Linkages can lead to competitive advantage in two ways: optimization
and coordination. Linkages often reﬂect tradeoffs among activities to
achieve the same overall result. For example, a more costly product design,
more stringent materials speciﬁcations, or greater in-process inspection may
reduce service costs. A ﬁrm must optimize such linkages reﬂecting its
strategy in order to achieve competitive advantage.
Linkages may also reﬂect the need to coordinate activities. On-time
delivery, for example, may require coordination of activities in operations,
outbound logistics, and service (e.g., installation). The ability to coordinate
linkages often reduces cost or enhances differentiation. Better coordination,
for example, can reduce the need for inveninventory throughout the ﬁrm.
Linkages imply that a ﬁrm’s cost or differentiation is not merely the result
of efforts to reduce cost or improve performance in each value activity
individually. Much of the recent change in philosophy towards


---PAGE BREAK---

manufacturing and towards quality—strongly inﬂuenced by Japanese
practice—is a recognition of the importance of linkages.
Linkages are numerous, and some are common to many ﬁrms. The most
obvious linkages are those between support activities and primary activities
represented by the dotted lines on the generic value chain. Product design
usually affects the manufacturing cost of a product, for example, while
procurement practices often affect the quality of purchased inputs and hence
production costs, inspection costs, and product quality. More subtle
linkages are those between primary activities. For example, enhanced
inspection of incoming parts may reduce quality assurance costs later in the
production process, while better maintenance often reduces the downtime of
a machine. An interactive order entry system may reduce salesperson time
required per buyer because salespersons can place orders faster and are
freed from the need to follow up on inquiries and problems. More thorough
inspection of ﬁnished goods often improves the reliability of products in the
ﬁeld, reducing servicing costs. Finally, frequent deliveries to buyers may
reduce inventory and accounts receivable. Linkages that involve activities in
different categories or of different types are often the most difﬁcult to
recognize.
Linkages among value activities arise from a number of generic causes,
among them the following:
• The same function can be performed in different ways. For example,
conformance to speciﬁcations can be achieved through high quality
purchased inputs, specifying close tolerances in the manufacturing
process, or 100 percent inspection of ﬁnished goods.
•  The cost or performance of direct activities is improved by greater
efforts in indirect activities. For example, better scheduling (an indirect
activity) reduces sales force travel time or delivery vehicle time (direct
activities); or better maintenance improves the tolerances achieved by
machines.
•  Activities performed inside a ﬁrm reduce the need to demonstrate,
explain, or service a product in the ﬁeld. For example, 100 percent
inspection can substantially reduce service costs in the ﬁeld.


---PAGE BREAK---

• Quality assurance functions can be performed in different ways. For
example, incoming inspection is a substitute for ﬁnished goods
inspection.
Though linkages within the value chain are crucial to competitive
advantage, they are often subtle and go unrecognized. The importance of
procurement in affecting manufacturing cost and quality may not be
obvious, for example. Nor is the link between order processing,
manufacturing scheduling practices, and sales force utilization. Identifying
linkages is a process of searching for ways in which each value activity
affects or is affected by others. The generic causes of linkages discussed
above provide a starting point. The disaggregation of procurement and
technology development to relate them to speciﬁc primary activities also
helps to highlight linkages between support and primary activities.
Exploiting linkages usually requires information or information ﬂows
that allow optimization or coordination to take place. Thus, information
systems are often vital to gaining competitive advantages from linkages.
Recent developments in information systems technology are creating new
linkages and increasing the ability to achieve old ones. Exploiting linkages
also frequently requires optimization or coordination that cuts across
conventional organizational lines. Higher costs in the manufacturing
organization, for example, may result in lower costs in the sales or service
organization. Such tradeoffs may not be measured in a ﬁrm’s information
and control systems. Managing linkages thus is a more complex
organizational task than managing value activities themselves. Given the
difﬁculty of recognizing and managing linkages, the ability to do so often
yields a sustainable source of competitive advantage. The speciﬁc role of
linkages in cost and differentiation will be discussed in more detail in
Chapters 3 and 4.
Vertical Linkages
Linkages exist not only within a ﬁrm’s value chain but between a ﬁrm’s
chain and the value chains of suppliers and channels. These linkages, which
I term vertical linkages, are similar to the linkages within the value chain—


---PAGE BREAK---

the way supplier or channel activities are performed affects the cost or
performance of a ﬁrm’s activities (and vice versa). Suppliers produce a
product or service that a ﬁrm employs in its value chain, and suppliers’
value chains also inﬂuence the ﬁrm at other contact points. A ﬁrm’s
procurement and inbound logistics activities interact with a supplier’s order
entry system, for example, while a supplier’s applications engineering staff
works with a ﬁrm’s technology development and manufacturing activities.
A supplier’s product characteristics as well as its other contact points with a
ﬁrm’s value chain can signiﬁcantly affect a ﬁrm’s cost and differentiation.
For example, frequent supplier shipments can reduce a ﬁrm’s inventory
needs, appropriate packaging of supplier products can lower handling cost,
and supplier inspection can remove the need for incoming inspection by a
ﬁrm.
The linkages between suppliers’ value chains and a ﬁrm’s value chain
provide opportunities for the ﬁrm to enhance its competitive advantage. It is
often possible to beneﬁt both the ﬁrm and suppliers by inﬂuencing the
conﬁguration of suppliers’ value chains to jointly optimize the performance
of activities, or by improving coordination between a ﬁrm’s and suppliers’
chains. Supplier linkages mean that the relationship with suppliers is not a
zero sum game in which one gains only at the expense of the other, but a
relationship in which both can gain. By agreeing to deliver bulk chocolate
to a confectionery producer in tank cars instead of solid bars, for example,
an industrial chocolate ﬁrm saves the cost of molding and packaging while
the confectionery manufacturer lowers the cost of in-bound handling and
melting. The division of the beneﬁts of coordinating or optimizing linkages
between a ﬁrm and its suppliers is a function of suppliers’ bargaining power
and is reﬂected in suppliers’ margins. Supplier bargaining power is partly
structural and partly a function of a ﬁrm’s purchasing practices.5 Thus both
coordination with suppliers and hard bargaining to capture the spoils are
important to competitive advantage. One without the other results in missed
opportunities.
Channel linkages are similar to supplier linkages. Channels have value
chains through which a ﬁrm’s product passes. The channel markup over a
ﬁrm’s selling price (which I term channel value) often represents a large
proportion of the selling price to the end user—it represents as much as 50
percent or more of selling price to the end user in many consumer goods,


---PAGE BREAK---

such as wine. Channels perform such activities as sales, advertising, and
display that may substitute for or complement the ﬁrm’s activities. There
are also multiple points of contact between a ﬁrm’s and channels’ value
chains in activities such as the sales force, order entry, and outbound
logistics. As with supplier linkages, coordinating and jointly optimizing
with channels can lower cost or enhance differentiation. The same issues
that existed with suppliers in dividing the gains of coordination and joint
optimization also exist with channels.
Vertical linkages, like linkages within a ﬁrm’s value chain, are frequently
overlooked. Even if they are recognized, independent ownership of
suppliers or channels or a history of an adversary relationship can impede
the coordination and joint optimization required to exploit vertical linkages.
Sometimes vertical linkages are easier to achieve with coalition partners or
sister business units than with independent ﬁrms, though even this is not
assured. As with linkages within the value chain, exploiting vertical
linkages requires information and modern information systems are creating
many new possibilities. I will discuss the role of supplier and channel
linkages in competitive advantage more fully in Chapters 3 and 4.
The Buyer’s Value Chain
Buyers also have value chains, and a ﬁrm’s product represents a
purchased input to the buyer’s chain. Understanding the value chains of
industrial, commercial, and institutional buyers is intuitively easy because
of their similarities to that of a ﬁrm. Understanding households’ value
chains is less intuitive, but nevertheless important. Households (and the
individual consumers within them) engage in a wide range of activities, and
products purchased by households are used in conjunction with this stream
of activities. A car is used for the trip to work and for shopping and leisure,
while a food product is consumed as part of the process of preparing and
eating meals. Though it is quite difﬁcult to construct a value chain that
encompasses everything a household and its occupants do, it is quite
possible to construct a chain for those activities that are relevant to how a
particular product is used. Chains need not be constructed for every
household, but chains for representative households can provide an


---PAGE BREAK---

important tool for use in differentiation analysis, to be discussed in more
detail in Chapter 4.
A ﬁrm’s differentiation stems from how its value chain relates to its
buyer’s chain. This is a function of the way a ﬁrm’s physical product is used
in the particular buyer activity in which it is consumed (e.g., a machine used
in the assembly process) as well as all the other points of contact between a
ﬁrm’s value chain and the buyer’s chain. Many of a ﬁrm’s activities interact
with some buyer activities. In optoelectronic parts, for example, a ﬁrm’s
product is assembled into the buyer’s equipment—an obvious point of
contact—but the ﬁrm also works closely with the buyer in designing the
part, providing ongoing technical assistance, troubleshooting, order
processing, and delivery. Each of these contact points is a potential source
of differentiation. “Quality” is too narrow a view of what makes a ﬁrm
unique, because it focuses attention on the product rather than the broader
array of value activities that impact the buyer.
Differentiation, then, derives fundamentally from creating value for the
buyer through a ﬁrm’s impact on the buyer’s value chain. Value is created
when a ﬁrm creates competitive advantage for its buyer—lowers its buyer’s
cost or raises its buyer’s performance.6 The value created for the buyer must
be perceived by the buyer if it is to be rewarded with a premium price,
however, which means that ﬁrms must communicate their value to buyers
through such means as advertising and the sales force. How this value is
divided between the ﬁrm (a premium price) and the buyer (higher proﬁts or
more satisfaction for the money) is reﬂected in a ﬁrm’s margin, and is a
function of industry structure. The relationship between the buyer’s value
chain and the ﬁrm’s value chain in creating and sustaining differentiation
will be described in detail in Chapter 4.7
Competitive Scope and the Value Chain
Competitive scope can have a powerful effect on competitive advantage,
because it shapes the conﬁguration and economics of the value chain. There
are four dimensions of scope that affect the value chain:8
• Segment Scope. The product varieties produced and buyers served.


---PAGE BREAK---

• Vertical Scope. The extent to which activities are performed in-house
instead of by independent ﬁrms.
•  Geographic Scope. The range of regions, countries, or groups of
countries in which a ﬁrm competes with a coordinated strategy.
•  Industry Scope. The range of related industries in which the ﬁrm
competes with a coordinated strategy.
Broad scope can allow a ﬁrm to exploit the beneﬁts of performing more
activities internally. It may also allow the ﬁrm to exploit interrelationships
between the value chains that serve different segments, geographic areas or
related industries.9 For example, a shared sales force may sell the products
of two business units, or a common brand name may be employed
worldwide. Sharing and integration have costs, however, that may nullify
their beneﬁts.
Narrow scope can allow the tailoring of the chain to serve a particular
target segment, geographic area or industry to achieve lower cost or to serve
the target in a unique way. Narrow scope in integration may also improve
competitive advantage through the ﬁrm’s purchasing activities that
independent ﬁrms perform better or cheaper. The competitive advantage of
a narrow scope rests on differences among product varieties, buyers, or
geographic regions within an industry in terms of the value chain best suited
to serve them, or on differences in resources and skills of independent ﬁrms
that allow them to perform activities better.
The breadth or narrowness of scope is clearly relative to competitors. In
some industries, a broad scope involves only serving the full range of
product and buyer segments within the industry. In others, it may require
both vertical integration and competing in related industries. Since there are
many ways to segment an industry and multiple forms of interrelationships
and integration, broad and narrow scope can be combined. A ﬁrm may
create competitive advantage by tuning its value chain to one product
segment and exploiting geographic interrelationships by serving that
segment worldwide. It may also exploit interrelationships with business
units in related industries. I will discuss these possibilities in more detail in
Chapter 15.


---PAGE BREAK---

Segment Scope
Differences in the needs or value chains required to serve different
product or buyer segments can lead to a competitive advantage of focusing.
For example, the value chain required to serve sophisticated minicomputer
buyers with in-house servicing capabilities is different from that required to
serve small business users. They need extensive sales assistance, less
demanding hardware performance, user-friendly software, and service
capability.
Just as differences among segments favor narrow scope, however,
interrelationships between the value chains serving different segments favor
broad scope. General Motors’ value chain for large cars is different from
that for small cars, for example, but many value activities are shared. This
creates a tension between tailoring the value chain to a segment and sharing
it among segments. This tension is fundamental to industry segmentation
and to the choice of focus strategies, the subject of Chapter 7.
Vertical Scope
Vertical integration deﬁnes the division of activities between a ﬁrm and
its suppliers, channels, and buyers. A ﬁrm may purchase components rather
than fabricate them itself, for example, or contract for service rather than
maintain a service organization. Similarly, channels may perform many
distribution, service, and marketing functions instead of a ﬁrm. A ﬁrm and
its buyers can also divide activities in differing ways. One way a ﬁrm may
be able to differentiate itself is by assuming a greater number of buyer
activities. In the extreme case, a ﬁrm completely enters the buyer’s industry.
When one views the issue of integration from the perspective of the
value chain, it becomes apparent that opportunities for integration are richer
than is often recognized. Vertical integration tends to be viewed in terms of
physical products and replacing whole supplier relationships rather than in
terms of activities, but it can encompass both. For example, a ﬁrm may rely
on a supplier’s applications engineering and service capability, or it may
perform these activities internally. Thus there are many options regarding


---PAGE BREAK---

what value activities a ﬁrm performs internally and what value activities it
purchases. The same principles apply to channel and buyer integration.
Whether or not integration (or de-integration) lowers cost or enhances
differentiation depends on the ﬁrm and the activity involved. I have
discussed the factors that bear on this question in Competitive Strategy. The
value chain allows a ﬁrm to identify more clearly the potential beneﬁts of
integration by highlighting the role of vertical linkages. The exploitation of
vertical linkages does not require vertical integration, but integration may
sometimes allow the beneﬁts of vertical linkages to be achieved more easily.
Geographic Scope
Geographic scope may allow a ﬁrm to share or coordinate value
activities used to serve different geographic areas. Canon develops and
manufactures copiers primarily in Japan, for example, but sells and services
them separately in many countries. Canon gains a cost advantage from
sharing technology development and manufacturing instead of performing
these activities in each country. Interrelationships are also common among
partially distinct value chains serving geographic regions in a single
country. For example, food service distributors such as Monarch and SISCO
have many largely distinct operating units in major metropolitan areas that
share ﬁrm infrastructure, procurement, and other support value activities.
Geographic interrelationships can enhance competitive advantage if
sharing or coordinating value activities lowers cost or enhances
differentiation. There may be costs of coordination as well as differences
among regions or countries that reduce the advantage of sharing, however.
The sources of competitive advantage from a global strategy and the
impediments to employing one are discussed in Competitive Strategy and
elsewhere.10 The same principles apply to national or regional coordination
of value chains.
Industry Scope
Potential interrelationships among the value chains required to compete
in related industries are widespread. They can involve any value activity,


---PAGE BREAK---

including both primary (e.g., a shared service organization) and support
activities (e.g., joint technology development or shared procurement of
common inputs). Interrelationships among business units are similar in
concept to geographic interrelationships among value chains.
Interrelationships among business units can have a powerful inﬂuence on
competitive advantage, either by lowering cost or enhancing differentiation.
A shared logistical system may allow a ﬁrm to reap economies of scale, for
example, while a shared sales force offering related products can improve
the salesperson’s effectiveness with the buyer and thereby enhance
differentiation. All interrelationships do not lead to competitive advantage.
Not all activities beneﬁt from sharing. There are also always costs of
sharing activities that must be offset against the beneﬁts, because the needs
of different business units may not be the same with respect to a value
activity. I will describe interrelationships among business units and their
implications for both corporate and business unit strategy in Chapters 9–11.
Coalitions and Scope
A ﬁrm can pursue the beneﬁts of a broader scope internally, or enter into
coalitions with independent ﬁrms to achieve some or all of the same
beneﬁts. Coalitions are long-term agreements among ﬁrms that go beyond
normal market transactions but fall short of outright mergers. Examples of
coalitions include technology licenses, supply agreements, marketing
agreements, and joint ventures. Coalitions are ways of broadening scope
without broadening the ﬁrm, by contracting with an independent ﬁrm to
perform value activities (e.g., a supply agreement) or teaming up with an
independent ﬁrm to share activities (e.g., a marketing joint venture). Thus
there are two basic types of coalition—vertical coalitions and horizontal
coalitions.
Coalitions can allow sharing of activities without the need to enter new
industry segments, geographic areas, or related industries. Coalitions are
also a means of gaining the cost or differentiation advantages of vertical
linkages without actual integration, but overcoming the difﬁculties of
coordination among purely independent ﬁrms. Because coalitions involve
long-term relationships, it should be possible to coordinate more closely


---PAGE BREAK---

with a coalition partner than with an independent ﬁrm, though not without
some cost. Difﬁculties in reaching coalition agreements and in ongoing
coordination among partners may block coalitions or nullify their beneﬁts.
Coalition partners remain independent ﬁrms and there is the question of
how the beneﬁts of a coalition are to be divided. The relative bargaining
power of each coalition partner is thus central to how the gains are shared,
and determines impact of the coalition on a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage. A
strong coalition partner may appropriate all the gains of a shared marketing
organization through the terms of the agreement, for example. The role of
coalitions in competitive advantage is discussed in my book on global
strategy, because they are particularly prevalent in international
competition.11
Competitive Scope and Business Deﬁnition
The relationship between competitive scope and the value chain provides
the basis for deﬁning relevant business unit boundaries. Strategically
distinct business units are isolated by weighing the beneﬁts of integration
and de-integration and by comparing the strength of interrelationships in
serving related segments, geographic areas, or industries to the differences
in the value chains best suited for serving them separately. If differences in
geographic areas or product and buyer segments require very distinct value
chains, then segments deﬁne business units. Conversely, strong and
widespread 
beneﬁts 
of 
integration 
or 
geographic 
or 
industry
interrelationships widen the relevant boundaries of business units. Strong
advantages to vertical integration widen the boundaries of a business unit to
encompass upstream or downstream activities, while weak advantages to
integration imply that each stage is a distinct business unit. Similarly, strong
advantages to worldwide coordination of the value chains imply that the
relevant business unit is global, while strong country or regional differences
necessitating largely distinct chains imply narrower geographic business
unit boundaries. Finally, strong interrelationships between one business unit
and another may imply that they should merge into one. Appropriate
business units can be deﬁned, then, by understanding the optimal value
chain for competing in different arenas and how the chains are related. I


---PAGE BREAK---

will return to this issue after the principles of industry segmentation have
been discussed in Chapter 7.
The Value Chain and Industry Structure
Industry structure both shapes the value chain of a ﬁrm and is a reﬂection
of the collective value chains of competitors. Structure determines the
bargaining relationships with buyers and suppliers that is reﬂected in both
the conﬁguration of a ﬁrm’s value chain and how margins are divided with
buyers, suppliers, and coalition partners. The threat of substitution to an
industry inﬂuences the value activities desired by buyers. Entry barriers
bear on the sustainability of various value chain conﬁgurations.
The array of competitor value chains is, in turn, the basis for many
elements of industry structure. Scale economies and proprietary learning,
for example, stem from the technology employed in competitors’ value
chains. Capital requirements for competing in an industry are the result of
the collective capital required in the chain. Similarly, industry product
differentiation stems from the way ﬁrms’ products are used in buyers’ value
chains. Thus many elements of industry structure can be diagnosed by
analyzing the value chains of competitors in an industry.
The Value Chain and Organizational Structure
The value chain is a basic tool for diagnosing competitive advantage and
ﬁnding ways to create and sustain it, the subject that will dominate the
chapters that follow. However, the value chain can also play a valuable role
in designing organizational structure. Organizational structure groups
certain activities together under organizational units such as marketing or
production. The logic of those groupings is that activities have similarities
that should be exploited by putting them together in a department; at the
same time, departments are separated from other groups of activities
because of their differences. This separation of like activities is what
organizational 
theorists 
call 
“differentiation.” 
With 
separation 
of
organizational units comes the need to coordinate them, usually termed
“integration.” Thus integrating mechanisms must be established in a ﬁrm to


---PAGE BREAK---

ensure that the required coordination takes place. Organizational structure
balances the beneﬁts of separation and integration.12
The value chain provides a systematic way to divide a ﬁrm into its
discrete activities, and thus can be used to examine how the activities in a
ﬁrm are and could be grouped. Figure 2–5 shows a value chain with a
typical organizational structure superimposed. Organizational boundaries
are often not drawn around the groups of activities that are most similar in
economic terms. Moreover, organizational units such as the purchasing and
R&D departments frequently contain only a fraction of the similar activities
being performed in a ﬁrm.
The need for integration among organizational units is a manifestation of
linkages. There are often many linkages within the value chain, and
organizational structure often fails to provide mechanisms to coordinate or
optimize them. The information necessary for coordinating or optimizing
linkages is also rarely collected throughout the chain. Managers of support
activities such as human resource management and technology development
often do not have a clear view of how they relate to the ﬁrm’s overall
competitive position, something the value chain highlights. Finally, vertical
linkages are often not well provided for in organizational structure.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 2–5. Organizational Structure and the Value Chain


---PAGE BREAK---

A ﬁrm may be able to draw unit boundaries more in tune with its sources
of competitive advantage and provide for the appropriate types of
coordination by relating its organizational structure to the value chain, and
the linkages within it and with suppliers or channels. An organizational
structure that corresponds to the value chain will improve a ﬁrm’s ability to
create and sustain competitive advantage. While this subject cannot be
treated in detail here, it remains an important issue in the implementation of
strategy.


---PAGE BREAK---

3
Cost Advantage
Cost advantage is one of the two types of competitive advantage a ﬁrm may
possess. Cost is also of vital importance to differentiation strategies because
a differentiator must maintain cost proximity to competitors. Unless the
resulting price premium exceeds the cost of differentiating, a differentiator
will fail to achieve superior performance. The behavior of cost also exerts a
strong inﬂuence on overall industry structure.
Managers recognize the importance of cost, and many strategic plans
establish “cost leadership” or “cost reduction” as goals. However, the
behavior of cost is rarely well understood. Wide disagreement often exists
among managers about a ﬁrm’s relative cost position and the reasons
underlying it. Cost studies tend to concentrate on manufacturing costs and
overlook the impact of other activities such as marketing, service, and
infrastructure on relative cost position. Moreover, the cost of individual
activities is analyzed sequentially, without recognizing the linkages among
activities that can affect cost. Finally, ﬁrms have great difﬁculty assessing
the cost positions of competitors, an essential step in assessing their own
relative positions. They often resort to simplistic comparisons of labor rates
and raw material costs.
This chapter has beneﬁted from joint work with John R. Wells.
The absence of a systematic framework for cost analysis in most ﬁrms
underlies these problems. Most cost studies address narrow issues and take
a short-term viewpoint. Popular tools like the experience curve are often
misused in cost analysis. The experience curve can serve as a starting point,


---PAGE BREAK---

but it ignores many of the important drivers of cost behavior and obscures
important relationships among them. Cost analyses also tend to rely heavily
on existing accounting systems. While accounting systems do contain
useful data for cost analysis, they often get in the way of strategic cost
analysis. Cost systems categorize costs in line items—such as direct labor,
indirect labor, and burden—that may obscure the underlying activities a
ﬁrm performs. This leads to aggregation of the costs of activities with very
different economics, and to the artiﬁcial separation of labor, material, and
overhead costs related to the same activity.
This chapter describes a framework for analyzing the behavior of costs,
the determinants of relative cost position, and the way ﬁrms can gain a
sustainable cost advantage or minimize their cost disadvantage. The
framework can also reveal the cost of differentiation, and the ways a
differentiated competitor can lower costs in the areas that do not undermine
its differentiation. The same tools can also be used to analyze supplier and
buyer cost behavior, important to both cost position and achieving
differentiation.
The value chain provides the basic tool for cost analysis. I begin by
showing how to deﬁne a value chain for cost analysis purposes and how to
associate costs and assets with value activities. I then describe how to
analyze the behavior of cost, using the concept of cost drivers. Cost drivers
are the structural determinants of the cost of an activity, and differ in the
extent to which a ﬁrm controls them. Cost drivers determine the behavior of
costs within an activity, reﬂecting any linkages or interrelationships that
affect it. A ﬁrm’s cost performance in each of its major discrete activities
cumulates to establish its relative cost position.
Having presented a framework for analyzing cost behavior, I turn to how
a ﬁrm can assess the relative cost of competitors and achieve a sustainable
cost advantage. I then describe some important pitfalls in developing an
understanding of cost position. The chapter concludes with a discussion of
the steps in strategic cost analysis. The techniques outlined in this chapter
do not constitute a substitute for the detailed analysis of cost necessary for
operations management or pricing, nor do they diminish the need for
ﬁnancial and cost accounting. Rather, the framework aims to help a ﬁrm
understand the behavior of cost in a broad, holistic way that will guide the


---PAGE BREAK---

search for a sustainable cost advantage and contribute to the formulation of
competitive strategy.
The Value Chain and Cost Analysis
The behavior of a ﬁrm’s costs and its relative cost position stem from the
value activities the ﬁrm performs in competing in an industry. A meaningful
cost analysis, therefore, examines costs within these activities and not the
costs of the ﬁrm as a whole. Each value activity has its own cost structure
and the behavior of its cost may be affected by linkages and
interrelationships with other activities both within and outside the ﬁrm. Cost
advantage results if the ﬁrm achieves a lower cumulative cost of performing
value activities than its competitors.
Deﬁning the Value Chain for Cost Analysis
The starting point for cost analysis is to deﬁne a ﬁrm’s value chain and to
assign operating costs and assets to value activities. Each activity in the
value chain involves both operating costs and assets in the form of ﬁxed and
working capital. Purchased inputs make up part of the cost of every value
activity, and can contribute to both operating costs (purchased operating
inputs) and assets (purchased assets). The need to assign assets to value
activities reﬂects the fact that the amount of assets in an activity and the
efﬁciency of asset utilization are frequently important to the activity’s cost.
For purposes of cost analysis, the disaggregation of the generic value
chain into individual value activities should reﬂect three principles that are
not mutually exclusive:
• the size and growth of the cost represented by the activity
• the cost behavior of the activity
• competitor differences in performing the activity
Activities should be separated for cost analysis if they represent a
signiﬁcant or rapidly growing percentage of operating costs or assets. While
most ﬁrms can easily identify the large components of their cost, they


---PAGE BREAK---

frequently overlook smaller but growing value activities that can eventually
change their cost structure. Activities that represent a small and stagnant
percentage of costs or assets can be grouped together into broader
categories.
Activities must also be separated if they have different cost drivers, to be
deﬁned in more detail below. Activities with similar cost drivers can be
safely grouped together. For example, advertising and promotion usually
belong in separate value activities because advertising cost is sensitive to
scale while promotional costs are largely variable. Any activity a business
unit shares with others should also be treated as a separate value activity
since conditions in other business units will affect its cost behavior. The
same logic applies to any activity that has important linkages with other
activities. In practice, one does not always know the drivers of cost behavior
at the beginning of an analysis; hence the identiﬁcation of value activities
tends to require several iterations. The initial breakdown of the value chain
into activities will inevitably represent a best guess of important differences
in cost behavior. Value activities can then be aggregated or disaggregated as
further analysis exposes differences or similarities in cost behavior. Usually
an aggregated value chain is analyzed ﬁrst, and then particular value
activities that prove to be important are investigated in greater detail.
A ﬁnal test for separating value activities is the behavior of competitors.
Signiﬁcant activities should be treated separately when a competitor
performs them in a different way.1 For example, People Express and other
no-frills airlines offer very different on-board service than the established
trunk carriers such as American, Eastern, TWA, and United. Differences
among competitors raise the possibility that an activity is the source of a
relative cost advantage or disadvantage.
Assigning Costs and Assets
After identifying its value chain, a ﬁrm must assign operating costs and
assets to value activities. Operating costs should be assigned to the activities
in which they are incurred. Assets should be assigned to the activities that
employ, control, or most inﬂuence their use. The assignment of operating
costs is straightforward in principle, although it can be time-consuming.


---PAGE BREAK---

Accounting records must often be recast to match costs with value activities
rather than with accounting classiﬁcations, particularly in areas such as
overhead and purchased inputs.
Since assets are expensive and their selection and use often involve
tradeoffs with operating costs, assets must be assigned to value activities in
some way that will permit an analysis of cost behavior. Assignment of
assets to activities is more complex than assignment of operating costs.
Asset accounts must usually be regrouped to correspond to activities, and
assets must be valued in some consistent way. There are two broad
approaches to assigning assets. They may be assigned at their book or
replacement value and compared to operating costs in this form, or book or
replacement value may be translated into operating costs via capital
charges. Either valuation approach poses difﬁculties. Book value may be
meaningless because it is sensitive to the timing of initial purchase and to
accounting policies. Calculating replacement value is also frequently a
difﬁcult task. Similarly, depreciation schedules are often arbitrary, as are
capital charges for both ﬁxed and current assets. The particular method
chosen to value assets should reﬂect industry characteristics, which in turn
will determine the most signiﬁcant biases inherent in the data and the
practical considerations in collecting it. The analyst must recognize the
biases inherent in whatever method is chosen.2 It may prove illuminating
for cost analysis to assign assets in several ways.
The costs and assets of shared value activities should be allocated
initially to the value chain of the business unit using whatever methodology
the ﬁrm currently employs, typically based on some allocation formula. The
cost behavior of a shared value activity reﬂects the activity as a whole and
not just the part that is attributable to one business unit. The cost of a scale-
sensitive shared activity will depend on the volume of all involved business
units, for example. In addition, the allocation formulas covering shared
activities may not reﬂect their economics but may have been set based on
convenience or political considerations. As the analysis proceeds, the costs
of shared activities can be reﬁned using more meaningful allocation
methods based on the cost behavior of the activities.
The time period chosen for assigning costs and assets to value activities
should be representative of a ﬁrm’s performance. It should recognize
seasonal or cyclical ﬂuctuations and periods of discontinuity that would


---PAGE BREAK---

affect cost. The comparison of costs at different points in time can
illuminate the effect of strategy changes, as well as help diagnose cost
behavior itself. Looking at the cost of an activity during successive periods
can highlight learning effects, for example, while comparing costs during
periods of widely differing levels of activity may give some indications
about scale sensitivity and the role of capacity utilization.
It is important to remember that assigning costs and assets does not
require the precision needed for ﬁnancial reporting purposes. Estimates are
often more than sufﬁcient to highlight strategic cost issues, and can be
employed in assigning costs and assets to value activities where generating
accurate cost ﬁgures would require great expense. As the analysis proceeds
and particular value activities prove to be important to cost advantage,
greater efforts at precision can be made. Finally, a ﬁrm may ﬁnd that
competitors assign their operating costs and assets differently. The way in
which competitors measure their costs is important because it will inﬂuence
their behavior. Part of the task of competitor cost analysis is to attempt to
diagnose competitor costing practices.
First Cut Analysis of Costs
The allocation of costs and assets will produce a value chain that
illustrates graphically the distribution of a ﬁrm’s costs. It can prove
revealing to separate the cost of each value activity into three categories:
purchased operating inputs, human resource costs, and assets by major
category. The proportions of the value chain can be drawn to reﬂect the
distribution of costs and assets among activities as shown in Figure 3–1.
Even the initial allocation of operating costs and assets to the value chain
may suggest areas for cost improvement. Purchased operating inputs will
often represent a larger proportion of costs than commonly perceived, for
example, because all the purchased inputs in the value chain are rarely
cumulated. Other insights can result from grouping value activities into
direct, indirect and quality assurance activities as deﬁned in Chapter 2, and
cumulating costs in each category. Managers often fail to recognize
burgeoning indirect costs and have a tendency to focus almost exclusively
on direct costs. In many ﬁrms, indirect costs not only represent a large


---PAGE BREAK---

proportion of total cost but also have grown more rapidly than other cost
elements. The introduction of sophisticated information systems and
automated processes is reducing direct costs but boosting indirect costs by
requiring such things as sophisticated maintenance and computer
programmers to prepare machine tapes. In valve manufacturing, for
example, indirect cost represents more than 10 percent of total cost. Firms
can also ﬁnd that the sum of all quality assurance activities in the value
chain is strikingly large. In many industries, this has led to the growing
conclusion that other approaches to quality assurance besides inspection,
adjusting, and testing can yield large cost savings.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 3–1. Distribution of Operating Costs and Assets in Flow Control Valves


---PAGE BREAK---

Cost Behavior
A ﬁrm’s cost position results from the cost behavior of its value
activities. Cost behavior depends on a number of structural factors that
inﬂuence cost, which I term cost drivers. Several cost drivers can combine
to determine the cost of a given activity. The important cost driver or drivers
can differ among ﬁrms in the same industry if they employ different value
chains. A ﬁrm’s relative cost position in a value activity depends on its
standing vis-à-vis important cost drivers.
Cost Drivers
Ten major cost drivers determine the cost behavior of value activities:
economies of scale, learning, the pattern of capacity utilization, linkages,
interrelationships, integration, timing, discretionary policies, location, and
institutional factors. Cost drivers are the structural causes of the cost of an
activity and can be more or less under a ﬁrm’s control. Drivers often
interact to determine the cost behavior of a particular activity, and the
relative impact of cost drivers will differ widely among value activities.
Thus no one cost driver, such as scale or the learning curve, is ever the sole
determinant of a ﬁrm’s cost position. Diagnosing the cost drivers of each
value activity allows a ﬁrm to gain a sophisticated understanding of the
sources of its relative cost position and how it might be changed.
ECONOMIES OR DISECONOMIES OF SCALE
The costs of a value activity are often subject to economies or
diseconomies of scale. Economies of scale arise from the ability to perform
activities differently and more efﬁciently at larger volume, or from the
ability to amortize the cost of intangibles such as advertising and R&D over
a greater sales volume. Economies of scale can result from efﬁciencies in
the actual operation of an activity at higher scale as well as from less than
proportional increases in the infrastructure or overhead needed to support an
activity as it grows. In a bauxite mine, for example, actual mining costs go
down less with scale than do infrastructure costs.


---PAGE BREAK---

Economies of scale must be clearly distinguished from capacity
utilization. Increasing capacity utilization spreads the ﬁxed costs of existing
facilities and personnel over large volume, while economies of scale imply
that an activity operating at full capacity is more efﬁcient at larger scale.
Mistaking capacity utilization for economies of scale can lead a ﬁrm to the
false conclusion that its costs will continue to fall if it expands capacity
once its existing capacity is full.
Increasing complexity and costs of coordination can lead to
diseconomies of scale in a value activity as scale increases. When the
number of lines in a metal can plant exceeds about 15, for example, the
complexity of the plant becomes unwieldy. Increasing scale also sometimes
dampens employee motivation and may increase wage or purchased input
costs. For example, a large plant may have a greater likelihood of
unionization or lead to higher expectations and greater stridency of union
negotiators. Diseconomies of scale in procurement can also occur if large
requirements meet an inelastic supply, forcing up input prices.
Diseconomies of scale appear to be present in many fashion-sensitive
industries and professional services, which rely heavily on fast response
times and creative individuals who do not function well in large
organizations.
The scale sensitivity of activities varies widely. Value activities such as
product development, national advertising, and ﬁrm infrastructure are
typically more scale-sensitive than activities such as procurement and sales
force operations because their costs are heavily ﬁxed no matter what the
ﬁrm’s scale is. However, economies (and diseconomies) of scale can be
found to some extent in virtually every value activity of a ﬁrm.
Economies of scale reﬂect not only the technology in a value activity but
also the manner in which a ﬁrm chooses to operate it. Scale economies in a
plant can be strongly affected by the number of product varieties produced
and the length of runs chosen. Similarly, the deployment of a sales force can
inﬂuence economies of scale in sales force operation. In a sales force
organized geographically, costs tend to fall as regional sales volume grows
because a salesperson can write larger orders on each sales call and/or
because travel time between accounts is reduced by greater density. If the
sales force is organized by product line, however, an increase in volume in


---PAGE BREAK---

one region may create diseconomies by requiring salespersons to travel
more to that region than to other regions closer to home base.
Economies of scale are not all equivalent. The relevant measure of scale
differs among value activities and industries. Firms that overlook this often
undermine their relative cost positions. For some value activities, global or
worldwide scale is the relevant cost driver. For other value activities,
national scale, regional scale, local scale, plant scale, project scale, scale per
production line, scale per buyer, scale per order, or some other measure of
scale may underlie the behavior of cost.3
In product R&D, for example, global or national scale are often the
relevant measure of scale. Developing a new model requires a ﬁxed
investment that is amortized over all the units sold. The development cost of
a standard model sold worldwide is sensitive to global scale, while the
development cost of a product that must be customized for individual
countries may be more sensitive to national scale. Economies of scale in
transportation typically hinge on regional or local scale or on scale per
buyer, depending on the mode of transportation employed. Local or regional
scale is a proxy for the density of buyers and hence the distances between
deliveries to different buyer’s locations. Transportation suppliers also
frequently offer discounts on containerload, carload, or trainload shipments
to a given area that contribute to local or regional scale sensitivity. Finally,
the cost of delivery to a given buyer often remains largely ﬁxed regardless
of the buyer’s order size, making large buyers less costly to serve.
Understanding how economies of scale affect cost, therefore, requires an
identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc mechanisms underpinning them and the
measure of scale that best captures these mechanisms.
The appropriate measure of scale is a function of how a ﬁrm manages an
activity. For example, modifying products by country instead of selling a
standard product worldwide, a policy choice, changes the appropriate
measure of scale. Similarly, the authorization cost of a credit card
processing ﬁrm that authorizes merchant charges electronically rather than
manually becomes much more sensitive to the overall volume of
transactions. Thus a ﬁrm can inﬂuence not only the extent of economies of
scale but also the type of scale that most determines its cost in an activity.
This suggests that a ﬁrm should manage its activities to maximize their
sensitivity to the type of scale in which the ﬁrm has the greatest advantage


---PAGE BREAK---

over its competitors. A regional ﬁrm should accentuate the value of its
regional scale, for example, while a national competitor without leadership
in any region should manage its activities to maximize the value of its
national scale.
LEARNING AND SPILLOVERS
The cost of a value activity can decline over time due to learning that
increases its efﬁciency. The mechanisms by which learning can lower cost
over time are numerous, and include such factors as layout changes,
improved scheduling, labor efﬁciency improvement, product design
modiﬁcations that facilitate manufacturing, yield improvements, procedures
that increase the utilization of assets, and better tailoring of raw materials to
the process. Learning can also reduce the cost of constructing plants, retail
outlets, or other facilities. Thus the possibilities for learning in an activity
are much broader than learning by personnel to perform their functions
more efﬁciently.4 The rate of learning varies widely among value activities
because each offers differing possibilities for learning improvements.5
Learning is often the cumulation of many small improvements rather than
major breakthroughs. The rate of learning may increase during slack
periods when attention is focused on reducing costs rather than meeting
demand. Moreover, learning tends to vary with the amount of management
attention devoted to capturing it.
Learning can spill over from one ﬁrm in an industry to another, through
mechanisms such as suppliers, consultants, ex-employees, and reverse
engineering of products. Where spillover of learning among ﬁrms is high in
a value activity, the rate of learning may stem more from total industry
learning than from the learning of one ﬁrm. Since a sustainable cost
advantage results only from proprietary learning, the rate of spillover also
determines whether learning serves to create a cost advantage for a ﬁrm or
simply lowers cost for the industry.6 Analysis of the rate of spillover plays a
crucial role in diagnosing the relative cost differences among competitors
due to differential rates of learning.
As with scale economies, the appropriate measure of the rate of learning
is different for different value activities. The appropriate measure of


---PAGE BREAK---

learning reﬂects the speciﬁc mechanisms of learning that account for the
fall in costs over time in a value activity. This will vary because
mechanisms for learning are diverse and because of the inﬂuence of
spillovers. In a value activity where learning affects cost behavior through
improving worker efﬁciency, for example, the rate of learning may be tied
to the cumulative volume in that activity. In this case, the rate of learning is
correlated with scale because high scale makes learning accumulate rapidly.
Where learning occurs through the introduction of more efﬁcient
machinery, however, its rate may reﬂect the rate of technological change in
machinery and have little to do with the ﬁrm’s volume. The rate of learning
can also be a function of calendar time or the level of investment expended
in modiﬁcations to an activity. Understanding the speciﬁc mechanisms for
learning in each value activity and identifying the best measure of its rate
are necessary if a ﬁrm is to improve its cost position.7 The rate of learning
is often subject to diminishing returns, and hence it may decline over time
for some value activities as an industry matures.
Some alternative measures that may serve as a proxy for the rate of
learning in an activity and typical value activities in which they apply are
shown in Table 3–1.
PATTERN OF CAPACITY UTILIZATION
Where a value activity has substantial ﬁxed cost associated with it, the
cost of an activity will be affected by capacity utilization. Fixed costs create
a penalty for underutilization, and the ratio of ﬁxed to variable cost
indicates the sensitivity of a value activity to utilization. Different ways of
conﬁguring a value activity will affect its sensitivity to capacity utilization.
For example, the use of food brokers to sell to supermarkets usually reduces
sensitivity to capacity utilization when compared to an in-house sales force.
Brokers typically receive a commission on sales, while an in-house sales
force is paid a ﬁxed salary and expenses over and above commissions.
TABLE 3–1 Typical Measures of Learning
Cumulative volume in the activity (typical for determining machine speed or reject rates in
fabrication operations)
Time in operation (typical for work-ﬂow layout in assembly)


---PAGE BREAK---

Cumulative investment (typical for plant efﬁciency)
Cumulative industry volume (typical for product design improvements that lower cost where
spillovers are high)
Exogenous technical change (typical for basic process improvements)
Capacity utilization at a given point in time is a function of seasonal,
cyclical, and other demand or supply ﬂuctuations unrelated to competitive
position. Thus the pattern of utilization over the entire cycle is the correct
cost driver instead of utilization at one point in time. Changes in the level of
capacity utilization will involve costs of expanding or contracting, so that a
ﬁrm that changes its utilization will have higher costs than one that keeps its
utilization constant, though they both have the same average utilization. The
pattern of utilization reﬂects such changes, and is thus the appropriate cost
driver rather than the average level of utilization. The pattern of capacity
utilization of an activity is partly determined by environmental conditions
and competitor behavior (particularly competitor investment behavior) and
is partly under a ﬁrm’s control through its policy choices in areas such as
marketing and product selection.
LINKAGES
The cost of a value activity is frequently affected by how other activities
are performed. As described in Chapter 2, two broad types of linkages exist:
linkages within the value chain and vertical linkages with the value chains
of suppliers and channels. These linkages mean that the cost behavior of a
value activity cannot be understood by examining that activity alone.
Linkages create the opportunity to lower the total cost of the linked
activities. They provide a potentially powerful source of cost advantage
because linkages are subtle and require joint optimization or coordination of
activities across organizational lines. Competitors often fail to recognize
their presence or are incapable of harnessing them.
Linkages within the Value Chain
Linkages among value activities pervade the value chain. Some of the
most common linkages are those between direct and indirect activities (e.g.,


---PAGE BREAK---

machining and maintenance), quality assurance and other activities (e.g.,
inspection and after-sale service), activities that must be coordinated (e.g.,
inbound logistics and operations), and between activities that are alternative
ways of achieving the result (e.g., advertising and direct sales, or writing
airline tickets on-board the plane instead of at ticket counters or gates).
Identifying linkages requires asking the question, “What are all the other
activities elsewhere in a ﬁrm that have or might have an impact on the cost
of performing this activity?”
When activities in the value chain are linked, changing the way one of
them is performed can reduce the total cost of both. Deliberately raising
cost in one activity may not only lower the cost of another activity but also
lower total cost. As described in Chapter 2, linkages lead to opportunities
for cost reduction through two mechanisms: coordination and optimization.
Better coordination of linked activities such as procurement and assembly
can reduce the need for inventory, for example. Inventory is typically a
manifestation of a linkage between activities, and reducing inventory is
possible by managing the linkage better. Jointly optimizing activities that
are linked involves resolving tradeoffs among them. In copier
manufacturing, for example, the quality of purchased parts is linked to the
adjustment of copiers after assembly. Canon found it could virtually
eliminate the need for adjustment in its personal copier line by purchasing
higher precision parts.
Vertical Linkages
Vertical linkages reﬂect interdependencies between a ﬁrm’s activities and
the value chains of suppliers and channels. The ﬁrm can identify them by
examining how the behavior of suppliers or channels affects the cost of each
of its activities and vice versa. Vertical linkages are frequently overlooked,
because identifying them requires a sophisticated understanding of supplier
and channel value chains.
Linkages with suppliers tend to center on the suppliers’ product design
characteristics, service, quality assurance procedures, packaging, delivery
procedures, and order processing. Supplier linkages also take the form of a
supplier performing an activity that the ﬁrm might otherwise undertake. In
these and other areas, the manner in which a supplier performs activities


---PAGE BREAK---

within its value chain can raise or lower a ﬁrm’s cost. Typical examples of
supplier linkages important to cost include the linkage between the
frequency and timeliness of supplier deliveries and a ﬁrm’s raw material
inventory, the linkage between supplier application engineering and a ﬁrm’s
technology development cost, and the linkage between a supplier’s
packaging and a ﬁrm’s material handling cost. As described in Chapter 2,
for example, delivery of bulk chocolate in liquid form instead of ten pound
molded bars can reduce a confectioner’s processing costs. Often linkages
with suppliers provide opportunities for cost reduction on both sides—e.g.,
delivery of liquid chocolate can reduce the supplier’s cost as well, since it
eliminates the cost of molding bars and packaging them.
Managing supplier linkages can lower total cost through coordination or
joint optimization, as in all linkages. The easiest linkages to exploit are
those where both a ﬁrm’s and a supplier’s cost fall. Sometimes exploiting a
linkage requires that a supplier’s cost go up to achieve a more than
compensating fall in a ﬁrm’s costs, however. A ﬁrm must be prepared to
raise the price it gives suppliers in such cases to make exploiting the linkage
worthwhile. The opposite case is also possible, and the ﬁrm must be
prepared to elevate its own internal cost if the supplier offers a more-than-
compensating price cut.
A similar analysis applies to linkages with channels. The typical linkages
mirror those with suppliers. For example, the location of a channel’s
warehouses and the channel’s materials handling technology can inﬂuence a
ﬁrm’s outbound logistical and packaging cost. Similarly, sales or
promotional activities of channels may reduce a ﬁrm’s sales cost. As with
supplier linkages, channel linkages may allow both the ﬁrm and its channels
to lower cost. However, exploiting channel linkages may require the
channel to raise cost for a more than offsetting reduction in the ﬁrm’s cost.
It may be desirable, then, to raise margins paid to channels in return for
changes in the way they operate that will reduce a ﬁrm’s cost. In the United
States, for example, Seiko paid its jewelers a generous fee for accepting
Seiko watches for repair and shipping them to Seiko. This minimized
Seiko’s need for service locations and lowered the cost of processing repairs
and of informing customers about repair procedures.
Since vertical linkages involve independent ﬁrms, reaching agreement on
how to exploit them and how to divide the resulting gains can be difﬁcult.


---PAGE BREAK---

Linkages that require a supplier or channel to raise cost to beneﬁt the ﬁrm
are quite difﬁcult to achieve unless the ﬁrm has considerable bargaining
power. Exploiting linkages may also require the creation of switching costs
as a byproduct, tying one or both sides to the other. This often further
complicates the task of agreeing on ways to exploit linkages, because
reaching agreement involves a high level of commitment and trust. The
payout to exploiting linkages may be great, however, because they are hard
for competitors to match.
INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Interrelationships with other business units within a ﬁrm affect cost, as
will be discussed in detail in Chapter 9. The most important form of
interrelationships is when a value activity can be shared with a sister unit.
American Hospital Supply has found that sharing an order processing and
distribution organization across many units producing medical supplies has
yielded a signiﬁcant cost improvement, for example, while shared
marketing and distribution are beneﬁting such ﬁnancial services ﬁrms as
Citicorp and Sears. Another form of interrelationship, that I term an
intangible interrelationship, involves the sharing of know-how between
separate but similar value activities. Emerson Electric, for example, uses
cost reduction expertise gained in one division to help lower cost in others.
Sharing a value activity raises throughput in the activity. It reduces unit
costs if cost in the activity is sensitive to economies of scale or learning, or
if sharing improves the pattern of capacity utilization because different
business units place demands on the value activity at different times.
Sharing is potentially a way to achieve scale, go down the learning curve
faster, or load capacity outside of the boundaries of a single industry.
Sharing is thus a potential substitute for position in a particular industry.
Sharing a value activity always involves costs, however, that must be
weighed against any beneﬁts from sharing. The other form of
interrelationship, sharing know-how between separate activities, lowers cost
if the activities are similar and if the know-how is signiﬁcant to improving
the efﬁciency of the activity. In effect, sharing know-how is transfering the
fruits of learning from one activity to another.


---PAGE BREAK---

INTEGRATION
The level of vertical integration in a value activity may inﬂuence its cost.
The cost of an order processing system can be lower if the ﬁrm owns its
own computer and software instead of contracting with a computer service
bureau, for example, while the cost of an outbound logistics activity may
vary depending on whether or not a ﬁrm owns its own ﬂeet of trucks. Every
value activity employs or could employ purchased inputs, and thus involves
explicit or implicit integration choices.
Integration can reduce cost in a number of ways. It avoids the costs of
using the market, such as procurement and transportation costs. It can allow
the ﬁrm to avoid suppliers or buyers with considerable bargaining power.
Integration can also lead to economies of joint operation, as where steel
does not have to be reheated if it moves directly from the steelmaking to the
fabrication process. However, integration can raise cost by creating
inﬂexibility, bringing activities in-house that suppliers can perform more
cheaply, undermining incentives for efﬁciency because the relationship with
the supplying unit becomes captive, or raising exit barriers.8 Whether
integration raises, lowers, or has no effect on cost thus depends on the
particular value activity and purchased input involved. Sometimes de-
integration is indicated.
A ﬁrm must assess the potential beneﬁts of integration for each
important purchased input in a value activity. Conversely, it must examine
those functions currently performed internally to determine whether de-
integration would lower the cost of the activity without undermining the
ﬁrm’s strategy. Firms often ignore the de-integration option in their cost
analyses. Integration and de-integration analysis must not limit itself to
major inputs but should also examine ancillary services and other
supporting functions. A product might be purchased without service, for
example, though the two are often bundled.9 Firms can often lower cost by
integrating into some ancillary services while continuing to buy the basic
product.
TIMING


---PAGE BREAK---

The cost of a value activity often reﬂects timing. Sometimes a ﬁrm may
gain ﬁrst-mover advantages from being among the ﬁrst to take a particular
action. The ﬁrst major brand in the market may have lower costs of
establishing and maintaining a brand name, for example. Gerber exploited
this advantage in baby food. Learning is also inextricably linked to timing,
because the timing of moves determines when learning begins.
Disadvantages may also accrue to ﬁrst movers. Late movers can enjoy
beneﬁts such as purchasing the latest equipment (an advantage today in
computers and steel) or avoiding high product or market development costs
borne by early movers. A late mover may also be able to tailor the value
chain to prevailing factor costs. Another late-mover advantage may be a less
senior, and therefore less costly, workforce. Newly established airlines such
as People Express have much less senior workforces than established
carriers such as PanAm. Furthermore, workforces assembled during
difﬁcult economic conditions may prove less interested in unionization.
First-mover and late-mover advantages are discussed extensively in Chapter
5.
Timing’s role in cost position may depend more on timing with respect
to the business cycle or market conditions than on timing in absolute terms.
For example, the timing of purchase of an offshore drilling rig in the
industry’s cycle strongly inﬂuences not only the interest cost but the
purchase price of the rig. ODECO has purchased rigs during downturns
when prices are depressed as an integral part of its cost leadership strategy.
Depending on the value activity, then, timing can either raise or lower costs
relative to competitors. Timing can lead to either sustainable cost advantage
or a short-term cost advantage. A ﬁrm that has low cost assets because of
fortuitous timing, for example, may ﬁnd that the eventual need to replace
those assets dramatically raises its relative cost position.
DISCRETIONARY POLICIES INDEPENDENT OF OTHER DRIVERS
The cost of a value activity is always affected by policy choices a ﬁrm
makes, quite independently of other cost drivers. Discretionary policy
choices reﬂect a ﬁrm’s strategy and often involve deliberate tradeoffs
between cost and differentiation. For example, an airline’s cost position is
determined by such policy choices as the quality of meals, which airports


---PAGE BREAK---

are used, the level of amenities in terminals, the baggage allowance offered,
and whether the airline sells tickets on-board or has in-terminal ticketing
and downtown ticket ofﬁces. A “no-frills” airline reduces cost by having no
meals or charging for them, using secondary airports with spartan terminals,
having no free baggage allowance, and ticketing on board.
Some of the policy choices that tend to have the greatest impact on cost
include:
• product conﬁguration, performance, and features
• mix and variety of products offered
• level of service provided
• spending rate on marketing and technology development activities
• delivery time
• buyers served (e.g., small versus large)
•  channels employed (e.g., fewer, more efﬁcient dealers versus many
small ones)
• process technology chosen, independent or scale, timing, or other cost
drivers
• the speciﬁcations of raw materials or other purchased inputs used (e.g.,
raw material quality affects processing yield in semiconductors)
• wages paid and amenities provided to employees, relative to prevailing
norms
• other human resource policies including hiring, training, and employee
motivation
• procedures for scheduling production, maintenance, the sales force and
other activities
Though policy choices always play an independent role in determining
the cost of value activities, they also frequently affect or are affected by
other cost drivers. Process technology is often dictated partly by scale and
partly by what product characteristics are desired, for example. Moreover,
other cost drivers inevitably affect the cost of policies. For example, an
automated ticketing and seat selection system may well be subject to


---PAGE BREAK---

economies of scale that make such a system very costly for a small airline
to adopt.
Policies typically play a particularly essential role in differentiation
strategies. Differentiation often rests on policy choices that make a ﬁrm
unique in performing one or more value activities, deliberately raising cost
in the process (see Chapter 4). A differentiator must understand the costs
associated with its differentiation and compare them to the price premium
that results. This can be done only by isolating the effects of policies on
cost. Frequently, ﬁrms choose seemingly benign policies to differentiate
themselves that prove enormously costly once their role in cost behavior
becomes clear. In other cases, ﬁrms forego policies that can enhance
differentiation with little impact on cost—or that are less expensive for
them to implement than for their competitors. A market leader such as
Owens-Corning Fiberglas, for example, can potentially differentiate itself at
lower cost than other ﬁberglass competitors through a high spending rate on
advertising. The resulting brand awareness is cheaper for Owens-Corning to
achieve than competitors because of scale economies in advertising that are
driven by national share.
Policies play a vital role in determining cost, and cost analysis must
uncover their impact. Yet many ﬁrms do not recognize the extent to which
the explicit and implicit policy choices they make determine cost. A ﬁrm
must scrutinize each value activity to identify the explicit and implicit
policy choices embodied in it. Sometimes policy choices are nearly
invisible, because they are inherited or represent conventional wisdom that
is unchallenged. An examination of competitors’ policies in each activity
often yields insight into the ﬁrm’s explicit or implicit policy choices and
suggests ways they might be modiﬁed or improved to lower costs. Policy
choices can often be changed rapidly, yielding immediate cost reduction.
LOCATION
The geographic location of a value activity can affect its cost, as can its
location relative to other value activities. While location frequently reﬂects
a policy choice, it can also stem from history, the location of inputs, and
other factors. Hence, location should be treated as a separate cost driver.


---PAGE BREAK---

The location of a value activity affects cost in a number of ways.
Locations differ in the prevailing costs of labor, management, scientiﬁc
personnel, raw materials, energy, and other factors. Prevailing wage levels
and tax rates vary markedly by country, region within a country, and city,
for example. Eaton Corporation has capitalized on this in automotive
components, employing plants in Spain and Italy to achieve a low-cost
position in Europe. Location can also affect the cost of a ﬁrm’s
infrastructure because of differences in available local infrastructure.
Climate, cultural norms, and tastes also differ by location. These affect not
only product needs but also the way in which a ﬁrm can perform value
activities. The amenities required in a plant, for example, are partly a
function of local norms. Finally, logistical costs often hinge on location.
Location relative to suppliers is an important factor in inbound logistical
cost, while location relative to buyers affects outbound logistical cost.
Location of facilities relative to each other affects the costs of transshipping,
inventory, transportation, and coordination. Location also shapes the
transportation modes and communication systems available to a ﬁrm, which
can affect cost.
Location has some inﬂuence, then, on the cost of almost every value
activity. Firms do not always understand the impact of location beyond
obvious differences such as wage rates and taxes, however. Opportunities
often exist for reducing cost through relocating value activities or by
establishing new patterns of location of facilities relative to each other.
Changing location often involves tradeoffs—it lowers some costs while
raising others. Locating to minimize transportation or other costs also
frequently trades off against scale economies. Technological change that
alters scale economies may alter historical tradeoffs, however, as may shifts
in relative wages and other costs. Thus ﬁrms may be able to create a cost
advantage through recognizing opportunities for changing location ﬁrst.
INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS
Institutional factors, including government regulation, tax holidays and
other ﬁnancial incentives, unionization, tariffs and levies, and local content
rules, constitute the ﬁnal major cost driver. Institutional factors represent
perhaps the single most important cost driver in the trucking industry in the


---PAGE BREAK---

United States in the 1980s, for example. Regulatory approval for the use of
double trailers could have as much as a 10 percent impact on cost. At the
same time, unionized carriers have much higher wage costs relative to
nonunion carriers. These two factors outweigh all the other major cost
drivers by a considerable margin in determining the relative cost position of
trucking ﬁrms. Another example of the role of institutional factors as a cost
driver is in power costs, the single largest determinant of cost position in
aluminum smelting. Power costs depend on the rates charged by power
companies, a highly political issue in areas where governments own power
companies. Rapid escalation of power rates in some countries has made
them uncompetitive smelting locations. Favorable institutional factors can
lower costs just as unfavorable ones can raise them. While institutional
factors often remain outside a ﬁrm’s control, means may exist to inﬂuence
them or minimize their impact.
DIAGNOSING COST DRIVERS
The same cost drivers determine asset utilization as well as operating
costs in an activity. Finished good inventory turnover, for example, is often
determined by the scale of the order processing activity and policies
regarding delivery time. Tradeoffs can often be made between asset
utilization and operating costs. A large-scale plant may have low operating
costs but less asset turnover than a small-scale one, for example. Such
tradeoffs must be identiﬁed in order to optimize the combination of assets
and operating cost to lower total cost. Some illustrative drivers of asset
utilization are shown in Table 3–2.
The cost behavior of a value activity can be a function of more than one
cost driver. While one driver may exert the strongest inﬂuence on the cost of
a value activity, several drivers often interact to determine cost. For
example, the cost of gate operations for an airline reﬂects policies regarding
how much service the airline provides, local scale (which inﬂuences the
efﬁciency with which personnel and facilities are utilized), and the pattern
of capacity utilization (which is a reﬂection of the ﬂight schedule). Figure
3–2 illustrates the most important cost drivers in a consumer durable
manufacturing ﬁrm.


---PAGE BREAK---

A ﬁrm must attempt to quantify the relationship between cost drivers and
the cost of a value activity whenever possible. This will require estimating
for each activity the slope of the scale or learning curve, the cost impact of
each important policy, the cost advantage or penalty of timing, and so on for
each driver. Though a high degree of precision is not required, some level of
quantiﬁcation is necessary in order to determine the relative signiﬁcance of
each cost driver. Quantiﬁcation will also greatly facilitate estimates of
relative cost position vis-à-vis competitors.
The technology employed in a value activity is not itself a cost driver,
but rather an outcome of the interplay of cost drivers. Scale, timing,
location, and other drivers shape the technology employed in combination
with policy decisions a ﬁrm makes. The relationship between technology
and the cost drivers is important in determining the feasibility of technology
changes, one of the subjects of Chapter 5.
Interactions Among Drivers. Cost drivers often interact to determine the
cost of an activity. These interactions take two forms: drivers either
reinforce or counteract each other. Drivers frequently reinforce or are
related to each other in affecting cost. The extent of scale economies in an
activity is partly determined by policy choices about how the activity will
be performed as well as product mix, for example. The effect of location on
cost is often related to institutional conditions such as unionization or
regulation, while securing good locations may require early timing in such
industries as retailing. Policy choices can also make linkages easier or more
difﬁcult to achieve, and the cost of policies is often affected by other drivers
as noted earlier. The advantages of early timing can be reinforced by scale
economies or learning effects, as will be discussed in Chapter 5. Integration
also frequently increases scale economies.


---PAGE BREAK---

TABLE 3–2 Illustrative Drivers of Asset Utilization for Selected Value
Activities


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 3–2. Cost Drivers in a Consumer Durable Manufacturing Firm


---PAGE BREAK---

Cost drivers can also counteract each other, offsetting each other’s
effects. This means that improving position vis-à-vis one driver may worsen
a ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis another. Large scale and high levels of vertical
integration frequently increase the penalty of underutilizing capacity, for
example. Similarly, increased scale can increase the likelihood of
unionization, while scale economies can be offset because a single location
raises transportation costs.
Identifying interactions among cost drivers is a necessary part of
determining the cost behavior of a value activity. Where drivers are
reinforcing, a ﬁrm must coordinate its strategy in order to achieve the
lowest cost. For example, policy choices should enhance the ﬁrm’s ability to
reap the beneﬁts of scale economies or to achieve linkages. Early timing
should be exploited by the aggressive pursuit of learning. Eliminating
inconsistencies and harnessing the reinforcing effects of cost drivers can
signiﬁcantly improve relative cost position.
The presence of counteracting cost drivers implies the need for
optimization. Location must optimize the tradeoff among scale economies,
transportation costs, and wage costs, for example. The choice of plant scale
must weigh the cost of underutilization. Policy choices can sometimes alter
such tradeoffs—for example, the choice of a ﬂexible manufacturing process
can change the tradeoff between scale and product variety. Resolving such
tradeoffs is only possible if the effect of each driver on the cost of an
activity can be quantiﬁed.
Interactions among cost drivers are often subtle. They are frequently not
recognized, especially if they are changing. The ability to translate insight
about the interaction of cost drivers into strategy choices can thus be a
sustainable source of cost advantage.
Identifying Cost Drivers. Identifying cost drivers and quantifying their
effect on cost may not be easy, and a number of methods can be employed.
Sometimes the cost drivers of a value activity will be intuitively clear from
examining its basic economics. For example, sales force costs are often
driven by local share because high local share lowers travel time. A
reasonably accurate estimate of the shape of the relationship between sales
force cost and share can be computed by estimating how rising share would
cut average travel time. It is often illuminating for understanding and


---PAGE BREAK---

quantifying cost behavior to employ alternative measures of the efﬁciency
of an activity besides total cost. For example, such measures as yield, scrap
rates, labor hours, and others can be employed to probe the sources of cost
changes in a value activity and their logic.
Another method of identifying cost drivers is for a ﬁrm to examine its
own internal experience, particularly if the ﬁrm’s circumstances have
changed over time or it operates multiple units. Past cost data may allow a
ﬁrm to plot its historical learning curve in a value activity, for example, if it
adjusts for inﬂation and changes in policies, product design, and product
mix. Cost levels at different scales of output in the past may shed some light
on scale economies. If a ﬁrm sells in several geographic regions or
manufactures in several plants, differences among them can illuminate cost
drivers.
Cost drivers can also be determined from interviews with experts.
Individuals who have extensive knowledge of a value activity can be asked
“what if” questions about the effects of changing various parameters on
cost. For instance, interviews with production managers might address the
impact of doubling line speed on such factors as manning levels, energy
consumption, and yield.
The ﬁnal method for identifying cost drivers is to compare a ﬁrm’s cost
in a value activity to its competitors’ or compare competitors’ costs to each
other. Since competitors will usually be situated differently vis-à-vis the
cost drivers, such comparisons can expose which cost drivers are most
important. Analyzing competitor cost behavior will be discussed below.
The Cost of Purchased Inputs
Procurement has strategic signiﬁcance in almost every industry, but
rarely has sufﬁcient stature in ﬁrms. Every value activity employs purchased
inputs of some kind, ranging from raw materials used in component
fabrication to professional services, ofﬁce space, and capital goods.
Purchased inputs divide into purchased operating inputs and purchased
assets. The total cost of purchased inputs as a percentage of ﬁrm value
provides an important indicator of the strategic signiﬁcance of procurement.
In many industries, the total cost of purchased inputs is a very large


---PAGE BREAK---

percentage of value, yet it receives much less attention than reducing labor
costs.
The cost of purchased inputs is an integral part of the cost of a value
activity, and the cost drivers described above determine the behavior of
input costs. However, isolating purchased inputs for separate analysis will
often yield additional insights into cost behavior. The cost of purchased
inputs in an activity is a function of three factors: their unit cost, their rate
of utilization in an activity, and their indirect effects on other activities
through linkages. While utilization of inputs in an activity and linkages with
other activities are best analyzed as part of the overall cost behavior of an
activity, the unit cost of purchased inputs often has similar drivers across
activities. Firmwide procurement practices also affect the unit cost of many
inputs. Thus a ﬁrm can gain insight into how to lower unit cost by analyzing
the unit cost of purchased inputs as a group.
In separating the unit cost of purchased inputs for analysis, however, a
ﬁrm must recognize all three factors noted above. Better quality steel may
improve the yield of a forging operation, as well as simplify machining. In
some instances, then, a ﬁrm may lower total cost by spending more on
purchased inputs. Minimizing the unit cost of purchased inputs is not
necessarily appropriate. However, it is still clearly desirable to seek the best
possible unit cost for purchased inputs after choosing the appropriate type
and quality of inputs.
Firms’ analyses of purchasing typically focus on the most visible items,
especially raw materials and components. However, purchased inputs other
than raw materials and components, when aggregated, often constitute an
even greater percentage of cost. Standard cost systems often distribute the
costs of such inputs among many cost categories rather than highlighting
their importance. Purchased services such as maintenance or professional
services are often overlooked in purchasing analyses, while purchases from
sister units seldom receive the level of examination that is applied to outside
purchases. Finally, purchased assets are frequently bought outside the
normal procurement system and without the associated expertise. A
comprehensive analysis of the unit cost of purchased inputs can be an
important tool in gaining cost advantage.
PURCHASING INFORMATION


---PAGE BREAK---

The starting point in analyzing the unit cost of purchased inputs is to
develop purchasing information. A ﬁrm should begin by identifying all
signiﬁcant purchased inputs and determining its yearly or quarterly
expenditures on them. The list should include inputs purchased from sister
business units. For purchased operating inputs, usage per period represents
a relatively easy means of calculating cost. This analysis, however, must
account for prepayments, discounts, and inventory changes. For purchased
assets, total purchase price can be used as a measure of cost, adjusted for
supplier concessions such as free service, free spare parts, or low-cost
ﬁnancing.
All signiﬁcant purchased inputs should be identiﬁed, and listed in the
order of importance to total cost. They should then be divided into
purchased operating inputs and purchased assets and, within these
categories, into items purchased regularly such as raw materials and ofﬁce
space, and irregularly purchased items such as equipment and consulting.
Categorizing purchased inputs in this way can direct attention to areas
where opportunities for cost reduction are frequently present. Small
purchased inputs often provide fruitful opportunities for cost reduction.
Managers tend to focus their attention on those few purchases that represent
a signiﬁcant percentage of costs. As a result, suppliers frequently generate
their highest margins on purchases that represent a small cost item to the
buyer. Irregularly purchased inputs frequently receive inadequate attention
as well, while regular purchases are monitored and most ﬁrms have
procedures to govern them. A ﬁrm should also compute the change in the
inﬂation-adjusted cost of each input over time. Such a calculation further
highlights those inputs that should be scrutinized. An increase in the real
unit cost of an input may indicate that a ﬁrm has either paid inadequate
attention to controlling cost or that supplier bargaining power has grown.
After sorting purchased inputs by size, regularity of purchase and real
cost change, a ﬁrm should then identify where it makes the purchasing
decision. Authority for many purchases rests outside the purchasing
department. Yet the purchasing department is the place where procedures,
procurement expertise, systems for tracking the costs of purchases, and the
mandate to manage cost reside. Although the de facto delegation of
procurement authority to other parts of a ﬁrm is often a practical necessity,
it tends to obscure the cost of many purchased inputs and can lead to less


---PAGE BREAK---

efﬁcient procurement unless the ﬁrm applies the same care as it does in the
purchasing department.
A ﬁnal step in developing information about purchased inputs is to
record the suppliers for each item and the proportion of purchases awarded
to each supplier over an ordering cycle. The number and mix of suppliers
will play an important role in determining the cost of purchased inputs. A
ﬁrm must also systematically track potential suppliers that it does not
currently purchase from. This will ensure that alternative suppliers are
regularly considered and that a ﬁrm can gain perspective on the
performance of its own suppliers. Often a simple list of suppliers for each
input will lead to some interesting conclusions. For example, single-sourced
items may represent a signiﬁcant fraction of total purchases. Unless special
circumstances are present, single sourcing is an indication that suppliers
have created switching costs and that unit costs of inputs may be
unnecessarily high.
DRIVERS OF PURCHASED INPUT COSTS
The same cost drivers identiﬁed above shape the cost behavior of
purchased inputs, in combination with the bargaining relationship between
the ﬁrm and suppliers that grows out of industry structure.10 The structural
bargaining relationship reﬂects the broader industry determinants of
supplier margin, while the cost drivers address how a ﬁrm’s speciﬁc
circumstances can inﬂuence it. While a ﬁrm must expect to pay suppliers
higher margins on some inputs for these structural reasons, the cost of all
inputs can be reduced by controlling the drivers. Some drivers have similar
effects on the cost of many purchased inputs, and Table 3–3 summarizes
some of the most important ones. For each purchased input, position vis-à-
vis the drivers will determine the unit cost of purchased inputs of a given
quality.
As discussed in Chapter 2, a ﬁrm should seek to coordinate or jointly
optimize supplier linkages to lower overall costs in addition to create
bargaining power with its suppliers. Effective communication with suppliers
is necessary to achieve linkages. Ideally, a ﬁrm can exploit the available
linkages and capture its share of their beneﬁts by exercising its bargaining


---PAGE BREAK---

power. Procurement policies have an important role in both harnessing
supplier linkages and improving a ﬁrm’s bargaining power.
SUPPLIER COST BEHAVIOR AND THE COST OF INPUTS
The cost behavior of suppliers will have an important inﬂuence on both
the cost of inputs and the ability of a ﬁrm to exploit supplier linkages.
Suppliers of a given purchased input will often vary in relative cost position,
and identifying the lowest cost source may lead to lower unit purchasing
costs in the long term if the ﬁrm can exercise its bargaining power. Supplier
cost behavior will determine whether placing larger orders will lower
suppliers’ cost. Supplier cost behavior will also determine the impact on
suppliers’ cost of other practices a ﬁrm adopts or asks its suppliers to adopt.
Supplier cost behavior is analyzed in the same way as a ﬁrm’s cost
behavior. Understanding the cost behavior of key suppliers will thus allow a
ﬁrm to establish better purchasing policies as well as to recognize and
exploit linkages.
TABLE 3–3 Drivers of the Unit Cost of Purchased Inputs
COST
DRIVER
COST DRIVER
APPLIED TO
PROCUREMENT
DESCRIPTION
Economies of
Scale
Purchasing scale
The volume of purchasing with a given supplier affects
bargaining power
Linkages
Linkages with suppliers Coordinating with suppliers on speciﬁcations, delivery,
and other activities can lower total costs
Interrelationships Shared purchasing with
other business units
Combining purchases with sister business units can
improve bargaining power with suppliers
Integration
Make versus buy
Integration may raise or lower the cost of an input
Timing
History of supplier
relationships
Historical loyalty to or problems with suppliers may
affect input costs, access to inputs during tight
periods, and services provided by suppliers
Policies
Purchasing practices*
Purchasing practices can signiﬁcantly improve
bargaining power with suppliers and the willingness
of suppliers to perform extra services, for example:
• Selection of the number and mix of suppliers
• Hedging procedures


---PAGE BREAK---

• Investment in information on supplier costs and
availability
• Annual contracts versus individual purchases
• Utilization of by-products
Location
Supplier location
Location of suppliers can affect the cost of inputs
through the cost of transportation and the ease of
communication
Institutional
Factors
Government and union
restrictions
Government policy can restrict access to inputs or affect
their cost through tariffs, taxes, and other means.
Unions may affect the ability to out-source or
whether nonunion suppliers can be used
* Purchasing practices that can lower input costs will be treated more completely below.
Segment Cost Behavior
Thus far I have described how to analyze the cost behavior of a business
unit as a whole. In practice, however, a business unit usually produces a
number of different product varieties and sells them to a number of different
buyers. It may also employ a number of different distribution channels. For
example, a shipbuilder constructs both liquid natural gas tankers and
containerships while a bank lends to sophisticated high net-worth
individuals as well as to middle income customers. Any of these differences
may give rise to segments in which the behavior of costs in the value chain
may be different. Unless the ﬁrm recognizes differences in cost behavior
among segments, there is a signiﬁcant danger that incorrect or average-cost
pricing will provide openings for competitors. Thus cost analysis at the
segment level must often supplement analysis at the business unit level.
Chapter 7 discusses the identiﬁcation and analysis of segments in more
detail. Differences in cost behavior among products, buyers, channels, or
geographic areas is one of the key bases for the existence of segments, and
hence cost analysis is an essential input to segmentation. The value chain
for segments generally parallels that of the whole business unit. However,
segment value chains may differ in some respects that affect cost. For
example, the large sizes of a product line may be produced on different
machines than small sizes and require different handling, inspection, and
shipping procedures. Similarly, they may require different purchased inputs.


---PAGE BREAK---

Identifying important differences in the value activities for different
segments is a starting point in segment cost analysis.
A ﬁrm should analyze the costs of those product lines, buyer types, or
other portions of its activities that
• have signiﬁcantly different value chains
• appear to have different cost drivers
• employ questionable procedures for allocating costs
In practice, a ﬁrm may want to select representative product varieties or
buyers to illuminate differences among segments, rather than analyze every
product variety or buyer in complete detail.
The process used to analyze cost behavior for segments is the same as
that used for business units. The value chain for the segment is identiﬁed
and costs and assets are assigned to it. Then the cost drivers of each activity
are determined and quantiﬁed if possible. While the process remains the
same, however, some complications often arise in practice. The prevalence
of shared value activities among segments (see Chapter 7) requires the
allocation of costs among segments. Standard cost systems often employ
arbitrary measures as the basis for allocating cost to segments, such as sales
volume or other readily measurable variables. While these measures have
the beneﬁt of simplicity, they often have little to do with the true
contribution of the segment to overall costs. For example, allocating the
costs of a value activity to domestic and international buyers by volume of
sales will usually seriously understate the true cost of international sales,
because international sales often make disproportionate demands in terms
of time and attention. The costs of support activities and the costs of
indirect primary activities appear to be most susceptible to misallocation.
Such misallocations result in incorrect costs and inappropriate prices for
product or buyer segments.
The costs of value activities shared among segments should be allocated
based on each segment’s actual impact on the effort or capacity of the value
activity. Such measures will capture the opportunity cost of using a shared
value activity in one segment instead of another. In technology
development, for example, allocation should probably be based on the


---PAGE BREAK---

estimated time spent by engineers and scientists on particular product lines
rather than on the products’ respective sales volumes.
It is not always feasible or necessary to allocate the costs of shared
activities to segments on an ongoing basis. The required analysis for
strategic purposes does not require a high degree of precision, and periodic
studies can sufﬁce. To allocate R&D costs, for example, engineers can be
interviewed to determine the percentage of their time spent on various
products and buyers over a period of time long enough to eliminate
distortions. Some ﬁrms may also be in a position to compute time allocation
by sampling engineering change orders or requests for product
modiﬁcations ﬂowing to the engineering group from the sales force. Similar
methods of approximation can provide the basis for allocating effort to
segments in almost any shared activity.
Cost Dynamics
In addition to analyzing cost behavior at a point in time, a ﬁrm must
consider how the absolute and relative cost of value activities will change
over time independent of its strategy. I term this cost dynamics. An analysis
of cost dynamics enables a ﬁrm to forecast how the cost drivers of value
activities may change and which value activities will increase or decrease in
absolute or relative cost importance. A ﬁrm with insight into cost dynamics
may be able to position itself to gain a cost advantage by anticipating these
changes and moving quickly to respond to them.
Cost dynamics occur because of the interplay of cost drivers over time,
as a ﬁrm grows or as industry conditions change. The most common
sources of cost dynamics include:
Industry Real Growth. Growth of an industry as a whole often has a
number of effects on costs. Growth can ﬂow through to purchased inputs,
affecting the scale of supplier industries and thereby the cost of inputs. In
some industries, industry growth forces up the cost of purchased inputs by
worsening the supply/demand balance, while in others it lowers the cost of
inputs by making suppliers more efﬁcient. Industry growth can also open up


---PAGE BREAK---

possibilities for scale economies by making the introduction of new
technologies feasible in value activities.
Differential Scale Sensitivity. Real growth (or decline) in the sales of
ﬁrms can dramatically change the absolute and relative costs of value
activities if activities have differing scale sensitivity. For example, software
cost has become increasingly high relative to hardware cost in many
electronics-related industries such as computers, video games, and
telecommunication equipment, as hardware cost has proven more scale- and
learning-sensitive than software cost. The same process can shift the
relative cost position of ﬁrms that have value chains with differing degrees
of scale sensitivity. For example, Eli Lilly’s DNA-based technology for
manufacturing insulin is believed to be more scale-sensitive than Novo
Industries’ process. If this proves to be true, Lilly’s relative cost position
will improve as volume grows.
Different Learning Rates. The relative cost of different value activities
will change if learning occurs in them at different rates. Learning reduces
the relative costs of those value activities in which it proceeds most rapidly.
For example, rapid learning has dramatically reduced assembly costs as a
percentage of sales for many electronics ﬁrms. As a result, differences
among regions and countries in labor rates for assembly workers have
diminished in importance in determining relative cost position.
Differential Technological Change. Technological changes that proceed
at different rates can clearly affect the relative cost of different value
activities and their cost drivers. For example, the availability of low-cost
computers and the development of airfreight have fundamentally shifted the
economics of many distribution industries. These changes have caused
dramatic reductions in order processing costs as a percentage of total costs,
and have allowed the restructuring of distributors in the direction of fewer
and more centralized warehouses.
Relative Inﬂation of Costs. The rate of inﬂation in key cost elements in
value activities often differs and this can signiﬁcantly shift their relative
cost. Differential inﬂation rates can quickly turn an insigniﬁcant value


---PAGE BREAK---

activity into one of critical strategic importance, or can convert a modest
cost item within an activity into the dominant one. For example, because of
the rapid inﬂation in oil prices relative to salaries and equipment, fuel costs
now constitute almost 50 percent of airline operating costs. As a result, the
fuel efﬁciency of the ﬂeet, the inherent efﬁciency of the route system, and
operating procedures have taken on critical strategic importance.
Aging. An aging capital base or workforce can shift the relative cost of
value activities. Older offshore drilling rigs require more maintenance and
insurance, for example, and an older workforce typically has higher salary
and beneﬁt costs.
Market Adjustment. The operation of market forces often works to
counteract high or low purchased input costs and to eliminate or reduce cost
differentials based on favorable purchasing by individual ﬁrms. People
Express and other new airlines have enjoyed extremely low aircraft costs by
purchasing used planes during the recent glut. Imitators of their strategy
will eventually eliminate the stock of used planes, and People Express will
compete with other airlines on a more equal basis.
Cost dynamics can lead to signiﬁcant changes in industry structure and
relative cost position. In steelmaking, for example, technological change
and changing material costs have shifted the stage at which the minimum
efﬁcient scale of a steelmaking complex is determined. The primary rolling
mill historically set minimum scale, but now the blast furnace stage does.
Continuous casting has emerged as a lower-cost process than primary
rolling for producing semiﬁnished steel slabs. It is also less scale-sensitive
than primary rolling. These shifts have major implications for the relative
cost positions of competitors, depending on their process conﬁgurations.
They have led to the success of mini-mills such as Nucor and Lone Star that
use continuous casting technology and also have lower-cost labor than
established competitors. Early identiﬁcation of cost dynamics can yield a
signiﬁcant cost advantage by directing a ﬁrm toward those value activities
that will have the greatest leverage for future relative cost position but may
not now be receiving attention.


---PAGE BREAK---

Cost Advantage
A ﬁrm has a cost advantage if its cumulative cost of performing all value
activities is lower than competitors’ costs.11 The strategic value of cost
advantage hinges on its sustainability. Sustainability will be present if the
sources of a ﬁrm’s cost advantage are difﬁcult for competitors to replicate
or imitate. Cost advantage leads to superior performance if the ﬁrm
provides an acceptable level of value to the buyer so that its cost advantage
is not nulliﬁed by the need to charge a lower price than competitors.
A ﬁrm’s relative cost position is a function of
• the composition of its value chain versus competitors’
• its relative position vis-à-vis the cost drivers of each activity
Competitors have value chains that may be similar to or different from
the ﬁrm’s. In airlines, for example, TWA and United employ similar value
chains that differ from that of People Express. If competitors’ value chains
are different from that of the ﬁrm, the inherent efﬁciency of the two chains
will determine relative cost position. Differences in value chains usually
encompass only a subset of value activities and thus a ﬁrm can isolate the
effect of different chains on relative cost position by comparing the cost of
these differing activities.
A ﬁrm’s relative cost position in value activities that are the same as
competitors’ depends on the ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis the cost drivers of
those activities relative to competitors. If regional scale drives the cost of
the sales force, for example, relative sales force cost will reﬂect the regional
shares of competitors and the steepness of the scale curve. A ﬁrm should
assess the relative cost position of common value activities one by one, and
then accumulate them together with the relative cost of different activities to
determine overall cost position.
Determining the Relative Cost of Competitors
The value chain is the basic tool for determining competitor costs. The
ﬁrst step in determining competitor costs is to identify competitor value
chains and how activities are performed by them. The process is the same as


---PAGE BREAK---

that employed by a ﬁrm to analyze its own value chain. In practice it is
often extremely difﬁcult to assess competitors’ costs because the ﬁrm does
not have direct information. It is usually possible to estimate directly the
cost of some of a competitor’s value activities from commonly available
public data as well as from interviews with buyers, suppliers and others. For
example, a ﬁrm can often learn the number of salespersons a competitor
employs as well as their approximate compensation and expense account
allowances. In this way, the costs of some of the competitor’s value
activities can be built up to yield an accurate but partial picture of the
competitor’s costs.
For value activities where a competitor’s costs cannot be estimated
directly, the ﬁrm should employ comparisons between itself and the
competitor. This requires that the relative position of the competitor with
respect to the cost drivers of the value activities in question be determined.
A ﬁrm then uses its knowledge of cost behavior to estimate differences in
the competitor’s costs. For example, if local share drives logistical costs and
the competitor has a higher local share, the competitor probably possesses a
cost advantage in that value activity. If the ﬁrm can estimate the scale curve
for logistical costs, the share difference provides a way of estimating the
extent of the ﬁrm’s disadvantage.
Given the extent to which determining a competitor’s costs involves
estimates and deduction, it is sometimes only feasible to estimate the
direction, and not the absolute magnitude, of the relative cost difference
with a competitor in a value activity. However, this can still prove extremely
useful, since the ﬁrm can combine the direction of difference with
knowledge of the proportional size of each value activity to develop a
general picture of a competitor’s relative cost position.
A ﬁrm can typically improve the accuracy of estimates of competitors’
costs by examining several competitors simultaneously. Information
disclosed by one competitor can be cross-checked against the disclosures of
other competitors and used to test the consistency of scale curves or other
cost models for a particular value activity. In fact, analyzing a ﬁrm’s cost
behavior and determining the relative costs of competitors is often an
iterative process.


---PAGE BREAK---

Gaining Cost Advantage
There are two major ways that a ﬁrm can gain a cost advantage:
• Control cost drivers. A ﬁrm can gain an advantage with respect to the
cost drivers of value activities representing a signiﬁcant proportion of
total costs.
• Reconﬁgure the value chain. A ﬁrm can adopt a different and more
efﬁcient way to design, produce, distribute, or market the product.
The two sources of cost advantage are not mutually exclusive. Even a ﬁrm
with a very different value chain from its competitors will have some
common activities, and its relative cost position in them can enhance or
detract from overall cost position.
Successful cost leaders usually derive their cost advantage from multiple
sources within the value chain. Sustainable cost advantage stems not from
one activity but from many, and reconﬁguring the chain frequently plays a
role in creating cost advantage. Cost leadership requires an examination of
every activity in a ﬁrm for opportunities to reduce cost, and the consistent
pursuit of all of them. More often than not, cost leaders have a culture
emanating from senior management that reinforces such behavior. It often
includes symbolic practices such as spartan facilities and limited executive
perquisites.
Cost reduction may or may not erode differentiation. Every ﬁrm should
aggressively pursue cost reduction in activities that do not inﬂuence
differentiation (see Chapter 4). In activities that contribute to differentiation,
a conscious choice may still be made to sacriﬁce all or part of
differentiation in favor of improving relative cost position.
CONTROLLING COST DRIVERS
Once a ﬁrm has identiﬁed its value chain and diagnosed the cost drivers
of signiﬁcant value activities, cost advantage grows out of controlling those
drivers better than competitors. A ﬁrm can potentially achieve superior
position vis-à-vis the cost drivers of any activity in the value chain.
Activities that represent a signiﬁcant or growing proportion of cost will


---PAGE BREAK---

offer the greatest potential for improving relative cost position. While the
appropriate cost drivers will vary for each activity, some generalizations
about how controlling each of the ten cost drivers can lead to cost advantage
in an activity are as follows:
CONTROLLING SCALE
Gain the Appropriate Type of Scale. Increasing scale through
acquisitions, product line extensions, market expansion, or marketing
activity can lower cost. However, the type of scale that drives cost differs by
activity. Boosting local or regional scale in an existing region will usually
lower sales force or physical distribution costs, while raising national scale
by entering a new region may actually raise these costs. By looking
throughout the value chain for the types of scale that drive cost, the value of
scale (and hence market share) of different types can be assessed. Pursuit of
scale should be selectively tuned to the type of scale that drives the cost of
important activities in the particular industry. Scale increases in different
activities must be balanced, moreover, so that pursuing scale in one activity
does not create diseconomies in another.
Set Policies to Reinforce Scale Economies in Scale-Sensitive Activities.
Scale economies are partly a function of how activities are managed. Eaton
has maximized its scale economies in engine valves, for example, by
simplifying its product line.
Exploit the Types of Scale Economies Where the Firm Is Favored. A ﬁrm
should manage activities in ways that bring out the types of scale economies
that most favor it. A ﬁrm with high global share should manage product
development to emphasize global scale, for example, by stressing world
products rather than country-tailored ones.
Emphasize Value Activities Driven by Types of Scale Where the Firm Has
an Advantage. Since different types of scale drive the cost of different value
activities, a ﬁrm should set its strategy to emphasize as much as possible the
activities in which it has superior scale of the appropriate type. For a
regional producer competing with national ﬁrms, for example, this may


---PAGE BREAK---

imply that sales force assistance and service should be emphasized, rather
than rapid new product introduction whose cost is driven by national or
global scale.
CONTROLLING LEARNING
Manage with the Learning Curve. Learning does not occur automatically
but results from the effort and attention of management and employees.
Attention to learning should not be conﬁned to labor costs but also to the
cost of constructing facilities, the cost of scrap, and other signiﬁcant value
activities. Every premise and every practice must be examined for possible
revision. Management must demand learning improvements and establish
targets for them, rather than simply hope that learning will occur. When
setting targets, the rate of learning should be compared across facilities and
regions, as well as to industry standards. A ﬁrm must also establish
mechanisms to facilitate the sharing of learning across facilities and
business units. The sharing of learning is often impeded by geographic
distance and internal rivalry.
Keep Learning Proprietary. Learning can lower a ﬁrm’s relative cost
position if the ﬁrm minimizes the spillover rate to competitors. Keeping
learning proprietary can become an important means of achieving cost
advantage in learning-sensitive value activities. Means for accomplishing
this include:
•  backward integration to protect know-how, such as by building or
modifying production equipment in-house
•  controlling employee publications or other forms of information
dissemination
• retaining key employees
• strict non-disclosure provisions in employment contracts
Learn from Competitors. Pride should not interfere with exploiting the
learning of competitors. Analysis of competitor value chains allows a ﬁrm
to uncover good ideas that can be applied in-house. There are many ways to
acquire competitor learning, including reverse engineering of competitor


---PAGE BREAK---

products, studying published material including patent ﬁlings and articles
about competitors, and maintaining relationships with competitors’
suppliers to gain access to knowhow and to the latest purchased inputs.
CONTROLLING THE EFFECT OF CAPACITY UTILIZATION
Level Throughput. A ﬁrm can often increase average capacity utilization
by ﬁnding ways to level the ﬂuctuations of volume through its value chain.
For example, Sun-Diamond, the agricultural cooperative that produces Sun
Maid raisins, Diamond walnuts, and other products, has reduced the cost of
underutilization by promoting year-round baking uses for its products.
These have reduced demand differences between the Christmas season and
the rest of the year. Similarly, credit card processors can level throughput by
serving a mix of accounts that have peak volumes spread throughout the
year, e.g., beach clubs and ski areas.
A ﬁrm can level throughput through a variety of means, including:
• peak load or contribution pricing
• marketing activity, such as increasing promotion during slack periods
and ﬁnding off-season uses for the products
•  line extensions into less cyclical products, or into products that can
intermittently utilize excess capacity (e.g., private label)
•  selecting buyers with more stable demand or demands that are
counterseasonal or countercyclical
• ceding share in high demand periods and regaining it in low demand
periods
• letting competitors serve ﬂuctuating segments12
• sharing activities with sister business units with a different pattern of
needs (see Chapter 9).
Reduce the Penalty of Throughput Fluctuations. In addition to smoothing
throughput ﬂuctuations, a ﬁrm can sometimes reduce the costs associated
with ﬂuctuations in the volume of activity. Tapered integration, for example,
is a means of using suppliers to cover peak needs rather than satisfying
them in-house. Canadian steel producers, for example, have avoided excess


---PAGE BREAK---

capacity despite ﬂuctuating sales by adding capacity for trendline demand
growth rather than year-to-year demand. They sell steel produced by
subcontractors and foreign ﬁrms to cover shortfalls.
CONTROLLING LINKAGES
Exploit Cost Linkages Within the Value Chain. A ﬁrm can improve its
cost position if it recognizes linkages among value activities and exploits
them. The additional cost of achieving higher precision in machining parts
may, for example, be offset by a reduction in inspection costs of the ﬁnished
products. Recent technological advances are making linkages stronger and
more possible to achieve. Information systems are making coordination
among activities easier, while computer-aided design and manufacturing is
just one example of how microelectronics is linking other activities.
Work with Suppliers and Channels to Exploit Vertical Linkages. Vertical
linkages imply that relations with suppliers and channels offer possibilities
for all parties to gain through the coordination and joint optimization of
their respective value chains. Xerox, for example, provides suppliers with
its manufacturing schedule through computer terminals, enabling suppliers
to ship parts precisely when needed. Seeking out and pursuing such
opportunities will require careful study of supplier and channel value
chains, as well as the determination to overcome suspicion, greed, and other
barriers to joint action. A ﬁrm must be prepared to share the gains of
linkages with suppliers and channels in order to ensure that they can be
achieved.
CONTROLLING INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Share Appropriate Activities. A ﬁrm can often reduce its relative costs
signiﬁcantly by sharing value activities with sister business units, or by
entering new businesses in which opportunities for sharing exist. Chapter 9
describes in detail how to identify opportunities for sharing that lower cost.
Transfer Know-how in Managing Similar Activities. A diversiﬁed ﬁrm
may also be able to transfer know-how gained in managing a value activity


---PAGE BREAK---

to other business units with generically similar activities. The issues
involved in doing so are also discussed in Chapter 9.
CONTROLLING INTEGRATION
Examine Systematically Possibilities for Integration and De-integration.
Both integration and de-integration offer the potential of lowering costs. As
changes in management attitudes and new information system technology
are making supplier linkages easier to achieve, de-integration is becoming
more and more attractive in many industries.
CONTROLLING TIMING
Exploit First-mover or Late-mover Advantages. The ﬁrst mover in an
industry often reaps a long-lasting cost advantage by tying up the best
locations, preempting the best personnel, gaining access to preferred
suppliers, or securing patents. In some industries, in fact, only the ﬁrst
mover can gain a signiﬁcant cost advantage. In other industries, late-movers
may gain cost advantages because technology is changing rapidly or they
can observe and cheaply imitate the actions of the pioneer. First-mover and
late-mover advantages are discussed in Chapter 5.
Time Purchases in the Business Cycle. Purchasing assets during periods
of soft demand can yield a major cost savings. This is the case for many
capital goods such as machinery, ships, and even complete plants.
CONTROLLING DISCRETIONARY POLICIES
Modify Expensive Policies That Do Not Contribute to Differentiation.
Many policies that govern a ﬁrm’s activities raise cost. Sometimes a ﬁrm
consciously does so in the hope of creating differentiation. Often, however,
ﬁrms fail to recognize the cost of a policy. Cost analysis will often highlight
the need to modify such policies, and careful scrutiny may also reveal that a
policy does not contribute meaningfully to differentiation because its costs
outweigh the price premium it generates. Both situations offer opportunities
for cost reduction. Chapter 4 will describe how to evaluate the role of value
activities in differentiation.


---PAGE BREAK---

Invest in Technology to Skew Cost Drivers in the Firm’s Favor. New
technology often underlies cost advantage. Technology can also allow a
ﬁrm to make its competitor’s advantages vis-à-vis cost drivers obsolete. The
level of technology investment is a policy choice and most cost leaders
invest aggressively. Iowa Beef, for example, spends $20 million or more on
plant renovations annually. Some of the important ways in which
technology investment lowers costs include:13
• Developing low-cost processes. For example, Union Carbide’s Unipol
process for making low-density polyethylene.
•  Facilitating automation. For example, Iowa Beef’s massive beef
processing plants and K Mart’s automated distribution centers.
• Low-cost product designs. For example, Canon’s NP200 copier with
fewer parts.
In some cases, the ability to apply new low-cost technology depends on
scale. In soft contact lenses, for example, Bausch and Lomb’s dramatically
lower-cost spin casting technology for manufacturing lenses is much more
scale-sensitive than lathe technology. However, the choice of technology
can also be related to other cost drivers such as timing, location, or
integration. A ﬁrm should invest in technology development in areas that
will skew cost drivers the most in its favor.
Avoid Frills. Most cost leaders control discretionary expenses throughout
their value chains. National Semiconductor executives work in spartan
surroundings with few private ofﬁces, and similar characteristics apply to
other cost leaders including Lincoln Electric, People Express, and Crown
Cork and Seal. Such policy choices not only reduce costs in their own right
but also seem to have important symbolic value.
CONTROLLING LOCATION
Optimize Location. The location of activities in relation to each other as
well as to buyers and suppliers often contributes signiﬁcantly to such things
as labor rates, logistical efﬁciency, and supplier access. The ﬁrm that locates
its facilities well will often gain a signiﬁcant cost advantage. The optimal


---PAGE BREAK---

location of activities changes over time, as is happening today in the steel
industry with the emergence of mini-mills.
CONTROLLING INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS
Do Not Take Institutional Factors as a Given. Firms can inﬂuence
institutional factors such as government policies and unionization, despite a
tendency to view institutional factors as beyond their control. For example,
many 
unionized 
trucking 
companies 
have 
established 
nonunion
subsidiaries. Firms can also frequently inﬂuence regulation through
lobbying, as Japanese ﬁrms are actively seeking to do in states that have
begun taxing foreign proﬁts. A number of states are already committed to
repealing their laws to avoid scaring away foreign investors.
PROCUREMENT AND COST ADVANTAGE
Procurement practices have a potentially major impact on cost position
that cuts across activities. A number of possible changes in procurement can
reduce costs:
Tune Speciﬁcations of Purchased Inputs to Meet Needs More Precisely.
A ﬁrm can improve its cost position by ensuring that the quality of
purchased inputs meets, but does not exceed, the ﬁrm’s requirements. Clark
Equipment, for example, has begun to move toward automotive grade
components for some lift truck models, rather than more expensive and
unnecessarily high-quality truck grade components.
Enhance Bargaining Leverage Through Purchasing Policies. Firms
rarely view purchasing strategically or as a bargaining problem, though
purchasing practices can signiﬁcantly affect cost. Firms can take a number
of speciﬁc actions to enhance their bargaining power with suppliers:
•  Increase bargaining power in purchasing by keeping the number of
sources sufﬁcient to ensure competition, but small enough to be an
important buyer to each source.
• Select suppliers who are especially competitive with each other, and
divide purchases among them.


---PAGE BREAK---

•  Vary the proportion of business awarded to suppliers over time to
ensure that they do not view it as an entitlement.
• Solicit occasional proposals from new suppliers, both to test market
prices and gather technological intelligence.
• Enhance the leverage of purchasing scale through contracting based on
annual volume with phased deliveries, instead of making frequent
smaller purchases.
• Seek out opportunities to combine purchases with sister business units.
•  Appoint high-quality purchasing executives to allow more
sophisticated buying practices.
•  Invest in information to understand suppliers’ costs and market
conditions better.
•  Pursue technology development to eliminate or reduce the need for
expensive inputs where unit costs cannot be reduced.
Select Appropriate Suppliers and Manage Their Costs. A ﬁrm should
select those suppliers which are most efﬁcient or those that offer the least
costly product to use given the ﬁrm’s value chain. Purchasing practices
should also include promoting supplier cost reduction, aiding suppliers
where necessary with technology development, and encouraging supplier
practices that lower the ﬁrm’s cost through linkages. Marks and Spencer, for
example, has achieved a low cost position in retailing in the United
Kingdom through active efforts to help suppliers adopt the most modern
technology. Managing the efﬁciency or effectiveness of the supplier base,
using an analysis of supplier value chains essentially the same as the
analysis of its own chain, can be equally as important to cost position as
enhancing bargaining power over suppliers.
RECONFIGURING THE VALUE CHAIN
Dramatic shifts in relative cost position most often arise from a ﬁrm
adopting a value chain that is signiﬁcantly different from its competitors’.
Reconﬁgured value chains stem from a number of sources, including:
• a different production process


---PAGE BREAK---

• differences in automation
• direct sales instead of indirect sales
• a new distribution channel
• a new raw material
• major differences in forward or backward vertical integration
• shifting the location of facilities relative to suppliers and customers
• new advertising media
No-frills airlines such as People Express and Southwest Airlines provide
a striking example of strategies based on reconﬁguring the value chain.
They have adopted chains that differ markedly from trunk carriers, as
shown in Table 3–4.
TABLE 3–4 Alternative Value Chains in Airlines
Trunk Airlines
TICKET COUNTER OPERATIONS
Full service
GATE OPERATIONS
Full service
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
Purchase new aircraft
Union pilots
ON-BOARD SERVICE
Full service
BAGGAGE HANDLING
Free baggage checking
TICKET OFFICES
Ticket ofﬁces in downtown locations


---PAGE BREAK---

No-Frills Carriers
TICKET COUNTER OPERATIONS
Secondary airports and terminals
No ticket counter (or check-in only)
Purchase tickets on board the aircraft or from machines
No interline tickets
Few fare options
GATE OPERATIONS
Secondary airports and terminals
First come, ﬁrst served seating
No ticketing at gates
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
Used aircraft
High-density seating
Nonunion pilots
Smaller crews and more ﬂying hours per day
ON-BOARD SERVICE
Nonunion ﬂight attendants
Snack only or no meals
Charge for food and drink served
BAGGAGE HANDLING
Provide carry-on space
Charge for checked baggage
No interline baggage
TICKET OFFICES
None
Two other examples from different industries illustrate the signiﬁcant
cost advantage to be gained through reconﬁguration of the value chain. In
beef packing, the traditional value chain involved raising cattle on isolated
farms and shipping them live to labor-intensive abattoirs in major rail
centers like Chicago. After the animal was slaughtered and broken, whole


---PAGE BREAK---

sides of beef were shipped to markets where they were cut into smaller
pieces by retailers. Pursuing an innovative strategy, Iowa Beef Packers built
large automated plants near the cattle supply and processed the meat there
into smaller “boxed” cuts. This signiﬁcantly reduced transportation
expense, a major cost, as well as raised yield by avoiding the weight loss
that occurred when live animals were shipped. Iowa Beef also reduced costs
in the operations activities in the value chain by using cheaper nonunion
labor, readily available in rural areas where its new plants were located.14
Federal Express similarly redeﬁned the value chain for air delivery of
small parcels. Traditional competitors such as Emery and Airborne
collected freight of varying sizes, shipped it via the airlines, and then
delivered it to the addressee. Federal Express limited itself to small
packages and ﬂew them on company-owned planes to its central hub in
Memphis where the parcels were sorted. It then ﬂew the parcels to their
destinations on the same planes and delivered them in company-owned
trucks. Other dramatic reconﬁgurations of the value chain include the early
discount retailers, discount stockbrokers, and new long distance telephone
companies such as MCI and Sprint.
Reconﬁguring the value chain can lead to cost advantage for two
reasons. First, reconﬁguration frequently presents the opportunity to
fundamentally restructure a ﬁrm’s cost, compared to settling for incremental
improvements. The new value chain may prove inherently more efﬁcient
than the old one. The success of the no-frills airlines vividly illustrates how
adopting a different value chain that is inherently cheaper can allow a ﬁrm
to establish a new cost standard for an industry. On some routes, no-frills
airlines have achieved costs that are as much as 50 percent lower than those
of trunk carriers. Not only are activities performed more cheaply in the new
value chain, but linkages are exploited. By ticketing on-board, for example,
People Express signiﬁcantly reduces cost in other value activities such as
gate operations and ticket counter operations.
The second way an alternate value chain can lead to cost advantage is by
altering the basis of competition in a way that favors a ﬁrm’s strengths.
Reconﬁguration of the chain may change the important cost drivers in a
way that favors a ﬁrm. Performing an activity differently can change its
susceptibility to scale economies, interrelationships, locational effects, and
virtually every other cost driver. In aluminum, for example, Japanese ﬁrms


---PAGE BREAK---

are investing in the new carbothermic reduction process that converts
bauxite and related ore directly into metal, skipping the intermediate
alumina stage. This would nullify the Japanese ﬁrms’ serious disadvantage
in power costs. In the beef processing case, Iowa Beef redeﬁned the role of
location as a cost driver and increased scale sensitivity. A ﬁrm with a large
market share, like Iowa Beef, often beneﬁts from shifting to a more scale-
sensitive value chain. In the case of the no-frills airlines, the new value
chain is less scale-sensitive than the old one because of the reduction in
indirect activities. This has been important to the success of the newly
established no-frills carriers.
Coalitions and other interﬁrm agreements sometimes provide ﬁrms with
a way to reconﬁgure the value chain even if they cannot do so
independently. A number of multiple system operators of cable television
franchises have traded franchises to increase marketing and operating
efﬁciency, for example. Similarly, Allied Chemical and Church & Dwight
have worked out a deal to swap identical raw materials produced in
different locations to save transportation costs.
To identify a new value chain, a ﬁrm must examine everything it does, as
well as its competitors’ value chains, in search of creative options to do
things differently. A ﬁrm should ask questions such as the following for
every activity:
• How can the activity be performed differently or even eliminated?
• How can a group of linked value activities be reordered or regrouped?
• How might coalitions with other ﬁrms lower or eliminate costs?
RECONFIGURING DOWNSTREAM
Where channel costs or other downstream costs represent a signiﬁcant
fraction of cost to the buyer, reconﬁguration of downstream activities can
reduce cost substantially. Gallo’s heavy use of the supermarket channel for
wine provides an example. A supermarket’s costs of distribution are less
than that of the liquor store channel which involves distributors. By
emphasizing supermarkets, Gallo has lowered the cost of getting wine to
buyers. Gallo’s high sales volume and faster turnover also reduce its relative


---PAGE BREAK---

cost to the supermarket. This has made supermarkets willing to accept
lower margins from Gallo than from its competitors.
The efﬁciency of downstream channels reﬂects their strategies and
degree of fragmentation. Chain stores are often more efﬁcient than single
outlets, for example, and large ofﬁce equipment or automobile dealers are
often more efﬁcient than smaller ones. A ﬁrm can not only choose more
efﬁcient downstream routes to the end user, but also take actions to promote
consolidation or otherwise improve the efﬁciency of downstream entities. In
extreme cases, a ﬁrm may have to integrate forward to achieve downstream
efﬁciency.
The relative bargaining power of a ﬁrm and its downstream channels has
an important inﬂuence on whether the ﬁrm will reduce its relative cost
position through downstream reconﬁguration. In Gallo’s case, supermarkets
would reap the beneﬁts of their greater efﬁciency if they priced wines the
same as liquor stores. However, Gallo’s “pull-through” effect and intense
competition among supermarkets have led to low prices and allowed Gallo
to reap most of the beneﬁts.
COST ADVANTAGE THROUGH FOCUS
A focus strategy may also provide a means for achieving a cost
advantage that rests on using focus to control cost drivers, reconﬁguring the
value chain, or both. Since the cost of value activities as well as the most
efﬁcient value chain may differ for different segments, a ﬁrm that dedicates
its efforts to a well-chosen segment of an industry can often lower its costs
signiﬁcantly. Federal Express based its reconﬁguration of the air parcel
delivery value chain on small packages requiring rapid delivery. People
Express has focused on price-sensitive buyers, allowing it to eliminate many
costs. In the hotel/motel industry, La Quinta offers only guest rooms, and
has lowered its investment and operating costs per room by eliminating
costly restaurants, conference facilities, and other services not desired by its
target buyer—the middle-level manager who travels frequently to the same
area.
The most dramatic improvements in relative cost position through focus
usually stem from employing a different and tailored value chain to serve
the target segment. The Federal Express, People Express, and La Quinta


---PAGE BREAK---

examples all share this characteristic. Focus can also lower costs if the
target segment is associated with a key cost driver. If regional market share
is a key cost driver, for example, a regional focus strategy can yield a cost
advantage over larger national competitors with small shares in the
particular region.
Successful 
focus 
strategies 
frequently 
stem 
from 
innovative
segmentation of an industry. Chapter 7 will describe how to segment
industries and how to choose appropriate focus strategies. Industry
segments grow, in part, out of product varieties, buyer groups, or
geographic areas that require a different value chain or in which cost drivers
differ.
Sustainability of Cost Advantage
Cost advantage will result in above-average performance only if the ﬁrm
can sustain it. Improving relative cost position in unsustainable ways may
allow a ﬁrm to maintain cost parity or proximity, but a ﬁrm attempting to
achieve cost leadership strategy must also develop sustainable sources of
cost advantage.
Cost advantage is sustainable if there are entry or mobility barriers that
prevent competitors from imitating its sources. Sustainability varies for
different cost drivers and from one industry to another. Some drivers,
however, tend to be more sustainable than others:
• Scale. Scale is a key entry/mobility barrier, and the cost of replicating
scale is often high because competitors must buy share.
•  Interrelationships. Interrelationships with sister business units can
force a competitor to diversify in order to match a cost advantage. If
there are entry barriers into the related industries, sustainability can be
high.
• Linkages. Linkages are often difﬁcult for a ﬁrm to detect and require
coordination across organizational lines or with independent suppliers
and channels.
• Proprietary learning. Learning is difﬁcult to achieve in practice; it can
also be hard for competitors to catch up if learning can be kept


---PAGE BREAK---

proprietary.
•  Policy choices to create proprietary product or process technology.
Replicating product innovations or new production processes often
poses great difﬁculties for competitors if innovations are protected by
patents or secrecy. Process innovations are often more sustainable than
product innovations because secrecy is easier to maintain.
Timing and integration can also be sources of sustainable cost advantage
because they are often hard to replicate. However, their sustainability will
be greatest in instances where they also translate into scale or learning
advantages. Location, the pattern of capacity utilization, institutional
factors, and policy choices can be sources of sustainable cost advantage in
some industries, although they tend to create less sustainable cost advantage
on average than other drivers. Even sources of cost advantage that are less
sustainable, however, can provide formidable barriers if they interact with
more sustainable drivers or with each other. Policy choices that elevate scale
economies can be difﬁcult to imitate, for example.
Sustainability stems not only from the sources of the cost advantage, but
also from their number. Cost advantage derived from one or two value
activities provides an alluring target for imitation by competitors. Cost
leaders usually accumulate cost advantages gained from numerous sources
in the value chain that interact and reinforce each other. This makes it
difﬁcult and expensive for competitors to replicate their cost position.
Gallo provides a good example of a sustainable cost leadership strategy
based on these principles. Gallo’s value chain, shown in simpliﬁed form in
Figure 3–3, contains numerous sources of cost advantage in many value
activities. The Gallo cost advantage draws heavily on scale and proprietary
technology, two of the most sustainable cost drivers. Gallo has consistently
achieved a 15 percent or greater cost advantage over its major rivals. Gallo’s
strength encouraged Coca-Cola’s exit from the wine industry, because
Gallo’s cost advantage dampened Coke’s proﬁtability.
The creation of a new or reconﬁgured value chain is a ﬁnal source of
sustainability in cost advantage. Competitors almost inevitably face a high
cost of matching a reconﬁgured chain. This is particularly true for well-
established competitors, who face signiﬁcant mobility barriers in moving
away from the industry’s traditional value chain. Iowa Beef and Federal


---PAGE BREAK---

Express, for example, have both enjoyed enduring advantages while
competitors struggled to respond. Japanese aluminum producers would gain
a similarly durable cost advantage in aluminum smelting if carbothermic
reduction proves a success.
Implementation and Cost Advantage
This chapter has focused on how to achieve a cost advantage through
changes in strategy and the way activities are performed. However, the
success of cost leadership hinges on a ﬁrm’s skills in actually implementing
it on a day to day basis. Costs do not go down automatically or by accident
but rather as a result of hard work and constant attention. Firms differ in
their abilities to lower costs, even when they have similar scale or
cumulative volumes or when guided by similar policies. Improving relative
cost position may not require a major shift in strategy so much as greater
management attention. A ﬁrm should never assume its costs are low
enough.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 3–3. Gallo’s Source of Cost Advantage in Wine


---PAGE BREAK---

No cost driver works automatically. Scale economies are not achieved in
an activity unless a ﬁrm’s other activities are coordinated to provide the
inputs necessary to operate smoothly at large scale. Policy choices must not
dissipate the advantages of scale through product proliferation.
Interrelationships will not lower cost unless affected business units actually
coordinate their behavior. Learning curve advantages do not occur unless a
ﬁrm’s management strives to capture them.
A number of factors, including the training and motivation of employees,
the ﬁrm’s culture, the adoption of formal cost reduction programs, a
constant pursuit of automation, and a strong belief in the learning curve
contribute to a ﬁrm’s ability to achieve cost leadership. Everyone in a ﬁrm
has the potential to affect cost. Cost leaders have cost control programs in
every value activity, not only in manufacturing. They compare activities
against themselves over time, and among business units and competitors.
The importance of symbolic factors in creating the climate for cost
reduction also cannot be overstated. Successful cost leaders usually pay a
great deal of attention to discretionary costs, in addition to tuning their
strategy to achieve minimum operating costs.
Pitfalls in Cost Leadership Strategies
Many ﬁrms do not fully understand the behavior of their costs from a
strategic perspective and fail to exploit opportunities to improve their
relative cost position. Some of the most common errors made by ﬁrms in
assessing and acting upon cost position include:
Exclusive Focus on the Cost of Manufacturing Activities. When one
mentions “cost,” most managers instinctively think of manufacturing.
However, a signiﬁcant, if not overwhelming, share of total cost is generated
in activities such as marketing, sales, service, technology development, and
infrastructure. These often receive too little attention in cost analysis. An
examination of the entire value chain often results in relatively simple steps
that can signiﬁcantly reduce cost position. For example, recent advances in
computers and computer-aided design are having dramatic impacts on the
cost of performing research.


---PAGE BREAK---

Ignoring Procurement. Many ﬁrms work diligently to reduce labor costs
but pay scant attention to purchased inputs. They tend to view purchasing as
a secondary staff function and devote few management resources to it.
Analysis within the purchasing department too often centers solely on the
purchase price of key raw materials. Firms often allow many items to be
purchased by individuals with little expertise or motivation to reduce cost.
Linkages between purchased inputs and the costs of other value activities go
unrecognized. Modest changes in purchasing practices could yield major
cost beneﬁts for many ﬁrms.
Overlooking Indirect or Small Activities. Cost reduction programs
usually concentrate on large cost activities and/or direct activities such as
component fabrication and assembly. Activities that represent a small
fraction of total cost seldom receive sufﬁcient scrutiny. Indirect activities,
such as maintenance and regulatory costs, often escape attention altogether.
False Perception of Cost Drivers. Firms often misdiagnose their cost
drivers. For example, a ﬁrm with the largest national market share and the
lowest costs may incorrectly assume that national market share drives cost.
However, cost leadership may actually stem from the ﬁrm’s large regional
share in the regions in which it operates. Failing to understand the sources
of its cost advantage may lead the ﬁrm to attempt to lower cost by raising
national share. As a result it may worsen its cost position by reducing
regional focus. It may also concentrate its defensive strategies on national
competitors and ignore the more signiﬁcant threat posed by strong regional
competitors.15
Failure to Exploit Linkages. Firms rarely recognize all the linkages that
affect cost, particularly linkages with suppliers and linkages among
activities such as quality assurance, inspection, and service. The ability to
exploit linkages underlies the success of many Japanese ﬁrms. Matsushita
and Canon, among others, recognize and exploit linkages despite the fact
that their policies contradict traditional manufacturing and purchasing
practices. Failure to recognize linkages also leads to such errors as requiring
each department to cut costs by the same amount, even though raising cost
in some departments may lower total costs.


---PAGE BREAK---

Contradictory Cost Reduction. Firms often attempt to reduce cost in
ways that are contradictory. They try to gain market share to reap the
beneﬁts of scale economies while at the same time dissipating scale
economies through model proliferation. They locate close to buyers to save
freight costs but emphasize weight reduction in new product development.
Cost drivers sometimes work in opposite directions, and a ﬁrm must
recognize the tradeoffs.
Unwitting Cross Subsidy. Firms often engage in unwitting cross subsidy
when they fail to recognize the existence of segments in which costs behave
differently.16 Conventional accounting systems rarely measure all the cost
differences among products, buyers, channels, or geographic areas
described above. Thus, a ﬁrm may charge excessive prices on some items in
the line or to some buyers while subsidizing prices charged on others. For
example, white wine requires less costly cooperage than red wine because
of its lower aging requirements. If a winery sets equal prices for white and
red wine based on average costs, then the price of lower-cost white wine
will subsidize the price of red wine. Unwitting cross subsidy often provides
an opening for competitors that understand costs and use them to undercut a
ﬁrm’s prices and improve their market position. Cross subsidy also exposes
the ﬁrm to focused competitors that only compete in the overpriced
segments.17
Thinking Incrementally. Cost reduction efforts often strive for
incremental cost improvements in the existing value chain, rather than
ﬁnding ways to reconﬁgure the chain. Incremental improvement can reach
the point of diminishing returns, while reconﬁguring the chain can lead to a
whole new cost plateau.
Undermining 
Differentiation. 
Cost 
reduction 
can 
undermine
differentiation if it eliminates a ﬁrm’s sources of uniqueness to the buyer.
Though doing so may be strategically desirable, it should be the result of a
conscious choice. Cost reduction efforts should concentrate most on
activities that do not contribute to a ﬁrm’s differentiation. A cost leader will
improve performance, moreover, if it differentiates in activities wherever
differentiation is not costly.


---PAGE BREAK---

Steps in Strategic Cost Analysis
The techniques described in this chapter can be summarized by outlining
the steps required in strategic cost analysis:
1. Identify the appropriate value chain and assign costs and assets to it.
2. Diagnose the cost drivers of each value activity and how they interact.
3.  Identify competitor value chains, and determine the relative cost of
competitors and the sources of cost differences.
4. Develop a strategy to lower relative cost position through controlling
cost drivers or reconﬁguring the value chain and/or downstream value.
5. Ensure that cost reduction efforts do not erode differentiation, or make
a conscious choice to do so.
6. Test the cost reduction strategy for sustainability.


---PAGE BREAK---

4
Differentiation
A ﬁrm differentiates itself from its competitors if it can be unique at
something that is valuable to buyers. Differentiation is one of the two types
of competitive advantage a ﬁrm may possess. The extent to which
competitors in an industry can differentiate themselves from each other is
also an important element of industry structure. Despite the importance of
differentiation, its sources are often not well understood. Firms view the
potential sources of differentiation too narrowly. They see differentiation in
terms of the physical product or marketing practices, rather than potentially
arising anywhere in the value chain. Firms are also often different but not
differentiated, because they pursue forms of uniqueness that buyers do not
value. Differentiators also frequently pay insufﬁcient attention to the cost of
differentiation, or to the sustainability of differentiation once achieved.
This chapter presents a framework for analyzing differentiation and
choosing a differentiation strategy. I will ﬁrst describe the sources of
differentiation, which can arise anywhere in a ﬁrm’s value chain. Successful
differentiation strategies grow out of the coordinated actions of all parts of a
ﬁrm, not just the marketing department. Differentiation is usually costly,
and I will show how to determine the cost of differentiation and how it
varies by competitor. I will then describe how to diagnose what types of
differentiation create buyer value, employing the buyer’s value chain as a
tool for doing so. Next I will show how to translate an analysis of buyer
value into speciﬁc buyer purchase criteria. Finally, I will use all of these
concepts to describe how to choose a differentiation strategy, and highlight
some common pitfalls in pursuing one.


---PAGE BREAK---

Sources of Differentiation
A ﬁrm differentiates itself from its competitors when it provides
something unique that is valuable to buyers beyond simply offering a low
price. Differentiation allows the ﬁrm to command a premium price, to sell
more of its product at a given price, or to gain equivalent beneﬁts such as
greater buyer loyalty during cyclical or seasonal downturns.1 Differentiation
leads to superior performance if the price premium achieved exceeds any
added costs of being unique. A ﬁrm’s differentiation may appeal to a broad
group of buyers in an industry or only to a subset of buyers with particular
needs. Brooks Brothers appeals to buyers wanting traditional clothing, for
example, though many buyers view Brooks Brothers clothing as too
conservative. Differentiation will be treated in general terms in this chapter,
and Chapter 7 will describe how differences in buyer needs within an
industry can lead to opportunities for differentiation through focus.
Differentiation and the Value Chain
Differentiation cannot be understood by viewing the ﬁrm in aggregate,
but stems from the speciﬁc activities a ﬁrm performs and how they affect
the buyer.2 Differentiation grows out of the ﬁrm’s value chain. Virtually any
value activity is a potential source of uniqueness. The procurement of raw
materials and other inputs can affect the performance of the end product and
hence differentiation. For example, Heineken pays particular attention to the
quality and purity of the ingredients for its beer and uses a constant strain of
yeast. Similarly, Steinway uses skilled technicians to choose the ﬁnest
materials for its pianos, and Michelin is more selective than its competitors
about the grades of rubber it uses in its tires.
Other successful differentiators create uniqueness through other primary
and support activities. Technology development activities can lead to
product designs that have unique product performance, as Cray Research
has done in supercomputers. Operations activities can affect such forms of
uniqueness as product appearance, conformance to speciﬁcations, and
reliability. Perdue, for example, has bolstered its differentiation of fresh
chickens by careful control of growing conditions and by feeding chickens


---PAGE BREAK---

marigolds to improve their color. The outbound logistical system can shape
the speed and consistency of deliveries. For example, Federal Express has
established an integrated logistical system using its Memphis hub that
yields a level of delivery reliability unheard of prior to its entry into the
small-parcel delivery business. Marketing and sales activities also
frequently have an impact on differentiation. Timken’s sales force, for
example, assists its buyers to use roller bearings more effectively in their
manufacturing processes.
Figure 4–1 illustrates how any activity in the value chain can potentially
contribute to differentiation. Even if the physical product is a commodity,
other activities can often lead to substantial differentiation. Similarly,
indirect activities such as maintenance or scheduling can contribute to
differentiation just as do direct activities such as assembly or order
processing. For example, a dust and fume free building can dramatically
improve defect rates in semiconductor manufacturing.
Value activities representing only a small percentage of total cost can
nevertheless have a major impact on differentiation. For example,
inspection may represent only 1 percent of cost, but shipping even one
defective package of drugs to a buyer can have major negative repercussions
for a pharmaceutical ﬁrm’s perceived differentiation. Value chains
developed for purposes of strategic cost analysis, therefore, may not isolate
all activities that are important for differentiation. Differentiation analysis
requires a ﬁner division of some value activities, while others may be
aggregated if they have little differentiation impact.
A ﬁrm may also differentiate itself through the breadth of its activities,
or its competitive scope. Crown Cork and Seal offers crowns (bottle caps)
and ﬁlling machinery plus cans. It thus offers a full line of packaging
services to its buyers, and its expertise in packaging machinery gives it
more credibility and access in selling cans. Citicorp’s breadth of activities in
ﬁnancial services enhances its reputation as well as allowing its sales
channels to offer a broader product range. A number of other differentiating
factors can result from broad competitive scope:


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 4–1. Representative Sources of Differentiation in the Value Chain


---PAGE BREAK---

• ability to serve buyer needs anywhere
•  simpliﬁed maintenance for the buyer if spare parts and design
philosophies are common for a wide line
• single point at which the buyer can purchase
• single point for customer service
• superior compatibility among products
Most of these beneﬁts require consistency or coordination among activities
if a ﬁrm is to achieve them.
Differentiation can also stem from downstream. A ﬁrm’s channels can be
a potent source of uniqueness, and may enhance its reputation, service,
customer training, and many other factors. In soft drinks, for example,
independent bottlers are crucial to differentiation. Coca Cola and Pepsi Cola
spend a great deal of attention and money attempting to upgrade bottlers
and improve their effectiveness. Coke, for example, has been arranging the
sale of less effective bottlers to new, more capable owners. Similarly,
observers credit Caterpillar Tractor’s dealers with providing an important
source of differentiation for Caterpillar. Cat’s approximately 250 dealers are
by far the largest in the industry on average, and their size allows them to
provide extensive service and buyer ﬁnancing. Selective distribution
through well-chosen outlets has also proven to be an extremely important
source of differentiation for such ﬁrms as Estée Lauder and Hathaway.
Firms can enhance the role of channels in differentiation through actions
such as the following:
• channel selection to achieve consistency in facilities, capabilities, or
image
• establishing standards and policies for how channels must operate
• provision of advertising and training materials for use by channels
• providing funding so that channels can offer credit
Firms often confuse the concept of quality with that of differentiation.
While differentiation encompasses quality, it is a much broader concept.
Quality is typically associated with the physical product. Differentiation
strategies attempt to create value for the buyer throughout the value chain.


---PAGE BREAK---

Drivers of Uniqueness
A ﬁrm’s uniqueness in a value activity is determined by a series of basic
drivers, analogous to the cost drivers described in Chapter 3. Uniqueness
drivers are the underlying reasons why an activity is unique. Without
identifying them, a ﬁrm cannot fully develop means of creating new forms
of differentiation or diagnose how sustainable its existing differentiation is.
The 
principal 
uniqueness 
drivers 
are 
the 
following, 
ordered
approximately in terms of their prominence:
Policy Choices. Firms make policy choices about what activities to
perform and how to perform them. Such policy choices are perhaps the
single most prevalent uniqueness driver. Johns Manville chooses to provide
extensive customer training in installing its rooﬁng products, for example,
while Grey Poupon chooses to advertise mustard at a substantially higher
rate of spending than historical industry practice. Much uniqueness,
therefore, is discretionary.
Some typical policy choices that lead to uniqueness include:
• product features and performance offered
• services provided (e.g., credit, delivery, or repair)
• intensity of an activity adopted (e.g., rate of advertising spending)
•  content of an activity (e.g., the information provided in order
processing)
•  technology employed in performing an activity (e.g., precision of
machine tools, computerization of order processing)
• quality of inputs procured for an activity
•  procedures governing the actions of personnel in an activity (e.g.,
service procedures, nature of sales calls, frequency of inspection or
sampling)
•  skill and experience level of personnel employed in an activity, and
training provided
•  information employed to control an activity (e.g., number of
temperature, pressure, and variables used to control a chemical
reaction)


---PAGE BREAK---

Linkages. Uniqueness often stems from linkages within the value chain
or with suppliers and channels that a ﬁrm exploits. Linkages can lead to
uniqueness if the way one activity is performed affects the performance of
the other:
LINKAGES WITHIN THE VALUE CHAIN. Meeting buyer needs often involves
coordinating linked activities. For example, delivery time is frequently
determined not only by outbound logistics but also by the speed of order
processing and the frequency of sales calls to take orders. Similarly,
coordination between the sales force and the service organization can lead
to more responsive customer service. Uniquely meeting buyer needs may
also require the optimization of linked activities. In a number of industries
such as copiers and semiconductors, for example, Japanese competitors
have achieved dramatic reductions in defect rates by modifying every
activity that inﬂuences defects instead of relying on a single value activity
such as inspection. Similarly, higher investment in indirect activities such as
maintenance can improve the performance of direct activities such as
ﬁnishing or printing.
SUPPLIER LINKAGES. Uniqueness in meeting buyer needs may also be the
result of coordination with suppliers. Close coordination with suppliers can
shorten new model development time, for example, if suppliers tool up for
producing new parts at the same time as a ﬁrm is completing the design of
equipment to manufacture the new model. Similarly, missionary sales
efforts by suppliers to a ﬁrm’s buyers can sometimes help differentiate a
ﬁrm’s product.
CHANNEL LINKAGES. Linkages with channels can also lead to uniqueness
in a variety of ways. By coordinating with channels or jointly optimizing
the division of activities between the ﬁrm and the channels, uniqueness can
frequently result. Some examples of how linkages with channels can lead to
uniqueness are as follows:
• training channels in selling and other business practices
• joint selling efforts with channels


---PAGE BREAK---

•  subsidizing for channel investments in personnel, facilities, and
performance of additional activities.
Timing. Uniqueness may result from when a ﬁrm began performing an
activity. Being the ﬁrst to adopt a product image, for example, may preempt
others from doing so and make the ﬁrm unique. This is one of Gerber’s
sources of differentiation in baby food. Early regulatory approval for its soft
contact lens gave Bausch and Lomb its differentiation. In other industries,
moving late may allow a ﬁrm to employ the most modern technology and
thereby differentiate. Chapter 5 discusses ﬁrst-mover and late-mover
advantages in more detail.
Location. Uniqueness may stem from location. For example, a retail
bank may have the most convenient branch and automatic teller machine
locations.
Interrelationships. The uniqueness of a value activity may stem from
sharing it with sister business units. Sharing a sales force for both insurance
and other ﬁnancial products, as some leading ﬁrms are beginning to do,
may allow the salesperson to offer the buyer better service. The analysis of
interrelationships is described in Chapter 9.
Learning and spillovers. The uniqueness of an activity can be the result
of learning about how to perform it better. Achieving consistent quality in a
manufacturing process may be learning-driven, for example. As with cost,
the spillover of learning to competitors erodes its contribution to
differentiation. 
Only 
proprietary 
learning 
leads 
to 
sustainable
differentiation.
Integration. A ﬁrm’s level of integration may make it unique. Integration
into new value activities can make a ﬁrm unique because the ﬁrm is better
able to control the performance of the activities or coordinate them with
other activities. Integration may also provide more activities to be sources
of differentiation. Providing service in-house instead of leaving it to third
party suppliers, for example, may allow a ﬁrm to be the only ﬁrm to also
offer service or to provide service in a unique way compared to competitors.


---PAGE BREAK---

Integration may encompass not only supplier or channel activities, but it
may involve performing activities currently performed by the buyer. By
connecting hospitals to its computer system and allowing on-line ordering,
for example, American Hospital Supply eliminates the need for some buyer
activities and differentiates itself. Integration also sometimes makes the
achievement of linkages with suppliers and channels easier. Reducing
integration relative to competitors may be a source of differentiation in
some industries. De-integration may exploit the capabilities of suppliers or
independent channels, for example.
Scale. Large scale can allow an activity to be performed in a unique way
that is not possible at smaller volume. For example, Hertz’s scale in car
rental underlies some of its differentiation. Hertz’s many locations in all
areas of the United States provide more convenient pick-up and drop-off of
cars, and faster ﬁeld service. The relevant type of scale that leads to
differentiation will vary—with Hertz it is number of rental and service
locations, while in another industry it might be the scale of plant that allows
precise tolerances due to high speed equipment. In some cases, however,
scale can work against the uniqueness of an activity. Scale may, for
example, reduce the ﬂexibility of fashion-related ﬁrms to buyer needs.
Institutional factors. Institutional factors sometimes play a role in
allowing a ﬁrm to be unique. Similarly, a good relationship with its union
may allow a ﬁrm to establish unique job deﬁnitions for employees.
The drivers of uniqueness vary for each activity and may vary across
industries for the same activity. The drivers interact to determine the extent
to which an activity is unique. A ﬁrm must examine each of its areas of
uniqueness to see what driver or drivers underlie it. This will be critical to
the sustainability of differentiation because some uniqueness drivers
provide more sustainability than others. Policy choices may be easier for
competitors to imitate than uniqueness stemming from interrelationships or
exploiting linkages, for example. Understanding what allows it to be unique
will also ensure that a ﬁrm does not undermine the causes. Finally, the
drivers of uniqueness may suggest new sources of differentiation.


---PAGE BREAK---

The Cost of Differentiation
Differentiation is usually costly. A ﬁrm must often incur costs to be
unique because uniqueness requires that it perform value activities better
than competitors. Providing superior applications engineering support
usually requires additional engineers, for example, while a highly skilled
sales force typically costs more than a less skilled one. Achieving greater
product durability than competitors may well require more material content
or more expensive materials—Rockwell’s water meters are more durable
than competitors’ because they employ more bronze.
Some forms of differentiation are clearly more costly than others.
Differentiation that results from superior coordination of linked value
activities may not add much cost, for example, nor may better product
performance that results from closer parts tolerances achieved through an
automated machining center. In diesel locomotives, the higher tolerances
achieved through automation improve fuel efﬁciency at low additional cost.
Similarly, differentiating through having more product features is likely to
be more costly than differentiating through having different but more
desired features.
The cost of differentiation reﬂects the cost drivers of the value activities
on which uniqueness is based. The relationship between uniqueness and
cost drivers takes two related forms:
•  what makes an activity unique (uniqueness drivers) can impact cost
drivers
• the cost drivers can affect the cost of being unique
In pursuing differentiation, a ﬁrm often affects the cost drivers of an
activity adversely and deliberately adds cost. Moving an activity close to the
buyer, for example, may raise cost because of the effect of the location cost
driver. Smith International achieved differentiation in drill bits by
maintaining large and more accessible inventories in the ﬁeld, raising its
cost.
At the same time as uniqueness often raises cost by affecting the cost
drivers, the cost drivers determine how costly differentiation will be. A
ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis cost drivers will determine how costly a particular


---PAGE BREAK---

differentiation strategy will be relative to competitors. The cost of providing
the most sales force coverage, for example, will be affected by whether
there are economies of scale in the operation of the sales force. If
economies of scale exist they may reduce the cost of increased coverage
and make such coverage less costly for a ﬁrm with a large local market
share.
Scale, interrelationships, learning, and timing are particularly important
cost drivers in affecting the cost of differentiation. Though scale can itself
lead to differentiation, it most often affects the cost of differentiation. Scale
can determine the cost of a ﬁrm’s policy choice to advertise heavily, for
example, or the cost of rapid introduction of new models. Sharing also can
reduce the cost of differentiation. IBM’s highly trained, experienced sales
force is made less expensive by sharing it among a variety of related ofﬁce
products, for example. A ﬁrm moving faster down the learning curve in a
differentiating activity will gain a cost advantage in differentiating, while
moving early may lower the cost of differentiating in areas such as
advertising where there is an accumulating stock of goodwill or other
intangible assets.
The cost drivers thus play an important role in determining the success
of differentiation strategies and have important competitive implications. If
competitors have different relative positions vis-à-vis important cost drivers,
their cost of achieving uniqueness in the affected activity will differ.
Similarly, different forms of differentiation are relatively more or less costly
for a ﬁrm depending on its situation vis-à-vis the cost drivers of the affected
activities. Manufacturing parts with higher precision through automation
can be less costly for a ﬁrm that can share the computerized machining
center via interrelationships than for a ﬁrm that cannot. Similarly, Black &
Decker has a faster rate of new product introduction than competitors in
power tools but this rate is proportionally less costly for Black & Decker
because of its leading worldwide market share. In the extreme, a ﬁrm may
have such a large cost advantage in differentiating a particular value activity
that its cost in that activity is actually lower than a ﬁrm not attempting to be
unique in the activity. This is one reason why a ﬁrm can sometimes be both
low cost and differentiated simultaneously, as was discussed in Chapter 1.
Sometimes making an activity unique also simultaneously lowers cost.
For example, integration may make an activity unique but also lower cost if


---PAGE BREAK---

integration is a cost driver. Where achieving differentiation and reducing
cost can take place simultaneously, however, this suggests that (1) a ﬁrm
has not been fully exploiting all the opportunities to lower cost; (2) being
unique in an activity was formerly judged undesirable; or (3) a signiﬁcant
innovation has occurred which competitors have not adopted, such as a new
automated process that both lowers cost and improves quality.
Firms often fail to exploit opportunities to lower cost through
coordination of linked activities that also raises differentiation. Better
coordination of quotations, procurement, and manufacturing scheduling
may lower inventory cost at the same time as it shortens delivery lead time,
for example. More extensive inspection by suppliers may lower a ﬁrm’s
inspection costs at the same time that the reliability of the end product is
increased. Unexploited opportunities to reduce cost through linkages that
also affect quality, in fact, are the reason underpinning the popular assertion
that “quality is free.” The possibility of simultaneously raising
differentiation and reducing cost through linkages exists, however, because
the ﬁrm has not been fully exploiting cost reduction opportunities and not
because differentiation is not costly.
If a ﬁrm has been aggressively reducing its cost, therefore, attempts to
achieve uniqueness usually raise cost. Similarly, once competitors imitate a
major innovation a ﬁrm can remain differentiated only by adding cost. In
assessing the cost of differentiation, then, a ﬁrm must compare the cost of
being unique in an activity with the cost of being equal to competitors.
Buyer Value and Differentiation
Uniqueness does not lead to differentiation unless it is valuable to the
buyer. A successful differentiator ﬁnds ways of creating value for buyers
that yield a price premium in excess of the extra cost. The starting point for
understanding what is valuable to the buyer is the buyer’s value chain.
Buyers have value chains consisting of the activities they perform just as a
ﬁrm does, as discussed in Chapter 2.3 A ﬁrm’s product or service is a
purchased input to its buyer’s value chain. Steel is a raw material that is
typically cut, bent, machined, or otherwise converted in its buyer’s
production process to become part of components and ultimately end


---PAGE BREAK---

products, for example. The buyer’s value chain determines the way in which
a ﬁrm’s product is actually used as well as the ﬁrm’s other effects on the
buyer’s activities. These determine the buyer’s needs and are the
underpinnings of buyer value and differentiation.
Although buyer value chains are easiest to visualize for industrial,
commercial, or institutional buyers, individual consumers also have value
chains. A consumer’s value chain represents the sequence of activities
performed by a household and its various members in which the product or
service ﬁts. To understand how a product ﬁts into a household value chain it
is usually necessary to identify those activities in which a product is directly
or indirectly involved, typically not all the activities a household performs.
A television serves as entertainment for various members of a household
during some periods of the day, and serves as a background noise during
others. The set is typically switched on and off a number of times each day
and the channel may be changed frequently. Traveler’s checks are typically
bought in quantity at a bank and then used occasionally in the course of a
vacation or business trip. Redeeming any extra checks after the trip involves
a visit to the bank, which means that many checks are saved for future trips
instead. A commercial, institutional, or industrial buyer’s value chain
reﬂects its strategy and approach to implementation, while a household’s
value chain reﬂects its members’ habits and needs. What is valuable for
either type of buyer, however, grows out of how a product and the ﬁrm
supplying it affect the buyer’s chain.
Buyer Value
A ﬁrm creates value for a buyer that justiﬁes a premium price (or
preference at an equal price) through two mechanisms:4
• by lowering buyer cost5
• by raising buyer performance
For industrial, commercial, and institutional buyers, differentiation
requires that a ﬁrm be uniquely able to create competitive advantage for its
buyer in ways besides selling to them at a lower price. If a ﬁrm is able to


---PAGE BREAK---

lower its buyer’s cost or enhance its buyer’s performance, the buyer will be
willing to pay a premium price. If the components supplied by a well
respected bicycle parts supplier allow a bicycle assembler to improve
differentiation and thereby charge a higher price, for example, the
assembler will be willing to pay a premium for the components. Similarly,
the fact that Kodak’s Ektaprint copier lowers the cost of a ﬁnished set of
collated documents with a recirculating document feeder and an in-line
automatic stapler that reduces the buyer’s personnel cost means that the
buyer is willing to pay a premium for the copier. In both instances, the ﬁrm
was able to enhance the competitive advantage of its buyer even though not
selling its product at a cheaper price.
The principle is the same for households and individual consumers,
though the measurement of buyer cost and particularly buyer performance
may be more subtle. For household buyers, the cost of a product includes
not only ﬁnancial costs but also time or convenience costs. The cost of time
for a consumer reﬂects the opportunity cost of using it elsewhere, as well as
the implicit cost of frustration, annoyance, or exertion. Buyer value results
from lowering any of these costs for the buyer. A refrigerator that uses less
electricity than other refrigerators can command a premium. A vacuum
cleaner that saves vacuuming time and reduces exertion is also valuable to
the household buyer. Offering direct marketing that saves the buyer
shopping time may not be valuable if the buyer enjoys shopping, however.
Raising buyer performance for consumers involves raising their level of
satisfaction or meeting their needs. If a TV set’s better picture quality and
faster warmup time lead to more satisfaction in watching it relative to
competitors’ sets, for example, the buyer will be willing to pay a premium.
Status or prestige are important needs just as are the features of a product or
its quality. Although it may be difﬁcult to value buyer performance for
consumers, their value chains will suggest the important dimensions of
satisfaction.
Industrial, commercial, and institutional buyers sometimes resemble
consumers in instances where their objectives are not solely proﬁts or
revenue growth. Buyers may value a supplier that provides satisfaction or
prestige for executives or other employees even if it does not contribute to
the proﬁt of the company. This reﬂects the differences that often exist
between employee and company goals. Similarly, a hospital values a


---PAGE BREAK---

diagnostic device that yields better treatment even if the hospital does not
earn higher proﬁt as a result. This reﬂects both the goal of providing quality
patient care and the fact that a large number of hospitals are nonproﬁt
institutions. Many organizations have other goals in addition to proﬁtability
even if they are proﬁt making, which may enter into buyer value.
The Value Chain and Buyer Value
A ﬁrm lowers buyer cost or raises buyer performance through the impact
of its value chain on the buyer’s value chain. A ﬁrm may affect the buyer’s
chain by simply providing an input to one buyer activity. Frequently,
however, a ﬁrm’s product will have both direct and indirect impacts on the
buyer’s chain that go beyond the activity in which the product is actually
used. For example, weight is important in a typewriter that is moved from
place to place though it is not relevant if one views the buyer activity simply
as typing. Moreover, a ﬁrm typically impacts the buyer not only through its
product but also through such activities as the logistical system, order entry
system, sales force, and applications engineering group. Even ﬁrm activities
representing a small fraction of total cost can have a substantial impact on
differentiation. Sometimes the buyer has individual contact with value
activities of the ﬁrm (e.g., the sales force) while in other cases the buyer
only observes the outcome of a group of activities (e.g., the ultimate on-
time or late delivery). Thus, the value a ﬁrm creates for its buyer is
determined by the whole array of links between the ﬁrm’s value chain and
its buyer’s value chain, represented schematically in Figure 4–2.
Figure 4–2. Representative Linkages Between the Firm and the Buyer’s Value Chain


---PAGE BREAK---

Heavy trucks offer a useful example of multiple links. A heavy truck
directly inﬂuences its buyer’s logistical costs—a function of the truck’s
carrying capacity, ease of loading and unloading, fuel costs, and
maintenance costs. The truck will also have indirect effects on its buyer’s
other costs. Its capacity will inﬂuence the frequency with which the buyer
makes deliveries. The truck may contribute product quality through the
amount of shaking it subjects the cargo to, as well as the temperature and
humidity conditions in transit. The truck may also affect the buyer’s
packaging costs, a function of the protection required to avoid damage.
Finally, the truck may incrementally affect brand identity through its
appearance and the visibility of the logo painted on the side.
Not only will the truck itself affect the buyer’s value chain, but several
other value activities of the truck manufacturer will probably affect the
buyer as well. Spare parts availability will affect the downtime experienced
by the buyer. Credit policies will affect the ﬁnancing cost of the truck. The
quality of the truck manufacturer’s sales force may well determine their
helpfulness in suggesting new maintenance procedures and truck utilization
practices. All these links between a truck manufacturer’s value activities
and the buyer may potentially add to or subtract from buyer cost or
performance. The principle also holds true for household buyers.
The links between a ﬁrm and its buyer’s value chain that are relevant to
buyer value depend on how the ﬁrm’s product is actually used by the buyer,
not necessarily how it was intended to be used. Even the most carefully
designed product can yield unsatisfactory performance if a buyer does not
understand how to install, operate, or maintain it or if it is used for a
purpose for which it was not intended. For example, a housewife may get
terrible results from a frozen food product if it is cooked at the wrong
temperature. Similarly, a machine can malfunction quickly if it is not oiled
in the right place.
Every impact of a ﬁrm on its buyer’s value chain, including every link
between ﬁrm and buyer value activities, represents a possible opportunity
for differentiation. The more direct and indirect impacts a product has on its
buyer’s value chain, the richer the possibilities for differentiation tend to be
and the greater the overall level of achievable differentiation. A truck
manufacturer with a sophisticated understanding of how it impacts its
buyer’s value chain, for example, can not only design the truck to provide


---PAGE BREAK---

greater beneﬁts to the buyer, but can perform other value activities such as
service, spare parts supply, and ﬁnancing to be more valuable to the buyer.
Differentiation, then, grows out of all the links between a ﬁrm and its
buyer in which the ﬁrm is unique. The value of being unique in a value
activity is its direct and indirect impact on the buyer’s cost or performance.
A ﬁrm’s overall level of differentiation is the cumulative value to the buyer
of the uniqueness throughout its value chain. This cumulative value can be
calculated and provides the upper limit of the price premium the ﬁrm can
command relative to its competitors. Since the ﬁrm must necessarily share
some of the value it creates with its buyer in order to give the buyer an
incentive to purchase, the actual price premium will be somewhat less in
practice.
Lowering Buyer Cost
Anything a ﬁrm can do that lowers the buyer’s total cost of using a
product or other buyer costs represents a potential basis for differentiation.
Actions that lower the cost of buyer value activities representing a
signiﬁcant fraction of the buyer’s cost constitute the most signiﬁcant
opportunities. There are frequently many ways to lower buyer cost if a ﬁrm
has a sophisticated understanding of how buyers use its product and how its
various marketing, delivery, and other activities affect buyer costs.
A ﬁrm can lower its buyer’s cost in a number of ways:6
• Lower delivery, installation, or ﬁnancing cost
• Lower the required rate of usage of the product
•  Lower the direct cost of using the product, such as labor, fuel,
maintenance, required space
•  Lower the indirect cost of using the product, or the impact of the
product on other value activities. For example, a light component may
reduce the transport costs of the end product
•  Lower the buyer cost in other value activities unconnected with the
physical product
• Lower the risk of product failure and thus the buyer’s expected cost of
failure.


---PAGE BREAK---

Table 4–1 lists some of the ways in which a ﬁrm’s product itself can
lower the buyer’s direct cost of use. In addition to lowering buyer cost
through its product characteristics as illustrated by the examples in Table 4–
1, a ﬁrm can lower its buyer’s cost of use through many other value
activities. Reliability of deliveries reduces buyer inventory, and short lead
times in supplying spare parts reduce downtime. Ordering and billing
procedures can reduce the buyer’s accounting and procurement costs.
American Hospital Supply’s on-line ordering system for hospitals, for
example, allows purchase orders to be placed by less skilled, lower paid
clerks instead of purchasing agents. A ﬁrm can also provide buyers with
advice or technical assistance that reduces their costs. Intel, for example,
has a development system to help buyers design its microprocessors
cheaply and rapidly into their products. A ﬁrm can also take over buyer
functions, in effect forward integrating into the buyer’s value chain. In
wholesaling, for example, Napco stocks shelves, prices goods, and replaces
slow-moving items for its buyers.7
TABLE 4–1 Illustrative Product Characteristics that Lower the
Buyers’ Direct Cost of Use
DIFFERENTIATING FACTOR
EXAMPLE
Reduced usage of the product to achieve an equivalent
beneﬁt (including scrap percentage)
Cut-to-size steel sheets
Faster time to process
Quick attaching fasteners
Lower labor costs of use (lower labor inputs, less training,
or lower skilled labor required)
Automatic dialers
Reducing quantity of inputs or ancillary equipment
required (e.g. fuel, electricity, required shielding from
interference, etc.)
Fuel-efﬁcient refrigerator
Lower required maintenance/spare parts or ease of
maintenance
Reliable copiers
Less downtime or idle time
Fast-loading cargo ships
Less required adjustment or monitoring
Uniform-quality paints
Lower failure cost or risk
Blowout preventers for oil wells
Lower installation costs
Single-ply rooﬁng material


---PAGE BREAK---

Less incoming inspection required
Semiconductors
More rapid setup time
Programmable machine tools
Faster processing time
Tailored aluminum alloys
Reduced risk of damage of other products
Filtration equipment
Higher trade-in value
Durable cars
Compatibility with more types of ancillary equipment
Personal computers
A number of more extended examples will illustrate how ﬁrms have
lowered their buyers’ costs and achieved differentiation. Kodak’s copiers,
described earlier, lower the buyer’s cost of making collated and stapled
copies. The industry leader Xerox was more concerned with copying speed
itself, which failed to recognize the buyer’s full cost of using copiers. In the
moving industry, Bekins has offered guaranteed pickup and delivery dates, a
ﬁxed price for a move that is quoted in advance, a $100 late payment to the
buyer if the move does not occur on time, and reimbursement for damaged
goods based on their replacement costs instead of purchase price. All these
lower the buyer’s direct and indirect cost of a move (and increase peace of
mind as well). In fasteners, Velcro uses a system involving many small
plastic hooks that connect to a ﬁbrous pad. Velcro fasteners are easier to
install than other forms of fastening devices and eliminate the need for
skilled labor in the fastening steps on the buyer’s assembly line.
In seeking opportunities to lower buyer costs, a ﬁrm must chart in detail
how its product moves through or affects the buyer’s value chain, including
the 
buyer’s 
inventory, 
handling, 
technology 
development, 
and
administrative activities. It must also be familiar with all other products or
inputs its product is used with, and understand how its product interfaces
with them. The ﬁrm must also identify every other value activity in its value
chain that affects the buyer’s chain.
Raising Buyer Performance
Raising buyer performance will depend on understanding what is
desirable performance from the buyer’s viewpoint. Raising the performance
of industrial, commercial, and institutional buyer depends on what creates


---PAGE BREAK---

differentiation with their buyers. Thus the needs of the buyer’s buyer must
be understood, requiring the same analysis as the analysis of buyer value. A
truck sold to a buyer who is a consumer goods company that uses it to carry
goods to retail stores provides an example. If the retail stores desire
frequent deliveries, the consumer goods company will be very interested in
a truck with carrying capacity to make frequent deliveries at reasonable
cost. Similarly, in selling to automobile manufacturers Velcro achieves
differentiation because its fasteners are more ﬂexible and allow interior
design options for cars that are appreciated by consumers.
Raising performance of industrial, commercial, or institutional buyers
can also be based on helping them meet their noneconomic goals such as
status, image, or prestige. In heavy trucks, for example, PACCAR has
achieved a high level of differentiation for its Kenworth “K-Whopper”
trucks by careful handcrafting and by tailoring them to individual owner
speciﬁcations. These have little to do with the economic performance of the
truck. However, many Kenworth buyers are owner-operators who derive
value from the appearance and brand image of their trucks.
For products sold to consumers, raising buyer performance will be a
function of better satisfying needs. American Express traveler’s checks are
used in a stream of consumer activities in which cash needs are irregular,
travel plans change, banks are not always available, and a risk of theft or
loss exists. American Express differentiates itself because its buyers value
the security of redemption anywhere as well as rapid replacement of lost
checks. American Express provides easy redemption anywhere via many
ofﬁces throughout the world that operate long hours.
Buyer Perception of Value
Whatever the value a ﬁrm provides its buyers, buyers often have a
difﬁcult time assessing it in advance. Even careful inspection and test
driving of a truck, for example, does not allow the buyer to assess
completely its comfort, durability, fuel usage, and repair frequency. A
detailed understanding of how the physical product affects a buyer’s cost or
performance often requires extensive experience in its use. A buyer faces an
even more difﬁcult challenge in knowing how all the other activities a ﬁrm


---PAGE BREAK---

performs will affect buyer value. Moreover, a buyer cannot always
completely or accurately gauge the performance of a ﬁrm and its product
even after the product has been purchased and used.
Buyers, then, frequently do not fully understand all the ways in which a
supplier actually or potentially might lower their costs or improve
performance—that is, buyers often do not know what they should be
looking for in a supplier. While buyers are more likely to understand the
direct impacts of a ﬁrm on their value chains, they often fail to recognize
the indirect impacts or the ways in which other supplier activities besides
the product affect them. Buyers can sometimes perceive too much value just
as they can fail to perceive enough. For example, buyers sometimes see
only the price of a product when measuring its value and do not add up
other, more hidden, costs such as freight or installation. The buyer’s
perception of a ﬁrm and its product, therefore, can be as important as the
reality of what the ﬁrm offers in determining the effective level of
differentiation achieved. Moreover, buyers’ incomplete knowledge of what
is valuable to them can become an opportunity for differentiation strategy,
since a ﬁrm may be able to adopt a new form of differentiation
preemptively and educate buyers to value it.
A buyer’s incomplete knowledge implies that the differentiation actually
achieved may well be based in part on the factors used by the buyer to infer
or judge whether a ﬁrm will lower its cost or improve its performance
relative to competitors (or is doing so currently). Buyers use such
indications as advertising, reputation, packaging, the professionalism,
appearance, and personality of supplier employees, the attractiveness of
facilities, and information provided in sales presentations to infer the value
a ﬁrm will or does create. I term such factors that buyers use to infer the
value a ﬁrm creates signals of value.
Some signals of value require ongoing expenditure by a ﬁrm (e.g.,
packaging, advertising) while others reﬂect the stock of goodwill or
reputation a ﬁrm has built up over time. Similarly, some signals of value are
not directly controlled by the ﬁrm at all (e.g., word of mouth). Signaling
may be as necessary, in some industries, to expose hidden costs of a product
on which the ﬁrm has an advantage over competitors as it is to expose
unrecognized beneﬁts. In some, if not many, industries, signals of value are
as important as the actual value created in determining realized


---PAGE BREAK---

differentiation. This is particularly true where a ﬁrm’s impact on buyer cost
or performance is subjective, indirect, or hard to quantify, when many
buyers are ﬁrst-time buyers, buyers are unsophisticated, or repurchase is
infrequent. Good examples would be legal services, cosmetics, and
consulting. However, the need to signal value is present in virtually every
industry.
Buyers will not pay for value that they do not perceive, no matter how
real it may be. Thus, the price premium a ﬁrm commands will reﬂect both
the value actually delivered to its buyer and the extent to which the buyer
perceives this value. This is illustrated schematically in Figure 4–3. A ﬁrm
that delivers only modest value but signals it more effectively may actually
command a higher price than a ﬁrm that delivers higher value but signals it
poorly.
In the long run, the upper limit of the price premium a ﬁrm can
command reﬂects its actual impact on buyer value—impact on buyer cost
and performance relative to competitors. Through effective signaling of
value, a ﬁrm may be able to command a price in excess of true value for a
time. Eventually, however, the failure of a ﬁrm to deliver perceived value to
match its price tends to become known, partly through the efforts of
competitors.8 The converse is less true, however. By failing to signal its
value effectively, a ﬁrm may never realize the price premium its actual value
deserves.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 4–3. Actual Versus Perceived Buyer Value
Buyer Value and the Real Buyer
A ﬁrm or household does not purchase a product; individual decision
makers do. Both actual value and signals of value are assessed and
interpreted by these decision makers. The identity of the speciﬁc person or
persons who make the purchase decision will inﬂuence, if not determine,
the value attached to a product. The decision maker may not necessarily be
the person who pays for the product (e.g., the doctor, not the patient,
chooses drugs) and may be different from the user (e.g., the purchasing
agent chooses a product used in the plant). The channel may also make its
own decision about whether to stock a ﬁrm’s product and whether the ﬁrm
is a desirable supplier.
Different decision makers will value different things about a supplier and
use different signals to assess them. A purchasing agent may not value
reliability as highly as a plant manager, for example, because the purchasing
agent is more detached from the consequences of product failure. The
purchasing agent may be motivated more to keep the cost of purchase to a
minimum. There may also be more than one decision maker for a product.
Both husband and wife typically decide on buying a house, for example,
and travel agents and tour brokers all can play a role in choosing an airline
or resort hotel. Similarly, the purchasing department and plant engineer
often jointly choose pieces of production equipment. A number of
individuals frequently inﬂuence the decision maker though they may not
participate in the decision directly. Such individuals may be able to veto a
supplier, despite the fact that they do not have the power to choose.
Identifying the value a ﬁrm creates for the buyer and the signals of value
used by the buyer, then, rests on determining the identity of the real buyer.
The process of identifying the real buyer often suggests new dimensions of
performance that are not immediately apparent if the buyer is viewed as the
ﬁrm or household. These can include such factors as prestige, personal
relationships with supplier personnel that are valued in their own right, and
the desire to avoid personal risk in the purchase decision by choosing a
well-known supplier. IBM has exploited its position as a “safe” choice as a
supplier, for example, as has Kodak in amateur photography. The expertise


---PAGE BREAK---

and sources of information available to the real buyer will also shape what
signals of value will be convincing—an engineer might use technical
publications and advertising in technical journals as signals while an
accounting clerk might be more swayed by polished salespeople and glossy
brochures.
Buyer Purchase Criteria
Applying these fundamentals of buyer value to a particular industry
results in the identiﬁcation of buyer purchase criteria—speciﬁc attributes of
a ﬁrm that create actual or perceived value for the buyer. Buyer purchase
criteria can be divided into two types:
•  Use criteria. Purchase criteria that stem from the way in which a
supplier affects actual buyer value through lowering buyer cost or
raising buyer performance. Use criteria might include such factors as
product quality, product features, delivery time, and applications
engineering support.
• Signaling criteria. Purchase criteria that stem from signals of value, or
means used by the buyer to infer or judge what a supplier’s actual
value is. Signaling criteria might include factors such as advertising,
the attractiveness of facilities, and reputation.
Use criteria are speciﬁc measures of what creates buyer value. Signaling
criteria are measures of how buyers perceive the presence of value. While
use criteria tend to be more oriented to a supplier’s product, outbound
logistics and service activities, signaling criteria often stem from marketing
activities. Nonetheless, every functional department of a ﬁrm (and most
every value activity) can affect both.
The price premium a ﬁrm can command will be a function of its
uniqueness in meeting both use and signaling criteria. Addressing use
criteria without also meeting signaling criteria, a common error, will
undermine a buyer’s perception of a ﬁrm’s value. Addressing signaling
criteria without meeting use criteria will also usually not succeed because
buyers will eventually realize that their substantive needs have gone unmet.


---PAGE BREAK---

The distinctions among use and signaling criteria are often complex,
since many of a ﬁrm’s activities contribute to meeting use criteria as well as
serve as signals of value. A polished sales force, for example, may both
signal value and be a valuable source of applications knowledge that will
lower the buyer’s cost. Similarly, brand reputation may be valuable to a
buyer because it removes any blame if a supplier does not perform (“How
can you blame me for selecting IBM?”). Despite such situations, however, it
is vital to separate use and signaling criteria and the ﬁrm’s activities that
contribute to both, since only use criteria represent true sources of buyer
value. Buyers do not pay for signals of value per se. A ﬁrm must understand
how well it meets use criteria and the value created in order to determine an
appropriate price premium. The value of meeting signaling criteria is
measured differently. The value of a signaling criterion is how much it
contributes to the buyer perceiving the value created in meeting use criteria.
USE CRITERIA
Use criteria grow out of links between a ﬁrm’s value chain and its
buyer’s value chain, as described earlier. Because these links are numerous,
there are often many use criteria that go well beyond characteristics of the
physical product. Use criteria can encompass the actual product (e.g., Dr
Pepper’s taste difference from Coca-Cola and Pepsi), or the system by
which a ﬁrm delivers and supports its product, even if the physical product
is undifferentiated. While the distinction between a product and other value
activities may only be a matter of degree, it remains an important one since
other value activities often provide more dimensions on which to
differentiate than the physical product. Other value activities besides those
associated with the product can represent an important source of
differentiation because many ﬁrms tend to be preoccupied with the physical
product. Use criteria can also include both the speciﬁcations achieved by a
ﬁrm’s product (or other value activities) as well as the consistency with
which it meets those speciﬁcations (conformance). Conformance may be as
important as or more important than speciﬁcations, although it too is often
overlooked as a differentiating factor.
Use criteria can also include intangibles such as style, prestige, perceived
status, and brand connotation (e.g., designer jeans), particularly in


---PAGE BREAK---

consumer goods. Intangible use criteria often stem from purchase
motivations that are not economic in the narrow sense. Smirnoff Vodka’s
ability to achieve a premium price for a product that is essentially a
commodity stems largely from the social context in which much drinking
takes place. Buyers want to be seen consuming sophisticated vodka or to
serve vodka perceived as such by their guests. While intangible use criteria
are usually associated with consumers, they can be equally important with
other buyers. Owning a Gulfstream III business jet can lead to considerable
prestige for executives with their peers, for example. Intangible use criteria
are most important in industrial, commercial, or institutional products
where the real buyer is an individual with considerable discretion in
purchasing.
Finally, use criteria also may encompass the characteristics of
distribution channels, or downstream value. Since channels can contribute
to differentiation, use criteria must reﬂect these in areas such as channel-
provided service, and credit provided by channels. In addition, channels
will have their own use criteria that measure sources of value in a ﬁrm’s
dealings with them. For example, channels will often want credit,
responsiveness to inquiries, or technical support that the end buyer may not
notice at all.
Since the performance of a ﬁrm in meeting use criteria may also be
affected by how the buyer actually uses a product, part of a ﬁrm’s challenge
is to ensure that its product is actually used in a way that allows it to
perform to its capabilities. This can be inﬂuenced by product design,
packaging, and training. Flow control valves, for example, are often
designed so they cannot be overtorqued. Factors that improve the chances
that a product is used as intended often become use criteria in their own
right. They may be potential bases for differentiation since ﬁrms often
assume that their products are used as intended.
SIGNALING CRITERIA
Signaling criteria reﬂect the signals of value that inﬂuence the buyer’s
perception of the ﬁrm’s ability to meet its use criteria. Activities a ﬁrm
performs, as well as other attributes, can be signaling criteria. Signaling
criteria may help a particular supplier to be considered and/or may play an


---PAGE BREAK---

important role in the buyer’s ﬁnal purchase decision. Typical signaling
criteria include:
• reputation or image
• cumulative advertising
• weight or outward appearance of the product
• packaging and labels
• appearance and size of facilities
• time in business
• installed base
• customer list
• market share
• price (where price connotes quality)
• parent company identity (size, ﬁnancial stability, etc.)
• visibility to top management of the buying ﬁrm
Often signaling criteria can be quite subtle. For example, the paint job on
a medical instrument may have an important impact on the buyer’s
perception of its quality even though the paint job has little or no impact on
the instrument’s performance. Similarly, Arm & Hammer’s brand extension
into detergents has been perceived as differentiated in part because a box of
it is heavier than competitors’ products even though it yields the same
number of washes.
Signaling criteria are the most important when buyers have a difﬁcult
time measuring a ﬁrm’s performance, they purchase the product
infrequently, or the product is produced to buyer speciﬁcations and hence
past history with other buyers is an incomplete indication of the future. In
professional services, for example, signaling criteria are extremely
important. Services are typically customized and actually performed only
after the buyer has purchased them. As a result, successful professional
service ﬁrms pay very close attention to such things as ofﬁce decor and the
appearance of employees. Another industry where signaling criteria are
important is pianos, where many buyers are not sophisticated or secure
enough to judge quality very accurately. Steinway, the differentiated


---PAGE BREAK---

producer, has recognized the use of pianos by concert pianists as a powerful
signaling criterion. Steinway maintains a “piano bank” of grand pianos all
over the United States that approved artists can use for concerts at a
nominal cost.9 As a result, Steinway has developed excellent artist
relationships, and a large percentage of concerts are performed on Steinway
pianos.
Signaling criteria also grow out of the need to reinforce the buyer’s
perception of a ﬁrm even after the purchase of the product. Buyers often
need continued reassurance that they made a good decision in choosing the
ﬁrm and the product. They may also need education to help them evaluate
the extent to which a product is meeting their use criteria. This is because
buyers often remain unable to discern how well a product has met their use
criteria even after purchase, and may have insufﬁcient data or may not pay
enough attention to notice product performance. Regular communication
that describes a ﬁrm’s contribution for its buyers can often have a major
impact on differentiation.10
Some signaling criteria are associated with particular use criteria, while
others are more generalized signals that a supplier will provide value to the
buyer. Advertising may emphasize product characteristics, for example,
while a ﬁrm’s reputation may imply to some buyers that many of their
criteria will be satisﬁed. It is important to attempt to draw the connections
between signals of value and the particular use criteria they are signaling.
This will both help in identifying additional signals of value, and help the
ﬁrm understand exactly those attributes its signaling should convey. If a
ﬁrm recognizes that its customer list is a signal of service reliability, for
example, it can present the list in a form that emphasizes this.
Identifying Purchase Criteria
Identiﬁcation of purchase criteria begins by identifying the decision
maker for a ﬁrm’s product and the other individuals that inﬂuence the
decision maker. The channels may be an intermediate buyer that must be
analyzed as well. Use criteria should be identiﬁed ﬁrst, because they
measure the sources of buyer value and also often determine signaling
criteria. A number of parallel approaches should be employed to identify


---PAGE BREAK---

use criteria. Internal knowledge of the buyer’s needs constitutes an initial
source of use criteria. However, conventional wisdom may color internal
perception of use criteria; an internal analysis alone is insufﬁcient. No
analysis of buyer purchase criteria should ever be accepted unless it
includes some direct contact with the buyer. However, even talking to
buyers, as essential as it is, is insufﬁcient because buyers often do not fully
understand all the ways in which a ﬁrm can affect their cost or performance
and they may also not tell the truth. In any serious effort to understand
buyer purchase criteria, then, a ﬁrm must identify the buyer’s value chain
and perform a systematic analysis of all existing and potential linkages
between a ﬁrm’s value chain and its buyer’s chain. This sort of analysis can
not only uncover unrecognized use criteria, but also show how to assess the
relative weight of well-known use criteria.
Use criteria must be identiﬁed precisely in order to be meaningful for
developing differentiation strategy. Many ﬁrms speak of their buyers’ use
criteria in vague terms such as “high quality” or “delivery.” At this level of
generality, a ﬁrm cannot begin to calculate the value of meeting a use
criterion to the buyer, nor can the ﬁrm know how to change its behavior to
increase buyer value. Quality could mean higher speciﬁcations or better
conformance, for example. For McDonald’s, consistency of hamburger and
french fry quality over time and across locations is important as is taste and
portion size. Improving these two things involves very different actions by a
ﬁrm. Service can also mean many things, including backing of claims,
repair capability, response time to service requests, and delivery time.
Good performance in meeting each use criteria should be quantiﬁed if
possible. For example, the quality of a food ingredient might be measured
in terms of the particle count of extraneous material or the percentage of fat
content.11 Quantiﬁcation not only forces careful thinking to determine what
precisely the buyer values, but also allows the measurement and tracking of
ﬁrm performance against a use criterion—this often yields major
improvements in performance in and of itself. Quantiﬁcation also allows a
ﬁrm to assess its position against competitors in meeting important criteria.
The ﬁrm can then study the practices that underlie competitors’
performance.
A ﬁrm can calculate the value of meeting each use criterion by
estimating how it affects the buyer’s cost or performance. Such calculations


---PAGE BREAK---

inevitably involve judgments, but are an indispensable tool in choosing a
sustainable differentiation strategy.12 Determining the buyer value in
meeting each use criterion will allow them to be ranked in order of
importance. For some use criteria a ﬁrm must only meet a threshold value to
satisfy the buyer’s need, while for others more performance against them is
always better. If a TV set warms up in two seconds, for example, there is
little additional beneﬁt if the time is reduced to one second. Nearly all use
criteria will reach a point of diminishing returns, however, after which
further improvement is not valuable or will actually reduce buyer value.
Meeting some use criteria may also involve tradeoffs with others.
Calculating the buyer value from meeting each use criterion will illuminate
the relevant thresholds, tradeoffs, and buyer value that accrues to additional
improvement in meeting it. A ﬁrm can only make its own assessments of
the balance between the value of differentiation and its cost if it understands
these things. The ranking of use criteria in terms of the buyer value of
meeting them will often contradict conventional wisdom.
Signaling criteria can be identiﬁed by understanding the process the
buyer uses to form judgments about a ﬁrm’s potential ability to meet use
criteria, as well as how well it is actually meeting them. Examining each
use criteria to determine possible signals is a good place to start. If a key
use criterion is reliability of delivery, for example, past delivery record and
customer testimonials might be signals of value. Two other analytical steps
can also provide insight into signals of value. By carefully analyzing the
process by which the buyer purchases, including the information sources
consulted, the testing or inspection procedures carried out, and the steps in
reaching the decision, signals of value may become apparent. This sort of
analysis will yield indications about what a buyer consults or notices,
including channels. A related way of identifying signaling criteria is to
identify signiﬁcant points of contact between a ﬁrm and the buyer both
before and after purchase, including the channels, trade shows, accounting
department, and others. Every point of contact represents an opportunity to
inﬂuence the buyer’s perception of a ﬁrm and thus is a possible signaling
criterion.
Like use criteria, signaling criteria should be deﬁned as precisely and
operationally as possible in order to guide differentiation strategy. In a bank,
for example, the appearance of facilities can signal value through its order,


---PAGE BREAK---

permanence, and security. For a designer clothing store, other dimensions of
appearance would be more appropriate. Signaling criteria vary in
importance, and a ﬁrm must rank them in terms of their impact on buyer
perception in order to make choices about how much to spend on them.
Calculating the contribution of signaling criteria to realized price is often
difﬁcult, but focus groups and interviews may be helpful. As with use
criteria, meeting signaling criteria can reach the point of diminishing
returns. Opulent ofﬁces, for example, may disillusion a buyer by making a
ﬁrm appear wasteful or unprofessional.
The process of identifying buyer purchase criteria should result in a
ranking and sorting of purchase criteria such as that in Figure 4–4, which
illustrates purchase criteria for a chocolate confection product. Price should
be included in the list corresponding to the ranking the buyer places on it.
Use and signaling criteria that derive from the end user and the channel
should be separated, to highlight the different entities involved and to
clarify the actions required to meet each criterion. Use criteria for both end
users and channels can be usefully divided into those factors that lower
buyer cost and those that raise buyer performance. While meeting a use
criterion can sometimes both lower cost and raise performance, often one or
the other modes of value creation is predominant—in the chocolate
confection example taste relates to buyer performance while availability is
predominantly a measure of buyer shopping cost. Then use criteria can be
further divided into those that are easy to measure and those that are
difﬁcult for the buyer to perceive and/or quantify (see Figure 4–5).


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 4–4. Ranked Buyer Purchase Criteria for a Chocolate Confection
Figure 4–5. The Relationship Between Use Criteria and Buyer Value
Recognizing the differences in use criteria represented in Figure 4–5 can
be important for a number of reasons. Differentiation that lowers buyer cost
provides a more persuasive justiﬁcation for paying a sustained price
premium with some buyers than differentiation that raises performance.
Financial pressures on buyers (such as in a downturn) often mean that
buyers are willing to pay a premium only to ﬁrms that can demonstrate


---PAGE BREAK---

persuasively that they lower buyers’ cost. Differentiation with a readily
measurable connection to buyer value is also frequently more translatable
into a price premium than differentiation that creates value in ways that are
hard to perceive or measure. Differentiation that is difﬁcult to measure tends
to translate into a price premium primarily in situations where the buyer
perceives a great deal to be at stake, such as in top level consulting or where
the buyer is seeking to meet status needs. Differentiation on the right-hand
side of Figure 4–5 tends to be expensive to explain, requiring high levels of
investment in signaling. Increasing buyer sophistication tends to threaten
difﬁcult-to-measure forms of differentiation that may have been accepted at
face value in the past.
Each individual buyer to which an industry sells may have a different set
of use and signaling criteria or may rank among them differently. Clustering
of buyers into groups based on similarities in their purchase criteria is one
basis of buyer segments, to which I will return in Chapter 7.
Differentiation Strategy
Differentiation stems from uniquely creating buyer value. It can result
through meeting use or signaling criteria, though in its most sustainable
form it comes from both. Sustainable differentiation requires that a ﬁrm
perform a range of value activities uniquely that impact those purchase
criteria. Meeting some purchase criteria requires that a ﬁrm perform just
one value activity well—for example, clever advertising. Other purchase
criteria are affected by many of a ﬁrm’s activities. Delivery time, for
example, can be inﬂuenced by operations, outbound logistics, and order
processing, among others.
Many value activities typically play a role in meeting some use or
signaling criterion. Figure 4–6 illustrates how purchase criteria can be
arrayed against value activities to help a ﬁrm identify the activities
important to differentiation. The links between the ﬁrm’s value chain and
the buyer’s value chain, highlighted earlier, underlie an analysis such as that
shown in Figure 4–6.
A ﬁrm’s overall level of differentiation is the cumulative value it creates
for buyers in meeting all purchase criteria. The sources of differentiation in


---PAGE BREAK---

the ﬁrm’s value chain are often multiple, as illustrated by Stouffer’s
successful differentiation strategy in frozen entrees (Figure 4–7). Stouffer’s
has differentiated itself in both use and signaling criteria. Heavy spending
on menu development has led to Stouffer’s having the highest proportion of
unique dishes, as well as superior sauce technology. Care in ingredient
selection and preparation has resulted in dishes of attractive, consistent
appearance. Meals are more sophisticated in their menus and ingredients.
Stouffer’s attractive packaging serves as a signal of value, reinforcing its
quality image. Stouffer’s also pioneered high rates of spending on
advertising in a product category where low spending levels had been the
norm. It also innovated by advertising its frozen entrees as gourmet meals
for busy people rather than as quick, ﬁlling meals for the family. Finally,
Stouffer’s spends a considerable amount on a direct sales force and food
brokers in order to gain attractive retail shelf displays, rapid restocking, and
the removal of damaged merchandise. These multiple sources of uniqueness
in its value chain combine to yield Stouffer’s a signiﬁcant price premium
over its competitors. Differentiation has also led to a substantial market
share.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 4–6. Relationship of Value Activities to Buyer Purchase Criteria


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 4–7. Sources of Stouffer’s Differentiation in Frozen Entrees


---PAGE BREAK---

Differentiation will lead to superior performance if the value perceived
by the buyer exceeds the cost of differentiation. Stouffer’s price premium
exceeds the extra costs it deliberately incurs in advertising, packaging,
ingredients, brokers, and research, and estimates suggest that it has been
signiﬁcantly more proﬁtable than its competitors. Differentiation strategy
aims to create the largest gap between the buyer value created (and hence
the resulting price premium) and the cost of uniqueness in a ﬁrm’s value
chain. The cost of differentiation will vary by value activity, and the ﬁrm
should choose those activities where the contribution to buyer value is
greatest relative to the cost. This may imply pursuing low cost sources of
uniqueness as well as high cost ones that have high buyer value. The cost of
differentiating in various ways will depend on the ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis
cost drivers, which can inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s approach to differentiation and
its resulting performance. Stouffer’s high share has lowered its cost of
advertising, product development, and procurement to the beneﬁt of its
performance.
The ﬁnal component of differentiation strategy is sustainability.
Differentiation will not lead to a premium price in the long run unless its
sources remain valuable to the buyer and cannot be imitated by competitors.
Thus a ﬁrm must ﬁnd durable sources of uniqueness that are protected by
barriers to imitation.
Routes to Differentiation
A ﬁrm can enhance its differentiation in two basic ways. It may become
more unique in performing its existing value activities or it may reconﬁgure
its value chain in some way that enhances its uniqueness. Becoming more
unique in its value activities requires that a ﬁrm manipulate the drivers of
uniqueness described earlier. In both cases, a differentiator must
simultaneously control the cost of differentiation so that it translates into
superior performance. A number of approaches characterize successful
differentiators:
ENHANCE THE SOURCES OF UNIQUENESS


---PAGE BREAK---

Proliferate the sources of differentiation in the value chain. A ﬁrm can
often increase its overall differentiation by exploiting sources of uniqueness
in additional value activities. Stouffer’s is a good example of how
successful differentiation usually stems from cumulating uniqueness in
many value activities. Other examples include Caterpillar Tractor, which
combines uniqueness in product durability, parts availability, and its dealer
network; and Heineken Beer, which combines raw material quality,
consistency of taste, rapid shipping time to preserve freshness, heavy
advertising, and wide distribution to differentiate in imported beer. Every
value activity should be scrutinized for new ways to enhance buyer value.
Some semiconductor manufacturers, for example, are offering computer-
aided design facilities to their buyers who take over ﬁnal design steps for
their chips.
Make actual product use consistent with intended use. Since the way a
buyer actually uses a product will determine its performance, differentiation
can often suffer if a ﬁrm does not take steps to bring actual and intended use
in line:
• Invest in understanding how the product is actually used by buyers
• Modify the product to make it easier to use correctly
•  Design effective manuals and other instructions for use, rather than
treating them as an afterthought
• Provide training and education to buyers to improve actual use, either
directly or via channels.
Employ signals of value to reinforce differentiation on use criteria. A
ﬁrm cannot gain the fruits of differentiation without adequate attention to
signaling criteria. The activities chosen to inﬂuence signaling criteria must
be consistent with a ﬁrm’s intended bases for differentiation on use criteria.
Pall Corporation, for example, showcases its extensive R&D facilities in the
liquid ﬁltration industry through advertising and buyer visits to reinforce its
differentiation in product performance. Since the buyer may fail to perceive
indirect or hidden costs of a product, signaling may be as necessary to show
the lack of value delivered by competitors as it is to show the value
delivered by the ﬁrm. In addition, a differentiator must provide reassurance


---PAGE BREAK---

about the correctness of the buyer’s choice after sale. Signaling is only
necessary to the extent that it helps buyers perceive the ﬁrm’s value,
however, and no more.
Employ information bundled with the product to facilitate both use and
signaling. Information and information systems are becoming increasingly
important tools in differentiation, and bundling information with a product
can often enhance differentiation. Effective descriptions of how a product
works, how to use it, and how to service it can align intended use with
actual use, as discussed above. Giving the product the capacity to generate
information as it is used (e.g., a continuous readout of gasoline mileage in a
car) can improve the product’s use as well as be valuable in its own right.
Combining a product with information systems can raise buyer value in
other ways as well. American Greetings, for example, provides retailers
with an automated inventory management system to help them maintain
their stock, thereby raising greeting card sales and at the same time
minimizing inventory requirements. Finally, bundling information with a
product about how the product was made, how unique it is, or how it
performs relative to substitutes is often an effective way of signaling its
value. Partagas ﬁne cigars, for example, includes an insert with every box
that explains the family history of the owners and how they have brought
the Partagas brand from Cuba to the United States.
MAKE THE COST OF DIFFERENTIATION AN ADVANTAGE
Exploit all sources of differentiation that are not costly. Many activities
can be made more unique at little extra cost. A good case in point is the use
of linkages to improve differentiation. A ﬁrm may be able to differentiate
itself simply by coordinating better internally or with suppliers or channels.
Similarly, changing the mix of product features may be less costly than
simply adding features. Other high priority targets for enhancing
differentiation are activities in which cost is also reduced in the process.
Reducing product defects may also reduce service cost, for example.
Minimize the cost of differentiation by controlling cost drivers,
particularly the cost of signaling. A ﬁrm can minimize the cost of


---PAGE BREAK---

differentiation by recognizing the impact of cost drivers. Firms should
differentiate as efﬁciently as possible by paying careful attention to
controlling the cost drivers of activities on which differentiation is based
using the principles described in Chapter 3. General Motors, for example, is
attempting to lower the cost of product variety through installing ﬂexible
manufacturing systems in a number of its auto plants. It is particularly
important to ﬁnd efﬁcient ways of signaling because signaling does not
itself create value. Signaling that draws on past investments or reputation
(e.g., units in place, cumulative advertising) can be less costly than
signaling that arises only from current expenditures.
Emphasize forms of differentiation where the ﬁrm has a sustainable cost
advantage in differentiating. The cost of differentiating in various ways will
differ among competitors. A ﬁrm should differentiate in those ways where it
has a cost advantage. A large-share ﬁrm will have a cost advantage in
differentiating in scale-sensitive activities such as advertising and R&D, for
example, while a diversiﬁed ﬁrm may have an advantage in differentiating
itself in ways where the cost of doing so is reduced by interrelationships
with sister business units.
Reduce cost in activities that do not affect buyer value. In addition to
seeking a cost advantage in differentiating, a ﬁrm must also pay attention to
lowering cost in activities unrelated to the chosen differentiation strategy.
CHANGE THE RULES TO CREATE UNIQUENESS
Shift the decision maker to make a ﬁrm’s uniqueness more valuable. The
identity of the decision maker in part deﬁnes what is valuable to the buyer,
as well as the appropriate signals of that value. A ﬁrm may be able to
increase its uniqueness or the perceived value of that uniqueness if it can
alter the purchasing process in a way that elevates the role of decision
makers who value more the ﬁrm’s particular forms of uniqueness. A
product with highly sophisticated features, for example, may be perceived
as more unique and more valuable by an engineer than by a purchasing
agent. Shifting the decision maker typically requires modifying a ﬁrm’s
value chain in ways such as the following:


---PAGE BREAK---

• deploying a new type of salesperson
• involving technical people in the sale
• changing advertising media and content
• changing selling materials
• educating the buyer about new bases for the decision that requires a
different decision maker.
Discover unrecognized purchase criteria. Finding important purchase
criteria that buyers (and competitors) have not recognized offers a major
opportunity to achieve differentiation. It can allow a ﬁrm to preempt a new
basis for differentiation and gain lasting beneﬁts in image and reputation.
Purchase criteria that are unrecognized are often use criteria, particularly
those based on the indirect impacts a ﬁrm or its product has on the buyer’s
value chain. Many great differentiation strategies were not passive
responses to buyer demands, but were based on new approaches to
differentiation. Stouffer’s discovered an entirely new way of differentiating
frozen entrees, for example, just as Procter & Gamble was the ﬁrst to
advertise hand and body lotion year-round to consumers instead of
seasonally. It discovered that hand and body lotion was used by buyers in
ways unrecognized in previous strategies.
Preemptively respond to changing buyer or channel circumstances.
Buyers or channels whose purchase criteria are changing provide another
important opportunity for differentiation strategies. Change creates new
bases for differentiation and can lead buyers to take a new look at products
that have been routinely purchased from an established supplier. Increased
health consciousness by buyers, for example, has led to the rapid
penetration of caffeine-free soft drinks. Increased competition in a buyer’s
industry can also enhance the buyer’s need for applications engineering
assistance, or raise the value of lowering the buyer’s cost. In oil ﬁeld
equipment, for example, increasing ﬁnancial pressure on buyers has favored
suppliers who can demonstrate that they lower buyers’ cost. Similarly,
buyer sophistication in minicomputers may be reducing the ability to
differentiate on the basis of customer service but may be enhancing
possibilities for differentiation based on delivery time, cost of use, and other


---PAGE BREAK---

more subtle bases. Differentiation that lowers the buyers cost will often fare
best during difﬁcult times for the buyer industry or as buyers get more
sophisticated. Similarly, differentiation based on quantiﬁable performance
improvements for the buyer may command a more lasting price premium
than that based on intangible performance advantages.
RECONFIGURE THE VALUE CHAIN TO BE UNIQUE IN ENTIRELY NEW WAYS
The discovery of an entirely new value chain can unlock possibilities for
differentiation. For example, Federal Express differentiated itself by
reconﬁguring the traditional value chain for small-parcel delivery
completely. It bought its own trucks and aircraft and pioneered the hub
concept. It thereby improved timeliness and reliability compared to
competitors using scheduled airlines and/or long-distance trucks combined
with many distribution points and sorting centers. Hanes’s L’eggs
pantyhose, with its innovative packaging, distinctive in-store displays, and
sales and delivery directly to supermarkets, serves as another example of
how a new value chain can be the key to a successful differentiation
strategy. Opportunities to achieve dramatic levels of differentiation often
result from reconﬁguring the value chain.
Conceiving of a new value chain is a creative process. Working
backward from the buyer’s value chain, a ﬁrm should probe for ways it
might link with the buyer’s chain differently or restructure its own value
activities to meet purchase criteria better. Common reconﬁgurations involve
areas such as the following:
• a new distribution channel or selling approach
•  forward integration to take over buyer functions or eliminate the
channels
• backward integration to control more determinants of product quality
• adoption of an entirely new process technology
The Sustainability of Differentiation


---PAGE BREAK---

The sustainability of differentiation depends on two things, its continued
perceived value to buyers and the lack of imitation by competitors. There is
an ever-present risk that buyers’ needs or perceptions will change,
eliminating the value of a particular form of differentiation. Competitors
may also imitate the ﬁrm’s strategy or leapfrog the bases of differentiation a
ﬁrm has chosen.
The sustainability of a ﬁrm’s differentiation vis-à-vis competitors
depends on its sources. To be sustainable, differentiation must be based on
sources where there are mobility barriers to competitors replicating them.
As discussed earlier, the drivers of uniqueness differ in their sustainability
while the cost of differentiation may also vary among competitors and
affect sustainability. Differentiation will be more sustainable under the
following conditions:
The ﬁrm’s sources of uniqueness involve barriers. Proprietary learning,
linkages, interrelationships, and ﬁrst-mover advantages tend to be more
sustainable drivers of uniqueness than simply a policy choice to be unique
in an activity as was discussed earlier. Signaling activities such as
advertising can also be sustainable because they involve barriers. However,
differentiation based too heavily on signaling tends to be vulnerable to
increasing buyer sophistication.
The ﬁrm has a cost advantage in differentiating. A ﬁrm with a
sustainable cost advantage in performing the activities that lead to
differentiation will enjoy much greater sustainability.
The sources of differentiation are multiple. The overall difﬁculty of
imitating a differentiation strategy depends in part on how many sources of
uniqueness a ﬁrm has. The sustainability of a differentiation strategy is
usually greatest if differentiation stems from multiple sources, rather than
resting on a single factor such as product design. A single basis for
differentiation provides a strong focal point for competitors. Differentiation
that results from coordinated actions in many value activities will usually be
more durable, since it requires wholesale changes in competitor behavior to
imitate.


---PAGE BREAK---

A ﬁrm creates switching costs at the same time it differentiates.
Switching costs are ﬁxed costs incurred by the buyer when it changes
suppliers, which allow a ﬁrm to sustain a price premium even if its product
is equal to that of competitors.13 If differentiation at the same time creates
switching costs, the sustainability of differentiation is increased. Switching
costs, like differentiation itself, grow out of the way in which a product is
used by the buyer. Activities that make a ﬁrm unique can frequently raise
the cost of switching since the buyer often tailors its activities to exploit the
ﬁrm’s uniqueness.
The Stouffer’s example described earlier provides an illustration of how
the sustainability of a ﬁrm’s sources of differentiation can be assessed (see
Figure 4–7). Of Stouffer’s sources of differentiation, the most sustainable
are probably its menu and sauce technology, its product positioning and
brand image, its relationships with prime food brokers, and its cost
advantage in advertising because of its leading market share. Heavy
investment by competitors would likely be necessary to replicate these
factors if they could be replicated at all. As a result, Stouffer’s
differentiation has been sustainable over a long period of time. Conversely,
Hanes’s new packaging of pantyhose and direct distribution to grocery
stores were policy choices not protected by proprietary learning, substantial
scale advantages in executing them, or other barriers to imitation. Hanes’s
differentiation has thus been extensively imitated by competitors and has
not yielded a signiﬁcant price premium.
Pitfalls in Differentiation
This chapter has suggested some common pitfalls that afﬂict ﬁrms
pursuing differentiation strategies. Most result from an incomplete
understanding of the underlying bases of differentiation or its cost.
UNIQUENESS THAT IS NOT VALUABLE
The fact that a ﬁrm is unique at something does not necessarily mean it
is differentiated. Uniqueness does not lead to differentiation unless it lowers
buyer cost or raises buyer performance as perceived by the buyer. The most


---PAGE BREAK---

persuasive differentiation often stems from sources of value the buyer can
perceive and measure, or from difﬁcult-to-measure sources of value that are
extensively signaled. A good test of the value of uniqueness is whether a
ﬁrm can command and sustain a price premium in selling to well-informed
buyers.
TOO MUCH DIFFERENTIATION
If a ﬁrm does not understand the mechanisms by which its activities
affect buyer value or the perception of value, it may be too differentiated. If
product quality or service levels are higher than buyers’ need, for example,
a ﬁrm may be vulnerable to competitors with the correct level of quality and
a lower price. Unnecessary differentiation is the result of failure to diagnose
performance thresholds or diminishing returns in buyer purchase criteria.
This, in turn, stems from a lack of understanding of how a ﬁrm’s activities
relate to the buyer’s value chain.
TOO BIG A PRICE PREMIUM
The price premium from differentiation is a function of value of
differentiation and its sustainability. A differentiated competitor will be
abandoned by buyers if the premium gets too high. Unless a ﬁrm shares
some of the value created with the buyer in the form of a more reasonable
price, moreover, it may tempt the buyer to backward integrate. The
appropriate price premium is a function not only of a ﬁrm’s extent of
differentiation, but also of its overall relative cost position. If a ﬁrm does not
keep its costs in proximity to competitors’, the price premium may grow
beyond sustainable levels even if a ﬁrm’s differentiation is maintained.
IGNORING THE NEED TO SIGNAL VALUE
Firms sometimes ignore the need to signal value, basing their
differentiation strategies on use criteria that are seen as the “real” bases for
differentiation. However, signals of value exist because buyers are not
willing or able to fully discern differences among suppliers. Ignoring
signaling criteria can open a ﬁrm to attack from a competitor providing


---PAGE BREAK---

inferior value but having a better understanding of the buyer’s purchasing
process.
NOT KNOWING THE COST OF DIFFERENTIATION
Differentiation does not lead to superior performance unless its
perceived value to the buyer exceeds its cost. Firms often do not isolate the
cost of the activities they perform to differentiate themselves, but instead
assume that differentiation makes economic sense. Thus they either spend
more on differentiation than they recover in the price premium, or fail to
exploit ways of reducing the cost of differentiation through understanding
its cost drivers.
FOCUS ON THE PRODUCT INSTEAD OF THE WHOLE VALUE CHAIN
Some ﬁrms see differentiation only in terms of the physical product, and
fail to exploit opportunities to differentiate in other parts of the value chain.
As has been discussed, the entire value chain often provides numerous and
sustainable bases for differentiation, even if the product is a commodity.
FAILURE TO RECOGNIZE BUYER SEGMENTS
Buyer purchase criteria and their ranking usually vary among buyers,
creating buyer segments. If a ﬁrm does not recognize the existence of these
segments, its strategy may not meet the needs of any buyer very well,
making it vulnerable to focus strategies. The existence of buyer segments
does not mean that a ﬁrm must choose a focus strategy, but rather that it
must base its differentiation on widely valued purchase criteria. The
strategic issues raised by industry segmentation will be discussed more
extensively in Chapter 7.
Steps in Differentiation
The concepts in this chapter can be summarized by outlining the
analytical steps necessary for determining the bases for differentiation and
selecting a differentiation strategy.


---PAGE BREAK---

1.  Determine who the real buyer is. The ﬁrst step in differentiation
analysis is to identify the real buyer. The ﬁrm, institution, or household is
not the real buyer, but rather one or more speciﬁc individuals within the
buying entity who will interpret use criteria as well as deﬁne signaling
criteria. Channels may also be buyers in addition to the end user.
2. Identify the buyer’s value chain and the ﬁrm’s impact on it. A ﬁrm’s
direct and indirect impact on its buyer’s value chain will determine the
value a ﬁrm creates for its buyer through lowering buyer cost or raising
buyer performance. A ﬁrm must clearly understand all the ways it does or
could affect its buyer’s value chain, and how possible changes in the buyer’s
value chain will impact the equation. Channels may play a role in affecting
the buyer’s chain as well as through linkages with the ﬁrm’s chain.
3. Determine ranked buyer purchasing criteria. Analysis of the buyer’s
value chain provides the foundation for determining buyer purchase criteria.
Purchase criteria take two forms, use criteria and signaling criteria.
Uniqueness in meeting use criteria creates buyer value, while uniqueness in
meeting signaling criteria allows that value to be realized. Sometimes an
analysis of the buyer’s value will suggest purchase criteria that the buyer
does not currently perceive. Purchase criteria must be identiﬁed in terms
that are operational, and their link to buyer value calculated and ranked. The
analyst must not shrink from ﬁnding ways to attach a speciﬁc value to
performance and cost savings, even for household buyers. The identiﬁcation
of purchase criteria grows out of buyer value chain analysis, buyer
interviews, and in-house expertise. The process is iterative, and the list of
buyer purchase criteria is reﬁned continuously as an analysis proceeds.
4. Assess the existing and potential sources of uniqueness in a ﬁrm’s
value chain. Differentiation can stem from uniqueness throughout a ﬁrm’s
value chain. A ﬁrm must determine which value activities impact each
purchase criteria (see Figure 4–6). It must then identify its existing sources
of uniqueness relative to competitors, as well as potential new sources of
uniqueness. A ﬁrm must also identify the drivers of uniqueness, because
they bear on the question of sustainability.
Since differentiation is inherently relative, a ﬁrm’s value chain must be
compared to those of competitors. Careful analysis of competitors is also
invaluable in understanding how value activities impact the buyer, and in
seeing possibilities for creating new value chains. Another technique for


---PAGE BREAK---

uncovering possible new ways to perform value activities is to study
analogies—industries producing similar products or selling to the same
buyer that may do things differently.
5. Identify the cost of existing and potential sources of differentiation.
The cost of differentiation is a function of the cost drivers of the activities
that lead to it. The ﬁrm deliberately spends more in some activities to be
unique. Some forms of differentiation are not very costly and pursuing them
may even lower cost in ways that the ﬁrm has overlooked. Normally,
however, a ﬁrm must deliberately spend more than it would have to
otherwise to be unique. A ﬁrm’s position vis-à-vis cost drivers will make
some forms of differentiation more costly than others relative to
competitors.
6.  Choose the conﬁguration of value activities that creates the most
valuable differentiation for the buyer relative to cost of differentiating. A
subtle understanding of the relationship between the ﬁrm’s and the buyer’s
value chains will allow a ﬁrm to select a conﬁguration of activities that
creates the largest gap between buyer value and the cost of differentiation.
Most successful differentiation strategies cumulate multiple forms of
differentiation throughout the value chain, and address both use and
signaling criteria.
7.  Test 
the 
chosen 
differentiation 
strategy 
for 
sustainability.
Differentiation will not lead to superior performance unless it is sustainable
against erosion or imitation. Sustainability grows out of selecting stable
sources of buyer value, and differentiating in ways that involve barriers to
imitation or where the ﬁrm has a sustainable cost advantage in
differentiating.
8.  Reduce cost in activities that do not affect the chosen forms of
differentiation. A successful differentiator reduces cost aggressively in
activities that are unimportant to buyer value. This will not only improve
proﬁtability, but also reduce the vulnerability of differentiators to attack by
cost-oriented competitors because the price premium becomes too large.


---PAGE BREAK---

5
Technology and Competitive Advantage
Technological change is one of the principal drivers of competition. It plays
a major role in industry structural change, as well as in creating new
industries. It is also a great equalizer, eroding the competitive advantage of
even well-entrenched ﬁrms and propelling others to the forefront. Many of
today’s great ﬁrms grew out of technological changes that they were able to
exploit. Of all the things that can change the rules of competition,
technological change is among the most prominent.
Despite its importance, however, the relationship between technological
change and competition is widely misunderstood. Technological change
tends to be viewed as valuable for its own sake—any technological
modiﬁcation a ﬁrm can pioneer is believed to be good. Competing in “high
technology” industries is widely perceived as being a ticket to proﬁtability,
while other industries that are “low-technology” are viewed with disdain.
The recent success of foreign competition, much of it based on
technological innovation, has encouraged companies even more to invest in
technology, in some cases uncritically.
Technological change is not important for its own sake, but is important
if it affects competitive advantage and industry structure. Not all
technological change is strategically beneﬁcial; it may worsen a ﬁrm’s
competitive position and industry attractiveness. High technology does not
guarantee proﬁtability. Indeed, many high-technology industries are much
less proﬁtable than some “low-technology” industries due to their
unfavorable structures.


---PAGE BREAK---

Technology, however, pervades a ﬁrm’s value chain and extends beyond
those technologies associated directly with the product. There is, in fact, no
such thing as a low technology industry if one takes this broader view.
Viewing any industry as technologically mature often leads to strategic
disaster. Moreover, many important innovations for competitive advantage
are mundane and involve no scientiﬁc breakthroughs. Innovation can have
important strategic implications for low tech as well as hi tech companies.
This chapter will describe some of the important links between
technological change and competitive advantage as well as industry
structure. It focuses not on particular technologies or on how to manage
research and development, but on ways to recognize and exploit the
competitive signiﬁcance of technological change. I present a rather broad
view of technology in this chapter because all the technologies embodied in
a ﬁrm’s value chain have potential competitive impacts.
The chapter begins by describing the linkage between technology and
competition. I examine the relationship of technology to competitive
advantage, growing out of technology’s role in the value chain and the
resulting ability of a ﬁrm to achieve low cost and/or differentiation through
its value activities. I then show how technology can shape industry
structure. With this framework established, the chapter examines methods
for selecting a technology strategy. Technology strategy must include
choices about what important technologies to invest in, whether to seek
technological leadership in them, and when and how to license technology.
The chapter then describes how a ﬁrm can forecast the path of technological
change as an industry evolves, crucial to the selection of technology
strategy. Finally, the steps in formulating technology strategy are
summarized.
Technology and Competition
Any ﬁrm involves a large number of technologies. Everything a ﬁrm
does involves technology of some sort, despite the fact that one or more
technologies may appear to dominate the product or the production process.
The signiﬁcance of a technology for competition is not a function of its
scientiﬁc merit or its prominence in the physical product. Any of the


---PAGE BREAK---

technologies involved in a ﬁrm can have a signiﬁcant impact on
competition. A technology is important for competition if it signiﬁcantly
affects a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage or industry structure.
Technology and the Value Chain
The basic tool for understanding the role of technology in competitive
advantage is the value chain. A ﬁrm, as a collection of activities, is a
collection of technologies. Technology is embodied in every value activity
in a ﬁrm, and technological change can affect competition through its
impact on virtually any activity. Figure 5–1 illustrates the range of
technologies typically represented in a ﬁrm’s value chain.
Every value activity uses some technology to combine purchased inputs
and human resources to produce some output. This technology may be as
mundane as a simple set of procedures for personnel, and typically involves
several scientiﬁc disciplines or subtechnologies. The materials handling
technology used in logistics, for example, may involve such disciplines as
industrial engineering, electronics, and materials technology. The
technology of a value activity represents one combination of these
subtechnologies. Technologies are also embodied in the purchased inputs
used in each value activity, both in consumable inputs and in capital items.
The technology inherent in purchased inputs interacts with the other
subtechnologies to yield the level of performance of the activity.
Technology is embodied not only in primary activities but in support
activities as well. Computer-aided design is an example of a technology just
coming into use in product development that is replacing traditional ways of
developing new products. Various types of technologies also underlie the
performance of other support activities, including those not typically
viewed as technologically based. Procurement embodies procedures as well
as technologies for placing orders and interacting with suppliers. Recent
developments in information systems technology offer the possibility of
revolutionizing procurement by changing ordering procedures and
facilitating the achievement of supplier linkages. Human resource
management draws on motivation research and technologies for training.


---PAGE BREAK---

Firm infrastructure involves a wide range of technologies ranging from
ofﬁce equipment to legal research and strategic planning.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 5–1. Representative Technologies in a Firm’s Value Chain


---PAGE BREAK---

Information systems technology is particularly pervasive in the value
chain, since every value activity creates and uses information. This is
evident from Figure 5–1, which shows information systems technology in
every generic category of value activity in the chain. Information systems
are used in scheduling, controlling, optimizing, measuring, and otherwise
accomplishing activities. Inbound logistics, for example, uses some kind of
information system to control material handling, schedule deliveries, and
manage raw material inventory. Similarly, an information system is involved
in order processing, managing suppliers, and scheduling the service force.
Information systems technology also has an important role in linkages
among activities of all types, because the coordination and optimization of
linkages (Chapter 2) requires information ﬂow among activities. The recent,
rapid technological change in information systems is having a profound
impact on competition and competitive advantages because of the pervasive
role of information in the value chain.
Another pervasive technology in the value chain is ofﬁce or
administrative technology, because clerical and other ofﬁce functions must
be performed as part of many value activities. While ofﬁce technology can
be subsumed under information systems technology, I have separated it
because of the propensity to overlook it. Change in the way ofﬁce functions
can be performed is one of the most important types of technological trends
occurring today for many ﬁrms, though few are devoting substantial
resources to it.
The technologies in different value activities can be related, and this
underlies a major source of linkages within the value chain. Product
technology is linked to the technology for servicing a product, for example,
while component technologies are related to overall product technology.
Thus a technology choice in one part of the value chain can have
implications for other parts of the chain. In extreme cases, changing
technology in one activity can require a major reconﬁguration of the value
chain. Moving to ceramic engine parts, for example, eliminates the need for
machining and other manufacturing steps in addition to having other
impacts on the value chain. Linkages with suppliers and channels also
frequently involve interdependence in the technologies used to perform
activities.


---PAGE BREAK---

A good example of the interdependence of technology in value activities
is American Airline’s Sabre reservations system. American leases terminals
to travel agents, which allows automated reservations and ticketing. The
system has been a source of differentiation for American. At the same time,
however, the same system is used inside American in ticketing and issuing
boarding passes as well as in route scheduling. American also sells listings
on the system to other airlines.
A ﬁrm’s technologies are also clearly interdependent with its buyers’
technologies. The points of contact between a ﬁrm’s value chain and its
buyer’s chain, discussed in the previous chapter, deﬁne the areas of
potential interdependency of technology. A ﬁrm’s product technology
inﬂuences the product and process technology of the buyer and vice versa,
for example, while a ﬁrm’s order processing technology inﬂuences and is
inﬂuenced by the buyer’s procurement methods.
Technology, then, is pervasive in a ﬁrm and depends in part on both the
buyers’ channels and suppliers’ technology. As a result, the development of
technology encompasses areas well outside the boundaries traditionally
established for R&D, and inherently involves suppliers and buyers.1 Some
of the technologies embodied in the value chain are industry-speciﬁc, to
varying degrees, but many are not. Ofﬁce automation and transportation are
just two areas where vital technologies, in large part, are not industry-
speciﬁc. Hence technology development relevant to a ﬁrm often takes place
in other industries. All these characteristics of technology have implications
for the role of technology in competitive advantage.
Technology and Competitive Advantage
Technology affects competitive advantage if it has a signiﬁcant role in
determining relative cost position or differentiation. Since technology is
embodied in every value activity and is involved in achieving linkages
among activities, it can have a powerful effect on both cost and
differentiation. Technology will affect cost or differentiation if it inﬂuences
the cost drivers or drivers of uniqueness of value activities described in
Chapters 3 and 4. The technology that can be employed in a value activity is
often the result of other drivers, such as scale, timing, or interrelationships.


---PAGE BREAK---

For example, scale allows high-speed automatic assembly equipment, while
early timing allowed some electric utilities to harness hydropower while
sites were available. In these instances technology is not the source of
competitive advantage, but rather an outcome of other advantages.
However, the technology employed in a value activity is frequently itself a
driver when it reﬂects a policy choice made independently of other drivers.
A ﬁrm that can discover a better technology for performing an activity than
its competitors thus gains competitive advantage.
In addition to affecting cost or differentiation in its own right, technology
affects competitive advantage through changing or inﬂuencing the other
drivers of cost or uniqueness. Technological development can raise or lower
scale economies, make interrelationships possible where they were not
before, create the opportunity for advantages in timing, and inﬂuence nearly
any of the other drivers of cost or uniqueness. Thus a ﬁrm can use
technological development to alter drivers in a way that favor it, or to be the
ﬁrst and perhaps only ﬁrm to exploit a particular driver.
Two good examples of the role of technology in altering relative cost
position are underway in the aluminum industry and illustrate these points.
The dramatic rise in energy costs has made power the largest single cost in
aluminum smelting, and transformed a number of ﬁrms into high-cost
producers because of the cost of their power. The great majority of Japanese
aluminum smelters fall into this category, for example. To deal with the
problem, Japanese ﬁrms have worked actively on carbothermic reduction, a
breakthrough technology that dramatically lowers power consumption by
converting bauxite and related ores directly into aluminum ingot without the
intermediate alumina step. Here a new technology is itself a policy cost
driver. Carbothermic reduction by reducing power consumption would also
diminish the importance of location and institutional factors as cost drivers
because location and government pricing policies for power strongly
inﬂuence electricity costs.
The other example of the role of technology in cost is occurring in
aluminum semifabrications, where a new process technology called
continuous casting is emerging as a potential replacement for hot mills. The
new process does not appear to result in lower cost at efﬁcient scale, but it is
less scale-sensitive. If the process proves successful, it could nullify the
scale advantage of large semifabricators and allow plants to be located


---PAGE BREAK---

closer to buyers. This would reduce relatively high transport cost in regions
previously served by products shipped from distant facilities. Here the new
technology does not appear to be itself a cost driver, but is affecting other
drivers (scale and location). It will inﬂuence the cost position of ﬁrms
asymmetrically depending on their positions vis-à-vis those drivers.
The role of technology in differentiation is illustrated by Federal
Express, which reconﬁgured the value chain in small parcel delivery and
achieved faster and more reliable delivery. The new technologies employed
in Federal Express’s value chain were policy choices, but also had the effect
of increasing scale economies and creating a ﬁrst mover advantage. Thus as
Federal Express has gained a large market share, the cost of matching its
differentiation has become very high for competitors. This example also
demonstrates the point that a major technological development need not
involve scientiﬁc breakthroughs or even technologies that were not widely
available previously. Mundane changes in the way a ﬁrm performs activities
or combines available technologies often underlie competitive advantage.
Since a ﬁrm’s technology is often interdependent with its buyers’
technology, technological change by the buyer can affect competitive
advantage just as can technological change within the ﬁrm. This is
particularly true in differentiation strategies. For example, a distributor that
once differentiated itself by performing pricing and inventory control
functions for its retail buyers may lose that differentiation if retailers switch
to on-line point-of-sale systems. Similarly, changes in suppliers’ technology
can add to or subtract from a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage if they affect the
drivers of cost or uniqueness in a ﬁrm’s value chain.
TESTS OF A DESIRABLE TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
The link between technological change and competitive advantage
suggests a number of tests for a desirable direction of technological change.
Technological change by a ﬁrm will lead to sustainable competitive
advantage under the following circumstances:
The technological change itself lowers cost or enhances differentiation
and the ﬁrm’s technological lead is sustainable. A technological change
enhances competitive advantage if it leads to lower cost or differentiation


---PAGE BREAK---

and can be protected from imitation. The factors that determine the
sustainability of a technological lead are described below.
The technological change shifts cost or uniqueness drivers in favor of a
ﬁrm. Changing the technology of a value activity, or changing the product
in ways that affect a value activity, can inﬂuence the drivers of cost or
uniqueness in that activity. Even if the technological change is imitated,
therefore, it will lead to a competitive advantage for a ﬁrm if it skews
drivers in the ﬁrm’s favor. For example, a new assembly process that is
more scale-sensitive than the previous process will beneﬁt a large-share ﬁrm
that pioneers it even if competitors eventually adopt the technology.
Pioneering the technological change translates into ﬁrst-mover
advantages besides those inherent in the technology itself. Even if an
innovator is imitated, pioneering may lead to a variety of potential ﬁrst-
mover advantages in cost or differentiation that remain after its
technological lead is gone. First-mover advantages and disadvantages are
identiﬁed below.
The technological change improves overall industry structure. A
technological change that improves overall industry structure is desirable
even if it is easily copied.
Technological change that fails these tests will not improve a ﬁrm’s
competitive position, though it may represent a substantial technological
accomplishment. Technological change will destroy competitive advantage
if it not only fails the tests but has the opposite effect contemplated in the
tests, such as skewing cost or uniqueness drivers in favor of competitors. A
ﬁrm may also ﬁnd itself in the situation where a technological change may
meet one test but worsen a ﬁrm’s position via another.
Technology and Industry Structure
Technology is also an important determinant of overall industry structure
if the technology employed in a value activity becomes widespread.
Technological change that is diffused can potentially affect each of the ﬁve


---PAGE BREAK---

competitive forces, and improve or erode industry attractiveness. Thus even
if technology does not yield competitive advantage to any one ﬁrm, it may
affect the proﬁt potential of all ﬁrms. Conversely, technological change that
improves a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage may worsen structure as it is
imitated. The potential effect of technological change on industry structure
means that a ﬁrm cannot set technology strategy without considering the
structural impacts.
TECHNOLOGY AND ENTRY BARRIERS
Technological change is a powerful determinant of entry barriers. It can
raise or lower economies of scale in nearly any value activity. For example,
ﬂexible manufacturing systems often have the effect of reducing scale
economies. Technological change can also raise economies of scale in the
technological development function itself, by quickening the pace of new
production introduction or raising the investment required for a new model.
Technological change also is the basis of the learning curve. The learning
curve results from improvements in such things as layout, yields, and
machine speeds—all of which are types of technological change.
Technological change can lead to other absolute cost advantages such as
low-cost product designs. It can also alter the amount of capital required for
competing in an industry. The shift from batch to continuous process
technology for producing cornstarch and corn syrup has signiﬁcantly
increased the capital requirements in corn wet milling, for example.
Technological change also plays an important role in shaping the pattern
of product differentiation in an industry. In aerosol packaging, for example,
technological change has resulted in product standardization and has made
the product a near commodity, all but eliminating the ability of contract
packagers to differentiate themselves based on product characteristics.
Technological change can also raise or lower switching costs. Technological
choices by competitors determine the need for buyers to retrain personnel or
to reinvest in ancillary equipment when switching suppliers. Technological
change can also inﬂuence access to distribution by allowing ﬁrms to
circumvent existing channels (as telemarketing is doing) or, conversely, by
increasing industry dependence on channels (if more product demonstration
and after-sale service is required, for example).


---PAGE BREAK---

TECHNOLOGY AND BUYER POWER
Technological change can shift the bargaining relationship between an
industry and its buyers. The role of technological change in differentiation
and switching costs is instrumental in determining buyer power.
Technological change can also inﬂuence the ease of backward integration
by the buyer, a key buyer bargaining lever. In the computer service industry,
for example, the rapid decline in the cost of computers, driven by
technological change, is having a major impact on the ability of ﬁrms such
as ADP to sell timesharing, since many buyers can now afford their own
machines.
TECHNOLOGY AND SUPPLIER POWER
Technological change can shift the bargaining relationship between an
industry and its suppliers. It can eliminate the need to purchase from a
powerful supplier group or, conversely, can force an industry to purchase
from a new, powerful supplier. In commercial rooﬁng, for example, the
introduction of rubber-based rooﬁng membranes has introduced powerful
new resin suppliers in place of less powerful asphalt suppliers.
Technological change can also allow a number of substitute inputs to be
used in a ﬁrm’s product, creating bargaining leverage against suppliers. For
example, the can industry has beneﬁted from ﬁerce competition between the
aluminum and steel companies to supply it, brought on by technological
change in aluminum cans. Technology investments by ﬁrms can also allow
the use of multiple suppliers by creating in-house knowledge of supplier
technologies. This can eliminate dependence on any one supplier.
TECHNOLOGY AND SUBSTITUTION
Perhaps the most commonly recognized effect of technology on industry
structure is its impact on substitution. Substitution is a function of the
relative value to price of competing products and the switching costs
associated with changing between them, as will be discussed extensively in
Chapter 8. Technological change creates entirely new products or product
uses that substitute for others, such as ﬁberglass for plastic or wood, word


---PAGE BREAK---

processors for typewriters, and microwave ovens for conventional ovens. It
inﬂuences both the relative value/price and switching costs of substitutes.
The technological battle over relative value/price between industries
producing close substitutes is at the heart of the substitution process.
TECHNOLOGY AND RIVALRY
Technology can alter the nature and basis of rivalry among existing
competitors in several ways. It can dramatically alter the cost structure and
hence affect pricing decisions. For example, the shift to continuous process
technology in the corn wet milling industry mentioned above has also raised
ﬁxed cost, and contributed to greater industry rivalry. A similar increase in
ﬁxed cost as a percentage of total cost has accompanied the increasing
deadweight tonnage of oil tankers, made possible by improvements in
shipbuilding technology. The role of technology in product differentiation
and switching costs also is important to rivalry.
Another potential impact of technology on rivalry is through its effect on
exit barriers. In some distribution industries, for example, automation of
materials handling has raised exit barriers because the materials handling
equipment is specialized to the particular goods moving through
warehouses. Hence what were once general-purpose facilities have become
specialized and capital-intensive facilities.
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND INDUSTRY BOUNDARIES
Technological change plays an important role in altering industry
boundaries. The boundary of an industry is often imprecise, because
distinctions between an industry’s product and substitutes, incumbents and
potential entrants, and incumbents and suppliers or buyers are often
arbitrary. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that regardless of where
one chooses to draw industry boundaries, technological change can broaden
or shrink them.
Technological change widens industry boundaries in a number of ways.
It can reduce transportation or other logistical costs, thereby enlarging the
geographic scope of the market. This happened in the 1960s and 1970s with
the advent of large bulk cargo carriers in shipping. Technological change


---PAGE BREAK---

that reduces the cost of responding to national market differences can help
globalize industries.2 It can also enhance product performance, thereby
bringing new customers (and competitors) into a market. Finally,
technological changes can increase the interrelationships among industries.
In industries such as ﬁnancial services, computers and telecommunications,
technological change is blurring industry boundaries and folding whole
industries together. In publishing, automated text processing and printing
technologies have made shared printing operations more feasible for several
different types of publications. Interrelationships are discussed in greater
detail in Chapter 9.
Technology can also narrow industry boundaries. Technological change
may allow a ﬁrm to tailor the value chain to a particular segment, as will be
discussed in Chapter 7. Thus segments can, in effect, become industries.
Portable cassette players, for example, have become a full-ﬂedged industry
independent of larger cassette players and cassette players used in dictating
due to technological advancements that improved their performance and
widened their usage.
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND INDUSTRY ATTRACTIVENESS
While it is sometimes believed that technological change always
improves industry structure, the previous discussion should make it clear
that it is just as likely to worsen industry structure. The effect of
technological change on industry attractiveness depends on the nature of its
impact on the ﬁve forces. If it raises entry barriers, eliminates powerful
suppliers, or insulates an industry from substitutes, then technological
change can improve industry proﬁtability. However, if it leads to more
buyer power or lowers entry barriers, it may destroy industry attractiveness.
The role of technological change in altering industry structure creates a
potential conundrum for a ﬁrm contemplating innovation. An innovation
that raises a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage may eventually undermine
industry structure, if and when the innovation is imitated by other
competitors. Firms must recognize the dual role of technological change in
shaping both competitive advantage and industry structure when selecting a
technology strategy and in making technology investments.


---PAGE BREAK---

Technology Strategy
Technology strategy is a ﬁrm’s approach to the development and use of
technology. Although it encompasses the role of formal R&D organizations,
it must also be broader because of the pervasive impact of technology on
the value chain. Because of the power of technological change to inﬂuence
industry structure and competitive advantage, a ﬁrm’s technology strategy
becomes an essential ingredient in its overall competitive strategy.
Innovation is one of the principal ways of attacking well-entrenched
competitors, a subject I will return to in Chapter 15. However, technology
strategy is only one element of overall competitive strategy, and must be
consistent with and reinforced by choices in other value activities. A
technology strategy designed to achieve differentiation in product
performance will lose much of its impact, for example, if a technically
trained sales force is not available to explain the performance advantages to
the buyer and if the manufacturing process does not contain adequate
provisions for quality control.
Technology strategy must address three broad issues:
• what technologies to develop
• whether to seek technological leadership in those technologies
• the role of technology licensing
Choices in each area must be based on how technology strategy can best
enhance a ﬁrm’s sustainable competitive advantage.
The Choice of Technologies to Develop
At the core of a technology strategy is the type of competitive advantage
a ﬁrm is trying to achieve. The technologies that should be developed are
those that would most contribute to a ﬁrm’s generic strategy, balanced
against the probability of success in developing them. Technology strategy
is a potentially powerful vehicle with which a ﬁrm can pursue each of the
three generic strategies. Depending on which generic strategy is being
followed, however, the character of technology strategy will vary a great
deal, as shown in Table 5–1.


---PAGE BREAK---

In many ﬁrms, R&D programs are driven more by scientiﬁc interests
than by the competitive advantage sought. It is clear from Table 5–1,
however, that the primary focus of a ﬁrm’s R&D programs should be
consonant with the generic strategy that is being pursued. The R&D
program of a cost leader, for example, should include a heavy dose of
projects designed to lower cost in all value activities that represent a
signiﬁcant fraction of cost, as well as projects to reduce the cost of product
design through value engineering. R&D by a cost leader on product
performance must be aimed at maintaining parity with competitors rather
than adding costly new features or the goals of R&D will be inconsistent
with the ﬁrm’s strategy.
Another important observation from Table 5–1 is that both product and
process technological change can have a role in supporting each of the
generic strategies. Firms often incorrectly assume that process technological
change is exclusively cost-oriented and product technological change is
intended solely to enhance differentiation. Chapter 3 has shown how
product technology can be critical in achieving low cost, while Chapter 4
has shown how changes in process technology may be the key to
differentiation (a favorite tactic of Japanese companies).
TABLE 5–1 Product and Process Technology and the Generic
Strategies
 
COST
LEADERSHIP
DIFFERENTIATION
COST
FOCUS
DIFFERENTIATION
FOCUS
 
 
ILLUSTRATIVE TECHNOLOGICAL
POLICIES
 
Product
Technological
Change
Product
development to
reduce product
cost by lowering
material content,
facilitating ease
of manufacture,
simplify
logistical
requirements,
etc.
Product
development to
enhance product
quality, features,
deliverability, or
switching costs
Product
development to
design in only
enough
performance for
the target
segment’s needs
Product design to
meet the needs
of a particular
segment better
than broadly-
targeted
competitors
Process
Learning curve
Process
Process
Process


---PAGE BREAK---

Technological
Change
process
improvement to
reduce material
usage or lower
labor input
Process
development to
enhance
economies of
scale
development to
support high
tolerances,
greater quality
control, more
reliable
scheduling,
faster response
time to orders,
and other
dimensions that
raise buyer value
development to
tune the value
chain to a
segment’s needs
in order to lower
the cost of
serving the
segment
development to
tune the value
chain to segment
needs in order to
raise buyer value
It is also important that a ﬁrm’s technology strategy extend beyond
product and process R&D as they are traditionally deﬁned. Technology
pervades a ﬁrm’s value chain and relative cost and differentiation are a
function of the entire chain. Thus a systematic examination of all a ﬁrm’s
technologies will reveal areas in which to reduce cost or enhance
differentiation. The information system department may have more impact
on technological change in some ﬁrms today than the R&D department, for
example. Other important technologies such as transportation, materials
handling, communications, and ofﬁce automation also deserve more than ad
hoc or informal attention. Finally, development in all technological areas
must be coordinated to ensure consistency and exploit interdependencies
among them.
Crown Cork and Seal provides a good example of the link between
technology strategy and competitive advantage. Crown focuses on select
customer industries and provides cans together with highly responsive
service. Crown does little or no basic research and does not pioneer new
products. Rather, its R&D department is organized to solve speciﬁc
customer problems on a timely basis, and to imitate successful product
innovations rapidly. Crown’s R&D approach, then, closely supports its
focus strategy. Its technological policies are quite different from those of
American Can or Continental Group, which supply broad lines of
packaging in addition to cans. American and Continental invest heavily on
research in basic materials and new products.
The selection of speciﬁc technologies in the value chain on which to
concentrate development effort is governed by the link between


---PAGE BREAK---

technological change and competitive advantage. A ﬁrm should concentrate
on those technologies that have the greatest sustainable impact on cost or
differentiation, either directly or through meeting the other tests described
earlier. These tests allow a ranking of technological changes that would
yield the greatest competitive beneﬁt. The cost of improving the technology
must be balanced against the beneﬁt, as well as the likelihood that the
improvement can be achieved.
Firms often confront a choice between attempting to improve an
established technology for performing a value activity or investing in a new
one. In aluminum smelting, for example, a ﬁrm might concentrate on
improving the Hall-Heroult process now in use, or it might attempt to
develop carbothermic reduction. Technologies seem to go through a life
cycle in which early major improvements give way to later incremental
ones. This argues that the beneﬁt/cost tradeoff in improving mature
technologies may be less (though perhaps more certain) than that in
improving newer technologies.
This can be a dangerous assumption, however, that is self-fulﬁlling. A
technology can be assumed to be mature only with great caution. Major
improvements in the efﬁciency of the Hall-Heroult process are occurring
today, for example, despite the fact that it was developed prior to 1900.
Similarly, the fuel efﬁciency of low-speed diesel engines has risen
signiﬁcantly since 1974. Diesel technology is also over 80 years old and
was widely viewed as mature compared to gas turbines, yet diesels have
actually increased their lead over turbines. In both these examples, the rapid
rise in energy prices stimulated active attention to fuel efﬁciency. Greater
attention to improving the technologies was coupled with improvements in
materials technology, instrumentation, and electronics that allowed better
process control, higher temperatures, and other beneﬁts.
As noted earlier, most products and value activities embody not one
technology but several technologies or subtechnologies. It is only a
particular combination of subtechnologies that can be assumed to be
mature, not individual subtechnologies themselves. Signiﬁcant changes in
any one of the subtechnologies going into a product or process may create
new possibilities for combining them that produce dramatic improvements,
such as those achieved in smelting and low-speed diesel engines. The
advent of microelectronics, a subtechnology that can be applied to many


---PAGE BREAK---

other technologies, is having a profound effect on many industries through
unlocking possibilities for new technological combinations.
Thus in choosing among technologies to invest in, a ﬁrm must base its
decisions on a thorough understanding of each important technology in its
value chain and not on simple indicators such as age. Sometimes all that is
necessary to produce technological progress is effort and investment, as
both examples illustrate. In other cases, advances in subtechnologies may
allow improvement in the existing technology. Efforts at improving an older
technology can sometimes be futile, however. In such instances the best
course of action is to attempt to leapfrog it. The decision by a ﬁrm to
discard its own technology may be difﬁcult, particularly if it was developed
in-house, but such a choice may be essential to maintaining the ﬁrm’s
competitive position.
The choice of technologies to develop should not be limited to those few
where there are opportunities for major breakthroughs. Modest
improvements in several of the technologies in the value chain, including
those not related to the product or the production process, can add up to a
greater 
beneﬁt 
for 
competitive 
advantage. 
Moreover, 
cumulative
improvements in many activities can be more sustainable than a
breakthrough that is noticeable to competitors and becomes an easy target
for imitation. The success of Japanese ﬁrms in technology is rarely due to
breakthroughs, but to a large number of improvements throughout the value
chain.
Technological Leadership or Followership
The second broad issue a ﬁrm must address in technology strategy is
whether to seek technological leadership. The notion of technological
leadership is relatively clear—a ﬁrm seeks to be the ﬁrst to introduce
technological changes that support its generic strategy. Sometimes all ﬁrms
that are not leaders are viewed as technological followers, including ﬁrms
that disregard technological change altogether. Technological followership
should be a conscious and active strategy in which a ﬁrm explicitly chooses
not to be ﬁrst on innovations, and that is the sense in which it is examined
here.


---PAGE BREAK---

While technological leadership is often thought of in terms of product or
process technology, the issue is much broader. Leadership can be
established in technologies employed in any value activity. The discussion
here is directed at the strategic choice between pioneering innovation in any
value activity and waiting for others to pioneer.
The decision to become a technological leader or follower can be a way
of achieving either low cost or differentiation, as illustrated in Table 5–2:
TABLE 5–2 Technological Leadership and Competitive Advantage
 
TECHNOLOGICAL LEADERSHIP
TECHNOLOGICAL FOLLOWERSHIP
Cost Advantage
Pioneer the lowest-cost product
design
Be the ﬁrst ﬁrm down the
learning curve
Create low cost ways of
performing value activities
Lower the cost of the product or
value activities by learning
from the leader’s experience
Avoid R&D costs through
imitation
Differentiation
Pioneer a unique product that
increases buyer value
Innovate in other activities to
increase buyer value
Adapt the product or delivery
system more closely to buyer
needs by learning from the
leader’s experience
Firms tend to view technological leadership primarily as a vehicle for
achieving differentiation, while acting as a follower is considered the
approach to achieving low cost. If a technological leader is the ﬁrst to adopt
a new lower-cost process, however, the leader can become the low-cost
producer. Or if a follower can learn from the leader’s mistakes and alter
product technology to meet the needs of buyers better, the follower can
achieve differentiation. There can also be more than one technological
leader in an industry because of the many technologies involved and the
different types of competitive advantage sought.
The choice of whether to be a technological leader or follower in an
important technology is based on three factors:3
• Sustainability of the technological lead. The degree to which a ﬁrm
can sustain its lead over competitors in a technology.


---PAGE BREAK---

• First-mover advantages. The advantages a ﬁrm reaps from being the
ﬁrst to adopt a new technology.
• First-mover disadvantages. The disadvantages a ﬁrm faces by moving
ﬁrst rather than waiting for others.
All three factors interact to determine the best choice for a particular
ﬁrm. Signiﬁcant disadvantages of being a ﬁrst mover may eliminate the
desirability of taking the leadership role even if a ﬁrm can sustain its
technological lead. Conversely, ﬁrst-mover advantages may translate an
initial technological lead into a sustainable competitive advantage elsewhere
though the technological lead itself disappears. First-mover advantages and
disadvantages occur most often in the context of technological choices, but
their signiﬁcance for competitive strategy formulation extends beyond
technological strategy. They address the wider question of how timing
translates into competitive advantage or disadvantage and into entry and
mobility barriers.
SUSTAINABILITY OF THE TECHNOLOGICAL LEAD
Technological leadership is favored if the technological lead can be
sustained because (1) competitors cannot duplicate the technology, or (2)
the ﬁrm innovates as fast or faster than competitors can catch up. The
second condition is important because technology often diffuses, requiring a
technological leader to remain a moving target. Kodak, for example, has
maintained leadership in amateur photography in large part through a
succession of camera systems and ﬁlm chemistries, most recently including
the disc camera, rather than possessing a single technology competitors
could not match. If a technology lead cannot be sustained, technological
leadership can only be justiﬁed if the initial lead translates into ﬁrst-mover
advantages, because of the greater cost of leadership compared to
followership.
The sustainability of a technological lead is a function of four factors:
The Source of Technological Change. The sustainability of a
technological lead depends heavily on whether technology is being
developed inside the industry or is coming from outside it. An important


---PAGE BREAK---

proportion of technological change comes from external sources such as
suppliers, buyers, or completely unrelated industries. In many process
industries, for example, the key source of technology is construction
engineering ﬁrms that design production processes and build plants.
Where important sources of technology are external to an industry,
sustaining a technological lead is generally more difﬁcult. External
technology sources decouple a ﬁrm’s access to technology from its
technological skills and R&D spending rate, because many companies can
get access to external developments. Hence external technological changes
act as an equalizer among competitors. Technological leaders in industries
with key external sources of technology must capture the best of those
sources through coalitions or exclusive arrangements in order to sustain
their lead, or have a superior ability to adapt externally developed
technology to the industry.
The Presence or Absence of a Sustainable Cost or Differentiation
Advantage in Technology Development Activity. A technological lead is
more likely to be sustainable if a ﬁrm has a cost or differentiation advantage
in performing technology development. The tools in Chapters 3 and 4 can
be used to analyze a ﬁrm’s relative cost and differentiation in the
development of technology. For example, scale economies or learning
effects in technological development give large-share or experienced ﬁrms
an R&D cost advantage. Where the costs of developing a model are largely
ﬁxed, a ﬁrm with a large share has proportionally lower R&D costs than a
smaller-share ﬁrm. It may thus be able to spend more money on R&D in
order to maintain its technological lead without a cost penalty. This seems
to have occurred in large turbine generators, where General Electric has
outspent Westinghouse in absolute terms and maintained a signiﬁcant
technological lead although its R&D as a percentage of sales is still lower
than Westinghouse’s. Rising costs of product development in an industry
also work in favor of large-share ﬁrms. As the cost of bringing out a new
herbicide has risen to over $30 million, for example, the advantages of the
industry leaders in agricultural chemicals are widening.
A ﬁrm’s relative cost or effectiveness in performing technology
development can also be strongly inﬂuenced by interrelationships among
related business units within the parent company. Interrelationships can


---PAGE BREAK---

allow the transference of skills or sharing of costs of R&D activity. The
types of interrelationships involving R&D are described in Chapter 9.
Technological 
leaders 
often 
aggressively 
pursue 
technological
interrelationships, entering new businesses with related technologies. They
also create mechanisms for R&D transfer among business units, and tend to
invest at the corporate level in core technologies with a potential impact on
many business units.
Different parts of the innovation cycle—basic research, applied research,
development—tend to offer differing opportunities for sustainable cost
advantages in R&D spending. Basic product innovation is often less scale-
sensitive than the subsequent rapid introduction of new product types and
the incorporation of new features. This is one of the reasons Japanese ﬁrms
often overtake innovative U.S. ﬁrms that fail to maintain their lead in
subsequent product improvements. Many successful technological leaders
do not reap all of the beneﬁts of scale, learning, or interrelationships in
R&D in the form of higher proﬁts, but reinvest to maintain their
technological lead. They also exploit any scale or learning advantages in
R&D by rapid new model introduction. Honda, for example, has reinforced
its competitive advantage in motorcycles through a continual stream of new
models.
Relative Technological Skills. A ﬁrm with unique technological skills
vis-à-vis competitors is more likely to sustain its technological lead than a
ﬁrm with comparable R&D personnel, facilities, and management to
competitors. Technological skills will inﬂuence the output from a given rate
of spending on technology, regardless of scale, learning, or interrelationship
effects. Technological skills are a function of many factors—management,
company culture, organizational structure and systems, company reputation
with scientiﬁc personnel, and others. NEC Corporation, for example, is the
company most highly ranked by engineering graduates in Japan. This
contributes to its ability to attract the best graduates, reinforcing its strong
R&D capability. Successful technological leaders pay close attention to
their stock of R&D skills. They avoid cutting back R&D staff in industry
downturns or proﬁt squeezes. They also seek out relationships with the
leading scientiﬁc centers in appropriate ﬁelds, and attempt to develop an


---PAGE BREAK---

image as the best place to work for the types of research personnel that
support their technology strategy.
Rate of Technology Diffusion. A ﬁnal important factor in determining the
sustainability of a technological lead is the rate of diffusion of the leader’s
technology. Superior technological skills or cost advantages in performing
R&D are nulliﬁed if competitors can easily copy what a ﬁrm develops.
Diffusion of technology occurs continually, though at different rates
depending on the industry. Some of the mechanisms for diffusion of a
leader’s technology are as follows:
•  direct observation by competitors of a leader’s products (reverse
engineering) and methods of operating
• technology transfer through equipment suppliers or other vendors
• technology transfer through industry observers such as consultants and
the trade press
• technology transfer through buyers who desire another qualiﬁed source
• personnel losses to competitors or spinoff ﬁrms
• public statements or papers delivered by a leader’s scientiﬁc personnel
The diffusion of technology is often greater for the basic product and
process innovations than it is for later improvements. Product and process
reﬁnements are more likely to be kept proprietary, particularly when based
on process improvements. Since Japanese ﬁrms have emphasized constant
process innovations, they often develop more sustainable advantages than
U.S. or European ﬁrms that pioneered the process.
The rate of technological diffusion is partly intrinsic to an industry and
partly under a ﬁrm’s control. Most of the technology of a mobile home
producer, for example, is readily observable by examining the product.
Disposable diaper technology diffuses more slowly because much of it
hinges on the way the product is manufactured on customized machines.
Some factors that slow down the rate of diffusion are as follows:
• patenting of the ﬁrm’s technology and related technologies
• secrecy


---PAGE BREAK---

• in-house development of prototypes and production equipment
•  vertical integration into key parts that embody or give clues to the
technology
• personnel policies that retain employees
Successful technological leaders are aggressive in trying to slow down
diffusion. They patent extensively where patents can be obtained, and
enforce them by always challenging infringers. They view all contact with
outsiders, even buyers, as a threat to proprietary know-how. Plant tours are a
rarity, and even buyers are not told about key innovations. Technological
leaders are also often vertically integrated, building or modifying equipment
in-house to protect technology, and are discrete in public disclosures. It is
striking how many of the ﬁrms known to be secretive are also technological
leaders. These include DuPont, Kodak, Procter & Gamble, and Michelin.
FIRST-MOVER ADVANTAGES
Technological leadership is strategically desirable when ﬁrst-mover
advantages exist. These allow a leader to translate a technology gap into
other competitive advantages that persist even if the technology gap closes.
First-mover advantages rest on the role of timing in improving a ﬁrm’s
position vis-à-vis sustainable sources of cost advantage or differentiation. In
general terms, a ﬁrst mover gets the opportunity to deﬁne the competitive
rules in a variety of areas.
The most important types of potential ﬁrst-mover advantages include the
following, and can also accrue to moving ﬁrst into a geographic area or to
pioneering that does not involve technology per se:4
Reputation. A ﬁrm that moves ﬁrst may establish a reputation as the
pioneer or leader, a reputation that emulators will have difﬁculty
overcoming. Leadership places a ﬁrm, at least temporarily, in the position of
being unique which can produce long-term image beneﬁts not available to
others. A ﬁrst mover also may be ﬁrst to serve buyers and thus to establish
relationships where there may be loyalty. The signiﬁcance of any reputation
advantage from leadership will depend on the credibility of a ﬁrm and its
capacity to invest in marketing. A small company may not succeed in


---PAGE BREAK---

enhancing its reputation by moving ﬁrst because it lacks the resources to
publicize its lead.
Preempting a Positioning. A ﬁrst mover may preempt an attractive
product or market positioning, forcing competitors to adopt less desirable
ones. Stouffer’s preempted the gourmet concept in frozen entrees, for
example. A ﬁrst mover gets the opportunity to shape the way a product is
deﬁned or marketed in a way that favors it. A ﬁrst mover can also put
capacity in place to preempt the ability of competitors to proﬁtably expand.
Switching Costs. A ﬁrst mover can lock in later sales if switching costs
are present. In hospital management contracts, for example, the pioneer that
signed up hospitals ﬁrst gained a signiﬁcant edge in contract renewals
because of the substantial costs to the hospital of changing management
ﬁrms. Switching would result in disruption caused by a new administrator, a
new computer system, and other changes.
Channel Selection. A ﬁrst mover may gain unique channel access for a
new product or product generation. It can pick the best brokers, distributors,
or retailers, while followers must either accept the second best, establish
new channels, or persuade the ﬁrst mover’s channels to shift or divide their
loyalties.
Proprietary Learning Curve. A ﬁrst mover gains a cost or differentiation
advantage if there is a proprietary learning curve in value activities that are
affected by the early move. The ﬁrst mover begins down the learning curve
ﬁrst in the affected activities, and may establish a durable cost or
differentiation advantage if it can keep its learning proprietary.
Favorable Access to Facilities, Inputs, or Other Scarce Resources. A ﬁrst
mover can often enjoy at least a temporary advantage in access to purchased
inputs or other resources, because it contracts for them before market forces
reﬂect the full impact of the change it is pioneering. A ﬁrm may get its pick
of sites for facilities, for example, or favorable deals with raw material
suppliers eager for new business. A good case in point is the airline
industry, where the early no-frills carriers have acquired cheap surplus


---PAGE BREAK---

aircraft and/or low-cost terminal space, and hired out-of-work pilots.
Market forces will eventually bid up the prices of these inputs as the no-
frills strategy is imitated.
Other examples come from several extractive industries. New mines and
processing plants are being constructed in increasingly remote locations,
raising infrastructure costs. They are also being forced to bear higher
environmental costs. Early movers, then, have lower costs.
Deﬁnition of Standards. A ﬁrst mover can deﬁne the standards for
technology or for other activities, forcing later movers to adopt them. These
standards, in turn, make the ﬁrm’s position more sustainable. For example,
RCA deﬁned the standards in color TV which meant that competitors had to
go down the learning curve RCA had already started down rather than
create a new one.
Institutional Barriers. A ﬁrst mover may enjoy institutional barriers
against imitation. The ﬁrst mover may secure patents, or being ﬁrst into a
country may give it special status with government. Institutional factors
often facilitate a ﬁrst mover’s ability to deﬁne standards as well.
Early Proﬁts. In some industries, a ﬁrst mover may be in a position to
enjoy temporarily high proﬁts from its position. It may be able to contract
with buyers at high prices during early scarcity of a new item, for example,
or sell to buyers who value the new technology very highly.
Successful technological leaders actively pursue ﬁrst-mover advantages
rather than rely solely on their technological edge. They take every
opportunity to use their technological leadership to deﬁne the competitive
rules in ways that beneﬁt them. They invest in marketing to reinforce the
reputation beneﬁts of being the leader, and price aggressively to make early
sales to buyers with the highest switching costs. It is striking how many
ﬁrms that were ﬁrst movers have remained leaders for decades. In consumer
goods, for example, such leading brands as Crisco, Ivory, Life Savers,
Coca-Cola, Campbell’s, Wrigley, Kodak, Lipton, and Goodyear were
leaders by the 1920s.


---PAGE BREAK---

First-mover advantages can be dissipated through aggressive spending
by later entrants unless the ﬁrst mover invests to capitalize on them. As
happened to Bowmar in electric calculators, small pioneers are often
overwhelmed by later entrants. Their lead is overcome not because ﬁrst-
mover advantages were not present, but because the resources were not
present to exploit them. IBM in personal computers is providing a more
recent example of a late mover succeeding against early movers based on
resources and interrelationships with other business units.
Where the ﬁrst mover does not have adequate resources, the ﬁrst early
mover with resources can often be the ﬁrm to gain the beneﬁts of ﬁrst-
mover advantages. In minicomputers, for example, Digital Equipment did
not introduce the ﬁrst machine but gained many ﬁrst-mover advantages
because it was the ﬁrst to develop the product aggressively. Digital invested
heavily to exploit its advantages through expanding its product line, going
down the learning curve, and increasing the size of its sales force. A similar
situation occurred in video cassette recorders, where Ampex pioneered the
product but Japanese ﬁrms invested heavily to improve the technology,
produce units cheaply, and translate their lead into ﬁrst-mover advantages.
FIRST-MOVER DISADVANTAGES
First movers often face disadvantages as well as advantages. First-mover
disadvantages stem from two broad sources, the costs of pioneering and the
risk that conditions will change.
Pioneering Costs. A ﬁrst mover often bears substantial pioneering costs,
including the following:5
• gaining regulatory approvals
• achieving code compliance
• educating buyers
• developing infrastructure in areas such as service facilities and training
• developing needed inputs such as raw material sources and new types
of machinery
• investing in the development of complementary products (see Chapter
12)


---PAGE BREAK---

• high costs of early inputs because of scarcity of supply or small scale
of needs
Pioneering costs vary widely depending on the type of technological
innovation and can be reduced by sharing them with good competitors (see
Chapter 6). However, they are often unavoidable for the ﬁrst mover.
Demand Uncertainty. A ﬁrst mover bears the risk of uncertainty over
future demand. It must put capacity in place ﬁrst, while later movers can
base their decisions on more current information. Though committing
before competitors has some advantages, it also has some signiﬁcant risks.
RCA was the ﬁrst mover into color TV, for example, betting on an early
takeoff of the new technology. Later movers learned from RCA’s experience
that demand for color sets was some years away and avoided a period of
losses.
Changes in Buyer Needs. A ﬁrst mover is vulnerable if buyer needs
change and its technology is no longer valued. A ﬁrst mover’s reputation
advantage may also be eliminated if buyers’ needs change and the ﬁrst
mover is identiﬁed with the old generation of technology. Unless buyer
needs shift radically, substantially changing the technology required to
serve them, however, a ﬁrst mover can maintain its lead by modifying
technology over time.
Speciﬁcity of Investments to Early Generations or Factor Costs. A ﬁrst
mover may be at a disadvantage if early investments are speciﬁc to the
current technology and cannot be easily modiﬁed for later generations. In
semiconductors, for example, Philco moved early for leadership with a
large automated plant. It enjoyed a period of success, but the later
development of a different manufacturing process for semiconductor chips
made its earlier investment obsolete. Similarly, the early movers will be
disadvantaged if its product or process reﬂected factor costs or factor
quality that have changed.
Technological Discontinuities. Technological discontinuities work
against the ﬁrst mover by making obsolete its investments in the established


---PAGE BREAK---

technology. Technological discontinuities are major shifts in technology
that a ﬁrst mover may be ill prepared to respond to given its investment in
the old technology. Discontinuity favors the fast follower who does not bear
the high cost of pioneering. Where technology evolves along a relatively
continuous path, however, a ﬁrst mover’s head start is an advantage. It can
transfer learning from the old technology to the new and stay ahead on the
learning curve.
Low-cost Imitation. A ﬁrst mover exposes itself to followers who may be
able to imitate the innovation at lower cost than the cost of innovating.
Followers often have to bear some costs of imitation and adaptation,
however, which work to the beneﬁt of the ﬁrst mover.
Licensing of Technology
The third broad issue in technology strategy is technology licensing, a
form of coalition with other ﬁrms.6 Firms with a unique technology are
often asked for licenses, or are forced to license by government regulations.
Licensing is also a way to gain access to technology. Where technology is
an important source of competitive advantage, decisions on licensing are
vital. Yet many ﬁrms have squandered technology-based competitive
advantages through inappropriate licensing decisions.
WHEN SHOULD A FIRM LICENSE?
If technology is a source of competitive advantage, a ﬁrm must treat
licensing other ﬁrms as a risky step that should be taken only under special
conditions. Licensing fees are rarely large enough to offset a loss of
competitive advantage. However, awarding licenses may be strategically
desirable under a number of circumstances.
Inability to Exploit the Technology. Awarding licenses is appropriate if a
ﬁrm cannot exploit the technology itself. This may be because a ﬁrm lacks
resources or skills to establish a sustainable position, is harvesting the
business unit involved, or competitors are too entrenched to yield market
position. The ﬁrst motivation for licensing is at work today in


---PAGE BREAK---

biotechnology and electronics, where creative startup ﬁrms lack the
capability to commercialize innovations. Even where the ﬁrm has
substantial resources, it may be unable to gain a substantial share on the
basis of its new technology because competitors are too committed or
because of government demands for local ownership. The former seems to
be one reason why Standard Brands widely licensed its technology for high
fructose corn syrup, a sugar substitute.
Where the ﬁrm cannot exploit the market itself, failure to license will
create the motivation for competitors to invent around its technology.
Eventually one or more competitors may succeed, and the ﬁrm will be left
with a small market position. By licensing, however, competitors gain a
cheaper and less risky alternative to investing in their own technology.
Thus, instead of being imitated, the ﬁrm licensing its technology may be
able to set the standard and collect licensing royalties in addition to proﬁts
from its own market position.
Tapping Unavailable Markets. Licensing may allow a ﬁrm to gain some
revenue from markets otherwise unavailable to it. This includes other
industries where the technology is valuable but where the ﬁrm has little
possibility of entering, or other geographic markets a ﬁrm cannot or does
not want to enter.
Rapidly Standardizing the Technology. Licensing may accelerate the
process by which the industry standardizes on a ﬁrm’s technology. If several
ﬁrms are pushing the technology, licensing not only will legitimize it but
also may accelerate its development. The pioneers of the VHS and Beta
formats in video cassette recorders licensed them widely to promote
standardization, for example, because standardization was so critical to
increasing the availability of software.
Poor Industry Structure. Licensing can be desirable where industry
structure is unattractive. In such instances, a ﬁrm may be better off
collecting royalties than investing in a market position that will not yield
high returns. The more bargaining power a ﬁrm has in extracting high
licensing fees, the more attractive it is to license and retain only a modest
position in the industry for itself.


---PAGE BREAK---

Creating Good Competitors. Licensing may be a vehicle for creating
good competitors, which in turn can play a variety of important roles such
as stimulating demand, blocking entry, and sharing the costs of pioneering.
Magnavox widely licensed its video game patents, for example, reasoning
correctly that it could expand the market faster through encouraging
competitors to introduce a wide range of products. Entry barriers were also
low enough that Magnavox was unlikely to be able to develop a sustainable
position. Chapter 6 describes the potential beneﬁts of good competitors in
detail, along with how a good competitor can be identiﬁed.
Quid Pro Quo. A ﬁrm may award a license in return for a license of
another ﬁrm’s technology, as ATT and IBM are prone to do. A ﬁrm must
ensure that the trade is a fair one, however.
CHOOSING A LICENSEE
Firms should award licenses only to noncompetitors or to good
competitors. Since noncompetitors can rapidly become competitors, a ﬁrm
must minimize the risk of this through the terms of the license or convince
itself that a noncompetitor will remain so. To ensure that a potential
licensee is a noncompetitor, a ﬁrm must consider not only the existing
markets or segments it serves, but also markets it might want to enter in the
future. Licensing buyers to make some of their needs internally can
sometimes be desirable to shrink the available market for competitors or
potential competitors.
Where a ﬁrm licenses a competitor, it should be a good competitor and
not just anyone. The same is true when a ﬁrm is compelled to license by
governments. When licensing noncompetitors, a ﬁrm ideally should license
noncompetitors that would be good competitors if they later decided to
enter the industry. Similarly, licenses should contain renewal clauses, when
possible, in order to avoid a perpetual commitment to turn over technology
in the event that a licensee becomes a competitor.
PITFALLS IN LICENSING


---PAGE BREAK---

Firms often hurt rather than help their competitive position by awarding
licenses. The two most common pitfalls in licensing are to create
competitors unnecessarily in the process, and to give away a ﬁrm’s
competitive advantage for a small royalty fee. Licensing often is an easy
way of increasing short-term proﬁts, but it can result in a long-term erosion
in proﬁts as a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage dissipates.
Firms often fail to perceive who their potential competitors are, and thus
award licenses that come back to haunt them. They may license foreign
ﬁrms that later enter their home markets. Similarly, many ﬁrms have
licensed ﬁrms in other industries only to have the licensees ultimately enter
their own industry. Often the process by which a license agreement sours
can be quite subtle. A ﬁrm licenses another amid talk of a long-term
alliance that will strengthen both. Over time, though, the licensee learns
everything possible, not only about the licensor’s technology but about its
other value activities. The licensee then decides it can attack the licensor
successfully and becomes a serious competitor. Asian ﬁrms, which have
licensed widely, have sometimes used licenses in this way.
Technological Evolution
Since technological change has such a powerful role in competition,
forecasting the path of technological evolution is extremely important to
allow a ﬁrm to anticipate technological changes and thereby improve its
position. Most research on how technology evolves in an industry has
grown out of the product life cycle concept. According to the life cycle
model, technological change early in the life cycle is focused on product
innovations, while the manufacturing process remains ﬂexible. As an
industry matures, product designs begin to change more slowly and mass
production techniques are introduced. Process innovation takes over from
product innovation as the primary form of technological activity, with the
aim of reducing the cost of an increasingly standardized product. Finally, all
innovation slows down in later maturity and declines as investments in the
various technologies in the industry reach the point of diminishing returns.
The product life cycle model has been reﬁned by the work of Abernathy
and Utterback.7 Initially, in their framework, product design is ﬂuid and


---PAGE BREAK---

substantial product variety is present. Product innovation is the dominant
mode of innovation, and aims primarily at improving product performance
instead of lowering cost. Successive product innovations ultimately yield a
“dominant design” where the optimal product conﬁguration is reached. As
product design stabilizes, however, increasingly automated production
methods are employed, and process innovation takes over as the dominant
innovative mode to lower costs. Ultimately, innovation of both types begins
to slow down. Recently, the concept of “dematurity” has been added to the
Abernathy8 framework to recognize the possibility that major technological
changes can throw an industry back into a ﬂuid state.
While these hypotheses about the evolution of technology in an industry
are an accurate portrayal of the process in some industries, the pattern does
not apply in every industry. In industries with undifferentiated products
(e.g., minerals, many chemicals), the sequence of product innovations
culminating in a dominant design does not take place at all or takes place
very quickly. In other industries (e.g., military and commercial aircraft,
large turbine generators), automated mass production is never achieved and
most innovation is product-oriented. Technology evolves differently in
every industry, just as other industry characteristics do.9 The pattern of
technological evolution is the result of a number of characteristics of an
industry, and must be understood in the context of overall industry
structural evolution. Innovation is both a response to incentives created by
the overall industry structure and a shaper of that structure.
Technological evolution in an industry results from the interaction of a
number of forces:
• Scale change. As ﬁrm and industry scale increase, new product and
process technologies may become feasible.
•  Learning. Firms learn about product design and how to perform
various value activities over time with resulting changes in the
technology employed.
•  Uncertainty reduction and imitation. There are natural pressures for
standardization as ﬁrms learn more about what buyers want and imitate
each other.


---PAGE BREAK---

•  Technology diffusion. Technology is diffused through a variety of
mechanisms described earlier.
•  Diminishing returns to technological innovation in value activities.
Technologies may reach limits beyond which further improvement is
difﬁcult.
The product life cycle pattern of technological evolution would result if
these forces interacted in the following way. Through successive product
innovation and imitation, the uncertainty about appropriate product
characteristics is reduced and a dominant design emerges. Growing scale
makes mass production feasible, reinforced by the growing product
standardization. Technological diffusion eliminates product differences and
compels process innovation by ﬁrms in order to remain cost competitive.
Ultimately, diminishing returns to process innovation set in, reducing
innovative activity altogether.
Whether the life cycle pattern of technological innovation or some other
pattern will occur in a particular industry will depend on some particular
industry characteristics:
Intrinsic Ability to Physically Differentiate. A product that can be
physically differentiated, such as an automobile or machine tool, allows
many possible designs and features. A less differentiable product will
standardize quickly and other forms of technological activity will be
dominant.
Segmentation of Buyer Needs. Where buyer needs differ substantially,
competitors may introduce more and more specialized designs over time to
serve different segments.
Scale and Learning Sensitivity. The extent to which the industry
technologies are scale- or learning-sensitive relative to industry size will
inﬂuence the pressure for standardization. High scale economies will create
pressure over time for standardization despite segmented buyer needs, while
low scale economies will promote the ﬂowering of product varieties.


---PAGE BREAK---

Technological Linkage Among Value Activities. The technologies in the
product and in value activities are often linked. Changing one
subtechnology in the product often requires changing others, for example,
while changing the production process alters the needs in inbound and
outbound logistics. Technological linkages among value activities will
imply that changes in one activity will beget or be affected by technology
changes in others, affecting the pattern of technological change.
Substitution Logic. The pressure from substitutes (Chapter 8) is an
important determinant of the pattern of technological evolution. Whether
substitutes are threatening based on cost or differentiation will lead to a
corresponding emphasis in technological change. For example, the initial
challenge for disposable diapers was to bring their cost into proximity with
those of cloth diapers and diaper services. A great deal of early innovation
was in manufacturing methods.
Technological Limits. Some technologies offer much richer possibilities
for cost or performance improvement than others. In products like
commercial aircraft and semiconductors, for example, diminishing returns
from efforts at product innovation come relatively slowly. The technological
limits in the various technologies and subtechnologies in the value chain
will thus affect the path of technological change.
Sources of Technology. A ﬁnal industry characteristic that shapes the
pattern of technological change is the source of the technologies employed
in the industry. The path of technological change is usually more
predictable when industry-speciﬁc technologies are dominant, and the
impact of technologies emanating from outside the industry is small.
Continuous Versus Discontinuous Technological Evolution
The pattern of technological evolution differs widely among industries
based on whether technological change is incremental or subject to
discontinuity. Where there is incremental technological change, the process
is more likely to be determined by actions of industry participants or


---PAGE BREAK---

spinoffs from these participants. External sources of technology are likely
to be existing suppliers to an industry.
Where there is technological discontinuity, the sources of technology are
much more likely to be outside the industry. Entirely new competitors or
new suppliers to the industry are more likely to have an important role.
Technological discontinuity also tends to decouple the pattern of
technological innovation from the state of industry maturity, because
outside sources of technology are less responsive to industry circumstances
than the R&D departments of industry participants.
Technological discontinuity creates the maximum opportunity for shifts
in relative competitive position. It tends to nullify many ﬁrst-mover
advantages and mobility barriers built on the old technology. Discontinuity
also may require wholesale changes in the value chain rather than changes
in one activity. Hence a period of technological discontinuity makes market
positions more ﬂuid, and is a time during which market shares can ﬂuctuate
greatly.
Forecasting Technological Evolution
A ﬁrm can use this framework to forecast the likely path of technological
evolution in its industry. In commercial aircraft, for example, the product is
highly differentiable. However, there are large scale economies in product
design which limit the number of product varieties that are developed. The
ﬂexibility of production means that the production process is no barrier to
continuous and long-lasting efforts at product innovation. Thus the aircraft
industry is one where we would expect continuous product R&D. The
ﬂexibility of the production process would also allow us to expect a
continuous search for new materials and components that would be much
less likely in an industry with heavy automation.
With some insight into the likely pattern of technological evolution, a
ﬁrm may be able to anticipate changes and move early to reap competitive
advantage. However, there will always be uncertainty wherever technology
is involved. Uncertainty over future technological evolution is a major
reason why a ﬁrm may want to employ industry scenarios in considering its
choice of strategies. Industry scenarios are discussed in detail in Chapter 13.


---PAGE BREAK---

Formulating Technological Strategy
The concepts in this chapter suggest a number of analytical steps in
formulating technological strategy in order to turn technology into a
competitive weapon rather than a scientiﬁc curiosity.
1. Identify all the distinct technologies and subtechnologies in the value
chain. Every value activity involves one or more technologies. The starting
point in formulating technological strategy is to identify all the technologies
and subtechnologies, no matter how mundane, that are employed either by
the ﬁrm or its competitors. In addition, a ﬁrm must gain a similar if not as
deep understanding of the technologies in its suppliers’ and buyers’ value
chains, which often are interdependent with its own. Firms often focus on
product technology or on technology in the basic manufacturing operation.
They ignore technologies in other value activities, and pay little attention to
the technology for developing technology.
2. Identify potentially relevant technologies in other industries or under
scientiﬁc development. Often technologies come from outside an industry
and such technologies can be a source of discontinuous change and
competitive disruption in an industry. Each value activity must be examined
to see if outside technologies are present that might be applicable.
Information systems, new materials, and electronics should always be
investigated thoroughly. All three are having a revolutionary impact in
creating new technologies or allowing new technological combinations of
old technologies.
3. Determine the likely path of change of key technologies. A ﬁrm must
assess the likely direction of technological change in each value activity and
in buyer and supplier value chains, including technologies whose sources
are unrelated to the industry. No technology should be assumed to be
mature. Subtechnologies of it may be changing or maturity may be only a
sign of little effort at technological innovation.
4.  Determine which technologies and potential technological changes
are most signiﬁcant for competitive advantage and industry structure. Not
all the technologies in the value chain will have signiﬁcance for
competition. The signiﬁcant technological changes are those that meet the
four tests described in this chapter:


---PAGE BREAK---

• Create a sustainable competitive advantage themselves
• Shift cost or uniqueness drivers in favor of a ﬁrm
• Lead to ﬁrst-mover advantages
• Improve overall industry structure
A ﬁrm must isolate these technologies, and understand how they will affect
cost, differentiation, or industry structure. Supplier and buyer technologies
are often among the most important in this respect. Critical technologies
will be those with a major effect on cost or differentiation, and where a
technological lead is sustainable.
5. Assess a ﬁrm’s relative capabilities in important technologies and the
cost of making improvements. A ﬁrm must know its relative strengths in key
technologies, as well as make a realistic assessment of its ability to keep up
with technological change. Considerations of pride should not obscure such
an assessment or a ﬁrm will squander resources is an area in which it has
little hope of contributing to its competitive advantage.
6. Select a technology strategy, encompassing all important technologies,
that reinforces the ﬁrm’s overall competitive strategy. Technology strategy
must reinforce the competitive advantage a ﬁrm is seeking to achieve and
sustain. The most important technologies for competitive advantage are
those where a ﬁrm can sustain its lead, where drivers of cost or
differentiation are skewed in its favor, or where the technology will translate
into ﬁrst-mover advantages. As described earlier, ﬁrms can do a lot to
reinforce advantages gained through technology through investments in
other areas.
Included in a ﬁrm’s technological strategy should be the following:
•  A ranking of R&D projects that reﬂects their signiﬁcance for
competitive advantage. No project should be approved without a
rationale describing its effect on cost and/or differentiation.
•  Choices about technological leadership or followership in important
technologies.
•  Policies toward licensing that enhance overall competitive position
rather than reﬂect short-term proﬁt pressures.


---PAGE BREAK---

• Means of obtaining needed technology externally, if necessary, through
licenses or otherwise.
7. Reinforce business unit technology strategies at the corporate level.
While technology is ultimately linked to individual business units, a
diversiﬁed ﬁrm can play two key roles to strengthen its overall
technological position. The ﬁrst is to assist in monitoring technologies for
possible business unit impacts. A corporate group can usefully invest in
identifying and analyzing all streams of technology that might have wide
impact, and then feed that information to business units. A corporate role in
monitoring such technologies as information systems, ofﬁce automation,
factory automation, materials, and biotechnology is often highly desirable.
The second key corporate role in technological strategy is in ﬁnding,
exploiting, and creating technological interrelationships among business
units. A business unit can gain competitive advantage if it can exploit
technological interrelationships with others, as Chapter 9 describes in some
detail.
The following speciﬁc actions at the corporate, sector, or group level can
strengthen a ﬁrm’s overall technological position:
• Identify core technologies for the corporation that impact many units.
• Ensure that active and coordinated research efforts are underway, and
that technology migrates among business units.
• Fund corporate research in important technologies to create a critical
mass of knowledge and people.
• Use acquisitions or joint ventures to introduce new technological skills
to the corporation, or to invigorate existing skills.


---PAGE BREAK---

6
Competitor Selection
Competitors are viewed by most ﬁrms as a threat. Attention is centered on
how a ﬁrm can gain share against them and how their entry can be
prevented in the ﬁrst place. Competitors, goes this line of thought, are the
enemy and must be eliminated. More market share is also usually seen as
being better than less, a viewpoint given reinforcement by adherents of the
experience curve.
While competitors can surely be threats, the right competitors can
strengthen rather than weaken a ﬁrm’s competitive position in many
industries. “Good” competitors can serve a variety of strategic purposes that
increase a ﬁrm’s sustainable competitive advantage and improve the
structure of its industry. Accordingly, it is often desirable for a ﬁrm to have
one or more “good” competitors, and even to deliberately forgo market
share rather than to attempt to increase it. More market share can frequently
be worse than less. At the same time, a ﬁrm should concentrate its efforts on
attacking “bad” competitors while maintaining relative position vis-à-vis
good ones. These principles apply to market leaders and followers alike.
This chapter will describe how a ﬁrm can understand and inﬂuence its
array of competitors to increase its competitive advantage and improve
industry structure. It will help a ﬁrm identify which are the right
competitors to attack, and avoid battling competitors who are beneﬁting its
own position and industry structure. I begin by identifying the potential
beneﬁts of having competitors. Next I describe how a ﬁrm can recognize a
“good” competitor and distinguish it from a bad one. Having laid this
groundwork, I show how a ﬁrm can inﬂuence whom it competes with, and


---PAGE BREAK---

how it can avoid the risk of eroding industry structure in the process of
competing. I then identify the considerations that bear on the choice of an
optimal conﬁguration of competitors in an industry from a ﬁrm’s viewpoint,
and how it can take actions that preserve industry stability. Finally, the
chapter highlights some pitfalls in dealing with competitors that follow
from the principles of competitor selection.
Competitors are not only beneﬁcial to competition, but can be more
beneﬁcial to a ﬁrm than is usually recognized. A ﬁrm can never be
complacent towards its competitors or stop seeking ways to gain
competitive advantage. Sustainable competitive advantage is the only
reliable way to achieve superior performance. At the same time, however, a
ﬁrm must know which competitors to attack, and how the array of
competitors it faces will inﬂuence industry structure. Each competitor will
carry with it different implications for competitive strategy.
The Strategic Beneﬁts of Competitors
The presence of the right competitors can yield a variety of strategic
beneﬁts that fall into four general categories: increasing competitive
advantage, 
improving 
current 
industry 
structure, 
aiding 
market
development, and deterring entry. The particular beneﬁts achieved will
differ by industry and the strategy a ﬁrm is pursuing.
Increasing Competitive Advantage
The existence of competitors can allow a ﬁrm to increase its competitive
advantage. The mechanisms are described below, along with the industry
characteristics that make them particularly valuable.
Absorb Demand Fluctuations. Competitors can absorb ﬂuctuations in
demand brought on by cyclicality, seasonality, or other causes, allowing a
ﬁrm to utilize its capacity more fully over time. Having competitors is thus
a way to control the capacity utilization cost driver described in Chapter 3.
Market shares of industry leaders commonly rise during downturns and fall
during upturns, for example, a manifestation of this phenomenon.
Competitors gain share when the leader’s capacity is short during an upturn


---PAGE BREAK---

because the leader cannot or chooses not to meet all the demand. In a
downturn, the leader gains share because it is the preferred source and now
has capacity available. Letting competitors absorb the ﬂuctuations is often
preferable to maintaining the necessary capacity to meet demand over the
cycle. However, a ﬁrm must ensure enough overall capacity in the industry
to serve key buyers and not attract entrants, and that it has enough excess
capacity to control industry prices if the product is a commodity.
Enhance the Ability to Differentiate. Competitors can enhance a ﬁrm’s
ability to differentiate itself by serving as a standard of comparison.
Without a competitor, buyers may have more difﬁculty perceiving the value
created by a ﬁrm, and may, therefore, be more price- or service-sensitive.
As a result, buyers may bargain harder on price, service, or product quality.
A competitor’s product becomes a benchmark for measuring relative
performance, however, which allows a ﬁrm to demonstrate its superiority
more persuasively or lower the cost of differentiation. Competitors, then,
can be signals of value for a ﬁrm’s product (Chapter 4). In consumer
industries, for example, the existence of generic brands may actually allow
a branded product to sustain higher margins in some circumstances. The
beneﬁt of a competitor as a benchmark, however, presupposes that the buyer
can perceive product and other differences, and that a ﬁrm is really
differentiated so that the presence of a benchmark does not expose an
unsustainable price premium.
A related situation in which having a competitor enhances differentiation
is where a ﬁrm is too superior to most of its rivals. It may be difﬁcult to
command a large premium over standard-quality producers without a
competitor somewhere in between, even if the value created by the ﬁrm
fully justiﬁes the premium. For example, IBM reportedly had difﬁculty
securing high prices in its management information system software
development business until the Big Eight accounting ﬁrms entered the
industry and charged high prices. The Big Eight had credibility, and their
prices made it easier for buyers to accept the premiums IBM was asking
over independent software houses.
The beneﬁts of a standard of comparison are most important in industries
where accepted standards for product quality and service are not apparent,
where a wide range of cost/quality tradeoffs are possible, and where buyers


---PAGE BREAK---

would be prone to price sensitivity in the absence of perceived
differentiation. In such industries, pressure from buyers to continually
improve products and services in the absence of a benchmark is likely to
place downward pressure on a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability.
Serve Unattractive Segments. A ﬁrm’s competitors can be happy to serve
industry segments that it ﬁnds unattractive, but that it would otherwise be
forced to serve in order to get access to desirable segments or for defensive
reasons. Unattractive segments are those which are costly for the ﬁrm to
serve, where buyers have bargaining power and price sensitivity, where the
ﬁrm’s position is not sustainable, or where participation undermines a ﬁrm’s
position in more attractive segments. The concepts in Chapter 7 can be used
to identify strategically-relevant industry segments and their attractiveness.
A common example of the value of competitors is where particular items
in the product line are difﬁcult for a ﬁrm to differentiate and do not earn
acceptable returns. If buyers must have them, they will seek a supplier for
the items that may gain an edge in selling the whole line. A good
competitor supplying these items is less threatening than the buyer ﬁnding
an entirely new source. The essential factor that makes a good competitor
valuable in this situation is that demand for items in the line is linked.
In a related situation, a particular buyer group may be price-sensitive and
possess bargaining power. Without a good competitor, however, the ﬁrm
may have to serve the unattractive buyers for defensive reasons to cut off a
logical entry avenue for a bad competitor (see Chapter 14). Major mass
merchandisers such as Sears, for example, are more powerful and price-
sensitive than smaller chains because they are larger and compete with cost
rather than differentiation strategies. If a ﬁrm serves the large mass
merchandisers, it will earn a lower return than it does in serving the smaller
chains and its overall proﬁtability will be lower unless the incremental
volume from the unattractive buyers is sufﬁcient to improve its overall cost
position. However, the large chains provide an inviting target for threatening
new entrants unless served effectively by a good competitor.
A typical situation in industries where there is government procurement
will illustrate how serving one segment can undermine performance in
others. The sealed bids required in selling to government agencies are
frequently open to public inspection. Thus the bid prices become known to


---PAGE BREAK---

less price-sensitive industrial buyers, potentially compromising a ﬁrm’s
ability to charge them premium prices. A ﬁrm may be better off with a good
competitor serving such a segment. Allowing a competitor to serve a
segment can also be beneﬁcial in situations where a ﬁrm has a weak product
offering in the segment that would undermine its credibility in other
segments.
A competitor can also be beneﬁcial to a ﬁrm if it competes in segments
with a buyer group that is particularly costly for a ﬁrm to service. If a ﬁrm
is unable for legal reasons to price-discriminate1 sufﬁciently among buyers
to reﬂect differences in servicing cost (e.g., because of the Robinson-
Patman Act), or if possibilities for reselling among buyers prevent
differential pricing, then a ﬁrm’s proﬁts are increased if a competitor who
can serve them more cheaply or has lower proﬁt standards serves the high-
cost customers.
A segment must truly be unattractive structurally to justify the beneﬁts of
a competitor, however. Sometimes seemingly unattractive segments are not
really unattractive, but rather are being priced or served incorrectly. Rather
than have competitors, then, a ﬁrm can proﬁt from serving the segments
itself. The risks of incorrect pricing are discussed in Chapter 3.
Provide a Cost Umbrella. A high-cost competitor can sometimes provide
a cost umbrella that boosts the proﬁtability of a low-cost ﬁrm. It is a
common view that industry leaders provide a price umbrella for industry
followers, and this is indeed the case in some industries.2 What is less often
recognized, however, is that market price is often set by the cost position of
the high-cost competitor in stable and particularly in growing industries. If a
high-cost competitor prices at or near its costs, the low-cost competitor can
earn a substantial margin if it matches that price. Without the high-cost
competitor, however, the price sensitivity of buyers may be greater because
there is a larger price premium that attracts buyers’ attention to price. The
cost umbrella from a high-cost competitor is particularly valuable where
buyers (including retailers) desire a second or third source and will
therefore give the high-cost competitor a portion of their business.
The risk of letting a high-cost competitor set the price is that this price
will attract entry. In order for the strategy to succeed, then, there must be
some entry barriers. It is also important that the high-cost competitor gain


---PAGE BREAK---

enough business to remain viable or its demise may attract the entry of a
bad competitor.
Improve Bargaining Position with Labor or Regulators. Having
competitors can greatly facilitate bargaining with labor and government
regulators, where negotiations are partly or wholly industrywide. A leader is
vulnerable to being pressured for concessions in union negotiations, or into
meeting stringent standards for product quality, pollution control, and so
on.3 The presence of a competitor can have a moderating effect on such
demands if the competitor is less proﬁtable, less well capitalized, or more
precariously positioned.
Lower Antitrust Risk. The presence of viable competitors may be
necessary to reduce the risk of antitrust scrutiny and prosecution, in both
government and private suits. Eastman-Kodak and IBM are notable
examples of companies that have faced repeated antitrust prosecution that
has consumed a great deal of management time and perhaps distracted
attention from running the business.4 Even if the chances of government
antitrust prosecution are low, having too large a market share can expose a
ﬁrm to private litigation every time it takes a signiﬁcant action such as a
new product introduction, technology license, or price change. The risk of
litigation often leads high-share ﬁrms to be consciously or unconsciously
cautious in making moves, to the detriment of their competitive advantage.
The presence of a viable competitor would improve the situation.
Increase Motivation. A role of competitors that is hard to overestimate is
that of motivator. A viable competitor can be an important motivating force
for reducing cost, improving products, and keeping up with technological
change. The competitor becomes a common adversary that brings people
together to achieve a common goal. Having a viable competitor has
important psychological beneﬁts inside an organization. Xerox, for
example, is showing signs of beneﬁting from the emergence of serious
competitors in copiers. Its manufacturing cost position appears to be
improving after years where cost was unimportant to success, and its pace
of new product development has quickened. The histories of ﬁrms with
monopoly or near-monopoly positions, on the other hand, frequently


---PAGE BREAK---

provide examples of situations where a dominant ﬁrm was complacent and
ultimately blinded to changes to which it failed to respond.
Improving Current Industry Structure
Having competitors can also beneﬁt overall industry structure in a
variety of ways:
Increase Industry Demand. The presence of competitors can increase
overall industry demand and, in the process, a ﬁrm’s sales. If primary
demand for a product is a function of total industry advertising, for
example, a ﬁrm’s sales can beneﬁt from competitors’ advertising. Followers
often spend disproportionately on advertising because they are too small to
reap economies of scale. A regular stream of product introductions by a
ﬁrm and competitors may also broaden industry appeal and raise awareness
of the industry, boosting demand. Finally, the entrance of competitors can
sometimes lend credibility to a product, as the entrance of IBM did with
personal computers.
Competitors can also boost industry demand where an industry’s product
line includes complementary products, as with cameras and ﬁlm, razors and
blades, and laboratory instruments and consumable supplies. A ﬁrm with a
proprietary position in one product can beneﬁt if one or more competitors
sell the complementary product. For example, Kodak has licensed camera
technology to allow numerous competitors to sell cameras, thereby
stimulating the sales of proprietary Kodak ﬁlm. This strategy is based on the
ability of competitors to enhance primary demand for a complementary
good through their collective marketing efforts. The strategy is also a good
one where it is difﬁcult to earn an adequate return on the complementary
product and thus the ﬁrm wants to meet only a portion of the demand
itself.5
Provide a Second or Third Source. In many industries, particularly those
involving important raw materials or other important inputs, buyers want a
second or third source in order to mitigate the risk of supply disruptions
and/or to hedge against the bargaining power of suppliers. This sort of
buyer behavior occurs in turbine generators, metal cans, sugar, and


---PAGE BREAK---

chemicals, for example. The presence of a good competitor as the second or
third source takes the pressure off a ﬁrm. It can prevent buyers from inviting
more threatening competitors into such industries as well as delay or reduce
the risk that buyers will backward integrate themselves.
Kyocera, the U.S. subsidiary of Kyoto Ceramics, has experienced the
problem of not having credible competitors in supplying the semiconductor
industry. Its share of ceramic housings for semiconductor chips is so
dominant that U.S. semiconductor companies have been actively searching
for new sources, and have actually invested resources to help new suppliers
get into the business. With a more credible competitor, Kyocera would have
been less vulnerable to such destabilizing behavior by its buyers and
perhaps under less scrutiny from them on pricing.
While the examples cited above have been drawn from industrial
products, the same issues apply in consumer goods. Retailers often desire
more than one brand to provide a counterweight to any one manufacturer’s
power. Having a good competitor can lower the chances that retailers will
actively help other competitors enter the industry through favorable shelf
positioning, heavy promotion, and other support.
Reinforce Desirable Elements of Industry Structure. A good competitor
can reinfore desirable aspects of industry structure or promote structural
change that improves the attractiveness of the industry. For example, a
competitor that stresses product quality, durability, and service can help
reduce buyer price sensitivity and mitigate price rivalry in the industry. Or a
competitor that heavily advertises may hasten the evolution of the industry
into one with a few strong brands and high entry barriers. Conversely, a bad
competitor can undermine the structure of an industry in the pursuit of its
own competitive advantage. In baby foods, for example, Beech-Nut
historically reinforced positive aspects of the industry through its high
levels of advertising, frequent product introductions, and stable prices
before its acquisition by Squibb in the mid-1970s. Heinz, on the other hand,
has undermined industry structure with a low cost/low price strategy in a
futile effort to overtake Gerber. Squibb’s acquisition of Beech-Nut turned
Beech-Nut into a bad competitor as well by altering its goals and strategy.
Aiding Market Development


---PAGE BREAK---

Competitors can help develop the market in emerging industries or in
industries where product or process technology is evolving:
Share the Costs of Market Development. Competitors can share the costs
of market development for new products or technologies. Market
development often involves costs of inducing buyer trial, battling substitutes
(see Chapter 8), legal compliance, and promoting the development of
infrastructure such as independent repair facilities.6 In addition, R&D
spending is often necessary to reﬁne the basic technology, to overcome
switching costs faced by any prospective buyer, and to develop procedures
for installation and service that are widely useful. Competitors can lower a
ﬁrm’s cost of market development, particularly if competitors spend
disproportionately on it relative to their sales and if their market
development efforts are in areas that represent industrywide problems.
Reduce Buyers’ Risk. Competitors may be necessary in a new market (or
a new technology) in order to provide an alternate source for buyers, even if
buyers would not normally require another source later on. Buyers are often
reluctant to purchase a new product if only one or two ﬁrms produce it,
particularly where the cost of switching is high or the buyer would be hurt if
a supplier failed to provide adequate service or went out of business.
Help to Standardize or Legitimize a Technology. Having competitors that
employ the same technology as a ﬁrm can accelerate the process by which
the technology is legitimized or becomes the standard. Buyers are often
reluctant to accept a technology as the standard when only one ﬁrm is
backing it, and may hold back from initial purchases to wait for
technological change to progress further. When a credible competitor is also
pushing the technology (and sharing in the cost of marketing it), buyers’
reluctance to adopt it can be much reduced. The move of the pioneers of
VHS and Beta format video cassette recorders to license other leading ﬁrms
to use their technology is a good example. A competitor with the same
technology may also facilitate the process of gaining approvals by
government or other standard-setting organizations for the technology.


---PAGE BREAK---

Promote the Image of the Industry. The right competitors can enhance
the image of an industry. Established companies with reputations in other
businesses can lend credibility to an industry by signaling that the industry
is legitimate and that promises by ﬁrms will be met.
The beneﬁts of having competitors during market development are often
transient ones, applying most strongly to the emerging or growth phases of
an industry’s development. Having several competitors may thus be most
strategically beneﬁcial early in an industry’s development, with the ideal
number of competitors declining thereafter.
Deterring Entry
Competitors play a crucial role in deterring other entrants, or enhancing
the sustainability of a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage. The right competitors
can contribute to defensive strategy (Chapter 14) in a variety of ways:
Increase the Likelihood and Intensity of Retaliation. Competitors can
increase the likelihood and severity of retaliation perceived by potential
entrants. Competitors can also act as a ﬁrst line of defense against new
entrants, battling them with tactics such as price cutting that would be
prohibitively expensive for a ﬁrm with a large market share because its
revenues across the board would be reduced. Further, an entrant may be less
prone to enter if it faces a number of credible competitors than if it sees a
dominant ﬁrm that is potentially vulnerable to focus strategies. Dominant
ﬁrms often have mixed motives in serving particular segments that expose
them to focused entrants.7
A competitor does not deter other entrants, however, if it is perceived as
too weak. Instead, a weak competitor provides a new entrant with an
inviting beachhead in the industry though the entrant would not dare to
attack the leader directly.
Symbolize the Difﬁculty of Successful Entry. A competitor can bear
witness to the difﬁculty of successfully competing against a ﬁrm, and
demonstrate the unspectacular proﬁtability of a follower position. The
limited increase in market share and poor proﬁtability of Procter &


---PAGE BREAK---

Gamble’s Folgers, for example, is a good lesson in the costs of gaining
share in the coffee industry against General Foods’ Maxwell House.
Without a competitor, a potential entrant may underestimate the height of
entry barriers and the competitive strength of the leader.
Block Logical Entry Avenues. Competitors can occupy positions that
represent logical entry paths into an industry, blocking them from potential
entrants. In the lift truck industry, for example, small lift trucks sold to
smaller buyers are a logical entry path. Small lift trucks require less service,
and smaller buyers face fewer switching costs in changing suppliers
because they often have only one lift truck and face no issues of ﬂeet
commonality. Thus the barriers to entry into this segment are lower than
into other segments. In this example, however, the moderate proﬁtability of
the segment caused leading U.S. manufacturers to neglect it. Unfortunately
for U.S. lift truck manufacturers, there was no credible U.S. competitor to
block entry into the segment, and Japanese manufacturers successfully used
the segment as a way to enter the U.S. market. Even though an industry
leader might serve such a segment itself, it may be more proﬁtable for the
leader to cede the segment to a good competitor if the segment is
structurally less attractive than the core business (see Chapter 7).
Competitors can also ﬁll product niches that would themselves be too
small for the leader, or in relation to which the leader faces mixed motives.
Having competitors ﬁlling these niches increases the difﬁculty of entry
because a potential entrant is forced to enter with a “me too” product,
instead of having a protected niche in which to create a base for expansion.8
The desire of buyers for a second or third source also opens up logical entry
avenues for competitors. Having a good competitor to fulﬁll this role can
deter more threatening entrants.
Crowd Distribution Channels. Having a competitor gives distributors
and/or retailers multiple brands, and may make it more difﬁcult for a new
entrant to gain access to distribution. Where there are only one or two ﬁrms
in an industry, on the other hand, the channels may welcome new
competitors to mitigate the bargaining power of the leaders or to supply
private label merchandise. The presence of competitors can thus force a new


---PAGE BREAK---

entrant to bear much higher costs of gaining channel access because the
channels already have a full complement of brands.
It may also be desirable for a leader to supply private label goods as a
defensive move if no good competitor is present to serve the private label
market. Despite this, many leaders tend to avoid private label business
because they see it as undercutting the position of their branded goods, as
RCA and Zenith reasoned in TV sets. This can be too narrow a viewpoint
when the risks of future entry are considered; in TV sets, Sears actively
encouraged Japanese entry into the U.S. color set market because of its
inability to source a quality private label set from RCA, Zenith, or other
capable U.S. manufacturers.
What Makes a “Good” Competitor?
Competitors are not all equally attractive or unattractive. A good
competitor is one that can perform the beneﬁcial functions described above
without representing too severe a long-term threat. A good competitor is
one that challenges the ﬁrm not to be complacent but is a competitor with
which the ﬁrm can achieve a stable and proﬁtable industry equilibrium
without protracted warfare. Bad competitors, by and large, have the
opposite characteristics.
No competitor ever meets all of the tests of a good competitor.
Competitors usually have some characteristics of a good competitor and
some characteristics of a bad competitor. Some managers, as a result, will
assert that there is no such thing as a good competitor. This view ignores the
essential point that some competitors are a lot better than others, and can
have very different effects on a ﬁrm’s competitive position. In practice, a
ﬁrm must understand where each of its competitors falls on the spectrum
from good to bad and behave accordingly.
Tests of a Good Competitor
A good competitor has a number of characteristics. Since its goals,
strategy, and capabilities are not static, however, the assessment of whether
a competitor is good or bad can change.


---PAGE BREAK---

Credible and Viable. A good competitor has sufﬁcient resources and
capabilities to be a motivator to the ﬁrm to lower cost or improve
differentiation, as well as to be credible with and acceptable to buyers. The
competitor cannot serve as a standard of comparison or aid in market
development unless it has the required resources to be viable in the long
term and unless buyers view it as at least a minimally acceptable alternative.
The credibility and viability of a good competitor are particularly important
to its ability to deter new entry. A competitor must have resources sufﬁcient
to make its retaliation a credible threat to new entrants and it must represent
an acceptable alternative to buyers if they are to forgo looking for new
sources. Finally, a competitor must be strong enough to keep the ﬁrm from
becoming complacent.
Clear, Self-Perceived Weaknesses. Though credible and viable, a good
competitor has clear weaknesses relative to a ﬁrm which are recognized.
Ideally, the good competitor believes that its weaknesses will be difﬁcult to
change. The competitor need not be weaker everywhere, but has some clear
weaknesses that will lead it to conclude that it is futile to attempt to gain
relative position against a ﬁrm in the segments the ﬁrm is interested in.
Understands the Rules. A good competitor understands and plays by the
rules of competition in an industry, and can recognize and read market
signals. It aids in market development and promotes the existing technology
rather than attempting strategies that involve technological or competitive
discontinuities in order to gain position.
Realistic Assumptions. A good competitor has realistic assumptions
about the industry and its own relative position. It does not overestimate
industry growth potential and therefore overbuild capacity, or underinvest in
capacity and in so doing provide an opening for newcomers. A good
competitor also does not overrate its capabilities to the point of triggering a
battle by attempting to gain share, or shy from retaliating against entrants
because it underestimates its strengths.
Knowledge of Costs. A good competitor knows what its costs are, and
sets prices accordingly. It does not unwittingly cross-subsidize product lines


---PAGE BREAK---

or underestimate overhead. As in the areas described above, a “dumb”
competitor is not a good competitor in the long run.
A Strategy that Improves Industry Structure. A good competitor has a
strategy that preserves and reinforces the desirable elements of industry
structure. For example, its strategy might elevate entry barriers into the
industry, emphasize quality and differentiation instead of price cutting, or
mitigate buyer price sensitivity through the nature of its selling approach.
An Inherently Limiting Strategic Concept. A good competitor’s strategic
concept inherently limits it to a portion or segment of the industry that is
not of interest to the ﬁrm, but that makes strategic sense for the competitor.
For example, a competitor following a focus strategy based on premium
quality might be a good competitor if it does not want to expand its share.
Moderate Exit Barriers. A good competitor has exit barriers that are
signiﬁcant enough to make its presence in the industry a viable deterrent to
entrants, but yet not so high as to completely lock it into the industry. High
exit barriers create the risk that the competitor will disrupt the industry
rather than exit if it encounters strategic difﬁculty.
Reconcilable Goals. A good competitor has goals that can be reconciled
with the ﬁrm’s goals. The good competitor is satisﬁed with a market
position for itself which allows the ﬁrm to simultaneously earn high returns.
This often reﬂects one or more of the following characteristics of a good
competitor:
HAS MODERATE STRATEGIC STAKES IN THE INDUSTRY. A good competitor
does not attach high stakes to achieving dominance or unusually high
growth in the industry. It views the industry as one where continued
participation is desirable and where acceptable proﬁts can be earned, but not
one where improving relative position has great strategic or emotional
importance. A bad competitor, on the other hand, views an industry as
pivotal to its broader corporate goals. For example, a foreign competitor
entering what it perceives to be a strategic market is usually a bad


---PAGE BREAK---

competitor. Its stakes are too high, and it may also not understand the rules
of the game.
HAS A COMPARABLE RETURN-ON-INVESTMENT TARGET. A good competitor
seeks to earn an attractive return on investment and does not place greater
priority on gaining tax beneﬁts, employing family members, providing jobs,
earning foreign exchange (e.g., some government-owned competitors),
providing an outlet for upstream products, or other goals that translate into
unacceptable proﬁts in the industry. A competitor with compatible proﬁt
objectives is less likely to undercut prices or make heavy investments to
attack a ﬁrm’s position. Differences in goals make McDonnell-Douglas a
much better competitor to Boeing in aircraft than the state-owned Airbus
Industries, for example.
ACCEPTS ITS CURRENT PROFITABILITY. A good competitor, while seeking to
earn attractive proﬁts, is typically satisﬁed with its current returns and
knows that improving them is not feasible. Ideally the competitor is
satisﬁed with proﬁtability that is somewhat lower than the ﬁrm’s in
segments that they jointly serve. In such a situation the competitor is not
prone to upset the industry equilibrium in order to improve its relative
proﬁtability, and its modest returns may serve to discourage entry by new
competitors.
DESIRES CASH GENERATION. A good competitor is interested enough in
generating cash for its stockholders or corporate parent that it will not upset
industry equilibrium with major new capacity or a major product line
overhaul. However, a good competitor does not harvest its position in the
industry because this will threaten its credibility and viability.
HAS A SHORT TIME HORIZON. A good competitor does not have so long a
time horizon that it will ﬁght a protracted battle to attack a ﬁrm’s position.
IS RISK-AVERSE. A good competitor is concerned about risk and will be
satisﬁed with its position rather than take large risks to change it.
Smaller divisions of diversiﬁed ﬁrms can often be good competitors if
they are not viewed as essential to long-term corporate strategy. They are


---PAGE BREAK---

often given tough proﬁtability targets and expected to generate cash ﬂow.
Divisions that are slotted for growth may be bad competitors, however.
Squibb’s acquisition of Beech-Nut’s baby food business was predicated on
the perception that Beech-Nut had signiﬁcant growth potential. This led
Beech-Nut to take some actions that proved unsuccessful but that
undermined the industry.
Even a competitor with considerable strengths can be a good competitor
if it has the right goals and strategy. Its goals and strategy create a situation
where a ﬁrm and the competitor can coexist. A clear and self-perceived
weakness is thus not a prerequisite for a good competitor. Conversely,
however, a competitor with a very long time horizon, little short-run need
for cash ﬂow, or a willingness to take substantial risks is usually a bad
competitor from the point of view of achieving a stable industry
equilibrium, whether or not it has any real strengths.
Sometimes a competitor can be a good competitor to a ﬁrm but the ﬁrm
is not a good competitor to it. One competitor plays by the rules, but the
other attacks it anyway. Industries are most stable when ﬁrms are mutually
good competitors—the segment one competitor focuses on is proﬁtable for
it but not of interest to the other, for example. Mutually good competitors
play to their respective strengths and succeed at doing so given their
respective internal standards.
“Good” Market Leaders
These tests of a good competitor also shed light on what makes a good
market leader from the perspective of followers. If a ﬁrm is not in a position
to be among the leaders in the industries it serves, its success may well be
highly dependent on picking industries with good leaders. The single most
important quality of a good leader from a follower’s perspective is that the
leader has goals and a strategy that provide an umbrella under which the
follower can live proﬁtably. For example, a leader with high return-on-
investment goals, concern for the “health of the industry,” a strategy built
upon differentiation, and a disinclination to serve certain industry segments
due to mixed motives will offer opportunities for followers to earn attractive
returns in a relatively stable industry environment. Conversely, a leader that


---PAGE BREAK---

fails to understand the beneﬁts of viable followers, that is satisﬁed with low
returns, or whose strategy works in other ways to erode industry structure is
unlikely to provide an attractive environment for followers. For example, a
leader pursuing a strategy based on going down the learning curve rapidly
through low prices in an industry where buyers are powerful and price-
sensitive will often destroy the industry for followers (and perhaps for
itself).
Diagnosing Good Competitors
Diagnosing whether a rival is a good competitor requires a complete
competitor analysis. A competitor’s goals, assumptions, strategy, and
capabilities all play a part in determining whether it is a good or bad
competitor for a particular ﬁrm.9 Since no competitor ever meets all the
tests of a good competitor completely, it is necessary to decide whether a
competitor’s desirable characteristics outweigh those that undermine the
industry or a ﬁrm’s position.
A number of examples may serve to illustrate the process of weighing
and balancing a competitor’s characteristics to reach a net assessment of
whether it is good, bad, or somewhere in between. In the computer industry,
Cray Research seems to be a good competitor for IBM, while Fujitsu is a
bad competitor. Cray is a viable rival that plays by accepted rules in a
focused segment of the industry, and does not appear to misjudge its ability
to take on IBM. Fujitsu, on the other hand, has high stakes in succeeding
against IBM, low standards for proﬁtability in markets it is attempting to
penetrate, and a strategy that may worsen industry structure by undermining
differentiation.
In the copier industry, Kodak is a relatively good competitor for Xerox.
Kodak is concentrating on the high-volume end of the market and
emphasizing quality and service. Though it has taken some proﬁtable
market share away from Xerox, Kodak has high rate-of-return standards and
is playing by the same rules as Xerox. Thus it has pushed Xerox to improve
its quality. Moreover, Kodak does not appear to view copiers as a linchpin
of an ofﬁce automation strategy that would justify accepting low proﬁts, but
as a proﬁtable business area in its own right.


---PAGE BREAK---

In fertilizer and chemicals, conversely, oil companies have proven to be
bad competitors. They have had excess cash to invest, and have looked for
big markets in which they could gain large market shares so as to have a
noticeable impact on their ﬁnancial statements. Instead of emphasizing
R&D and customer service, most oil companies have competed on price
and accelerated the commoditization of the industries they entered. They
have also had poor forecasting ability, and tended to build huge new plants
during the peaks of the business cycle rather than acquiring facilities during
troughs. This has meant that they have created or exacerbated problems of
excess capacity.
The competitive situation in CT scanners illustrates a case where a
follower seems to understand the beneﬁts of a good market leader. The
Israeli company Elscint has gained a number two or three market position.
GE is the leader in the industry, and Elscint has publicly disclaimed a desire
to overtake GE. Elscint views GE as a good market leader because it
maintains high prices, differentiates based on service and reputation, and
has invested heavily to educate and develop the market. Another historically
good market leader is Coca-Cola. Coke avoided price competition and
vigorous retaliation against followers’ moves, opting for a statesman’s role
instead. Pepsi Cola, Dr Pepper, and Seven-Up enjoyed many years of stable
proﬁts as followers. Perhaps as a result of Pepsi’s misjudgment in
attempting to take too much share from Coke combined with the
ascendance of new top management, however, Coke is showing signs of
becoming much more aggressive. Pepsi’s apparent triggering of Coke’s
change of behavior illustrates a pitfall in dealing with good competitors that
I will discuss further below.
If competitors are bad enough, even a ﬁrm with a signiﬁcant competitive
advantage may ﬁnd it unattractive to compete in an industry. In mushrooms,
for example, Ralston-Purina had some potential advantages but faced many
family ﬁrms with low return-on-investment standards as well as imports
from Taiwan and the People’s Republic of China. Ralston ﬁnally exited the
industry.
Inﬂuencing the Pattern of Competitors


---PAGE BREAK---

The beneﬁts of good competitors suggest that it may be desirable for a
ﬁrm to attack some current competitors and not others, and to encourage the
entry of new competitors provided they meet the tests of a good competitor.
Since it is usually desirable to have more competitors early in an industry’s
development than during maturity, it may also make sense to encourage the
early entry of competitors that will not be able to succeed in the long run.
Nothing in these statements implies that a ﬁrm should be complacent
toward competitors, or that a ﬁrm should not aggressively seek to increase
competitive advantage. Rather, the principles of competitor selection imply
that a ﬁrm must adopt a more sophisticated perspective towards its
competitors than is commonly done.
Who a ﬁrm competes with is determined by a wide range of factors,
many of which are largely outside a ﬁrm’s control. Which competitors
choose to enter an industry is, to a considerable extent, a matter of the luck
of the draw, as will be discussed in Chapter 14 in more detail. Whether or
not a particular ﬁrm perceives an industry to be attractive at a particular
time and has the resources available to enter is partly a matter of chance.
Once a few competitors have entered, however, others may no longer
perceive the industry as an opportunity, particularly if the early entrants
were credible ﬁrms. If a ﬁrm can somehow inﬂuence who enters early, then,
the entire pattern of entry into the industry may be changed.
Competitor selection seeks not only to inﬂuence the pattern of entry, but
to inﬂuence which competitors gain the market share necessary to be viable
and which segments they compete in.10 The following tactics to select
competitors are available in many industries:
Technology Licensing. A ﬁrm can license its technology early to good
competitors under favorable terms (see Chapter 5). If it picks the right
competitors, further entry may be effectively deterred. Given the desire of
buyers for a second or third source in semiconductors, for example,
licensing is relatively common in that industry and careful choice of
licenses can have a beneﬁcial effect. In an interesting recent move, Intel has
licensed IBM and Commodore to make the 8088 microprocessor. Here the
licenses are having the effect of making buyers competitors in a sense, but
blocking other more threatening competitors in the process.


---PAGE BREAK---

Selective Retaliation. A ﬁrm can retaliate vigorously against bad
competitors, leaving good competitors to enter or gain share unopposed.
The ﬁrm’s choice of products to introduce or geographic markets to enter
will often impact one competitor more than another, for example.
Selective Entry Deterrence. A ﬁrm can refrain from investing in creating
entry barriers to those segments where the presence of a good competitor
can improve the ﬁrm’s position. The risk is that the wrong competitor
chooses to occupy the undefended segments, as part of a more ambitious
sequenced entry strategy.11
Coalitions to Draw in New Entrants. A ﬁrm can contract with a good
potential competitor to become a source of supply for some item in the
product line, to be sold through a ﬁrm’s distribution channels. This
competitor may then logically expand to serve other segments undesirable
to the ﬁrm. Other forms of coalitions that can encourage good competitors
include sourcing agreements for components, and private label
arrangements where a competitor supplies goods sold under a ﬁrm’s name.
Both can have the effect of lowering barriers to entry for a good competitor.
Damaging Good Competitors in Battling Bad Ones
It is often difﬁcult to battle bad competitors without the battle spilling
over to harm good competitors. An increase in advertising, new product
introduction, or change in warranty policy designed to thwart a bad
competitor, for example, can reduce a good competitor’s market share or
even threaten its viability. Weakening the good competitor in turn may
erode the attractiveness of the industry or invite new entry.
It is important, therefore, to tailor offensive or defensive moves against
bad competitors to minimize their impact on good competitors. Sometimes
this is impossible, because of the segments a bad competitor is threatening
or the seriousness of the threat. However, the challenge is to maintain the
delicate balance between improving a ﬁrm’s position and vigorously
responding to threats, on the one hand, and preserving good competitors, on
the other. It is important that good competitors not perceive that they are the
target of attacks or they may change their goals in desperation. Also, a ﬁrm


---PAGE BREAK---

must inhibit good competitors from becoming bad ones by continued rivalry
to keep them from revising their objectives.
Changing Bad Competitors into Good Ones
Sometimes bad competitors can be transformed into good ones. Ideally,
market signaling to correct a competitor’s faulty assumptions is all that is
necessary. Alcoa has been attempting to inﬂuence overly optimistic demand
forecasts of its competitors in the aluminum industry, for example. In other
cases, time will convert a bad competitor into a good one. The futility of the
competitor’s strategy will become apparent to it, and it will alter its goals or
strategy in ways that make it a better competitor.
A ﬁrm must often be prepared to ﬁght battles in order to convert bad
competitors to good ones, however. A battle may be necessary to
demonstrate its relative weakness to a competitor, or to convince it that the
ﬁrm will not tolerate erosion of position. While battles can be expensive,
they are often cheaper than the cost of a protracted siege. With bad
competitors, a protracted siege is often a fact of life in an industry.
Some bad competitors will never become good competitors. With them,
a ﬁrm must accept the fact that continued challenges to its position will be
forthcoming. The full range of offensive and defensive tactics described
throughout this book will be necessary to sustain competitive advantage and
avoid undermining industry structure.
The Optimal Market Conﬁguration
The principles of competitor selection imply that holding a 100 percent
market share is rarely, if ever, optimal.12 It is sometimes more sensible for
ﬁrms to yield position and allow good competitors to occupy it than to
maintain or increase share. While this is contrary to managers’ beliefs in
some ﬁrms and almost heretical in others, it may be the best way to improve
competitive advantage and industry structure in the long run. The right
question a ﬁrm should ask is: What conﬁguration of market shares and
competitors is optimal? Having described the way in which a ﬁrm can
identify and inﬂuence good competitors, I will now consider the


---PAGE BREAK---

conﬁguration of competitors that is likely to best serve a ﬁrm’s long-run
strategic position.
The determinants of the ideal market share for a ﬁrm in general terms are
numerous and complex. It is possible, however, to lay down some general
principles for assessing the share a ﬁrm should hold and the ideal pattern of
competitors. I ﬁrst describe the factors that determine the ideal
conﬁguration, and then consider how a ﬁrm should move toward the ideal
conﬁguration given the existing competitor conﬁguration.
The Optimal Competitor Conﬁguration
A ﬁrm’s optimal share of the part of the industry it is targeting should be
high enough not to tempt a competitor to attack it. A ﬁrm must also have
sufﬁcient market share superiority (combined with its other competitive
advantages not related to share) to maintain an equilibrium in the industry.
The gap between leader and follower shares required to preserve stability
will vary from industry to industry as I will describe below.
A number of structural characteristics inﬂuence a leader’s optimal share:
Factors Implying a High Optimal
Market Share for Leaders13
• Signiﬁcant economies of scale14
• A steep learning curve that is
proprietary
• Few industry segments
• Buyers willing to purchase from a
single source
• No distribution channels stocking
multiple brands
• Competitors who can share value
activities with related business
units, implying that small
competitor share positions are an
Factors Suggesting a Lower Optimal
Share for Leaders
• Few economies of scale
• A modest learning curve
• There are unattractive segments
• Buyers demand a second or third
source
• Channels have bargaining power
and desire multiple suppliers
• Competitors are single-business
ﬁrms who cannot share activities
• Followers are necessary as credible
entry deterrents against more
threatening ﬁrms


---PAGE BREAK---

effective bases from which to
attack a leader (see Chapter 10)
• Other high entry barriers
• A follower needs a meaningful
share to be viable
• The industry has a history of
antitrust problems or vulnerability
to them.15
The distribution of market shares among ﬁrms in an industry that leads
to the greatest industry stability is critically dependent on industry structure
and whether competitors are good or bad competitors. The most important
industry structural variables determining the ideal pattern of shares are the
degree of differentiation or switching costs present in the industry and
whether or not the industry is segmented. Where there are few segments and
little differentiation or low switching costs, signiﬁcant market share
differences are usually necessary for a stable industry. With segmentation or
high levels of differentiation, conversely, ﬁrms can coexist proﬁtably
despite similar shares because they are less prone to see the need or
opportunity to attack each other.
The nature of competitors is equally important. Where competitors are
bad competitors, large share differences among ﬁrms are necessary to
preserve stability because bad competitors tend to take destabilizing actions
if they perceive any opportunity to succeed. Where competitors are good
competitors, conversely, little share differential may be necessary to
discourage attacks.
These considerations combine to yield the implications shown in Figure
6–1.16
The pattern of generic strategies in an industry is also vital. Firms with
different generic strategies can coexist much more easily than ﬁrms that all
converge on the same generic strategy. Thus a ﬁrm must look beyond
market shares alone in assessing the conﬁguration of competitors in its
industry.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 6–1. Competitor Conﬁguration and Industry Stability
It may be beneﬁcial for the share not controlled by leaders to be split
among followers rather than held by one. This means that followers will be
pitted against each other instead of eyeing the position of the leader.
Followers who are pursuing different focus strategies are even better than
followers who are competing head on. It is also essential that followers be
truly viable and offer a credible deterrent to new entrants, or fragmentation
of the follower group can backﬁre and invite new entry.
Maintaining Competitor Viability
A ﬁrm must pay close attention to the health of its good competitors.
Good competitors cannot play their role unless they are viable, and even a
good competitor may undermine a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage or industry
structure if driven to desperation. Desperate competitors have a tendency to
violate beneﬁcial industry conventions or engage in other practices that
undermine industry structure and damage industry image. They also have a
tendency to look for salvation through being acquired, and may in the
process introduce a threatening new player into the industry. Finally, the
managements of desperate competitors are frequently changed. A new
management can convert a good competitor into bad one.
The market position necessary for a competitor to be viable varies from
industry to industry depending on entry/mobility barriers; it is less than 5
percent in soft drinks, but probably more than 10 percent in frozen entrees.


---PAGE BREAK---

A ﬁrm must know the market position necessary to keep its good
competitors viable, and how this may be changing as a result of structural
evolution. It must also allow good competitors enough successes to lead
them to perpetuate their strategies, rather than change them in the face of
repeated problems.
Moving Toward the Ideal Competitor Conﬁguration
The considerations described above suggest how competitors should
ideally be distributed. To decide whether to move toward the ideal, however,
a ﬁrm must calculate the cost of gaining position or, conversely, the risk of
incrementally yielding it. Yielding share can be destabilizing by tempting
competitors to take even more, or by sending unfortunate signals to
potential entrants.
A ﬁrm may need to gain share not only to increase its own sales but also,
as we have seen, to improve industry structure through a more stable
competitor conﬁguration. The cost of gaining share will be a function of
who will lose share in the process. The losing competitors’ goals,
capabilities, and barriers to shrinkage will be especially critical. A
competitor’s goals, commitment to the business, and the importance it
attaches to share are important to assess. Its capabilities will determine the
cost of wooing away buyers from the competitor.
Barriers to shrinkage are barriers to reducing position in (though not
completely exiting) an industry. These are closely analogous to exit barriers,
and will be high where ﬁxed costs are high because of the high penalty for
reducing volume in existing facilities. Where competitors have high stakes
in an industry, goals stressing market share, or high barriers to shrinkage, it
may well be more costly to gain share than it is worth. In such industries,
upward movement toward the ideal share should be slow and take
advantage of opportunities posed by unfolding industry events.
The risk of yielding share to improve competitive advantage or industry
structure will be a function of the difference in relative strength between the
ﬁrm and competitors. If the gap is large, then a loss of share is unlikely to
tempt competitors (or potential entrants) to upset the industry equilibrium
by attempting to take even more share. The risk of yielding share is also a


---PAGE BREAK---

function of the inherent credibility of the ﬁrm in retaliating—a ﬁrm with a
tough image faces less risk than one with a statesman’s image. Finally, the
risk of yielding share also depends on the ability of a ﬁrm to yield share in a
way that will appear logical to other ﬁrms (including potential entrants)
rather than be taken as a sign of weakness.
Maintaining Industry Stability
Maintaining the stability of an industry requires continual attention and
effort by a ﬁrm, even if its competitors are good competitors. This is
because competitors’ goals or circumstances may change. Having enjoyed
for some years a relatively proﬁtable number two position, for example, a
competitor may decide that more would be better. Or a change in its
corporate parent or a shift in top management may lead a competitor to
change its goals or assumptions. For example, the acquisition of Beaird-
Poulan by Emerson Electric dramatically raised the ambitions of this
regional chain saw manufacturer. Changes in industry structure may also
create pressures on a competitor to gain share in the short or long run in
order to remain viable. Driven to the wall, even a good competitor can
touch off a process that destroys an industry.
These considerations suggest that a ﬁrm must continually work to
manage its competitors’ expectations and assumptions. This may require
periodic competitive moves, aggressive market signaling, and investing in
mobility barriers. The aim is to make sure competitors do not make faulty
estimates of their strengths or a ﬁrm’s commitment to the industry. Procter
& Gamble is a good example of a ﬁrm that manages expectations through
regular product changes and marketing investment. A ﬁrm that rests on its
laurels vis-à-vis its competitors is starting a time bomb ticking that may
transform a stable and proﬁtable industry into one in which there is a costly
battle for market share.
Pitfalls in Competitor Selection
The principles of competitor selection are not always followed. The
following pitfalls seem to be among the most common:


---PAGE BREAK---

Failure to Distinguish Good and Bad Competitors. Many companies do
not recognize which of their competitors are good competitors and which
are not. This leads them to pursue across-the-board moves, or worse yet, to
attack good competitors while leaving the bad ones alone. In the process,
industry structure is often severely damaged. Typical is the case of a
specialty rubber manufacturer that viewed another major specialty rubber
manufacturer as its mortal enemy and behaved accordingly. The view was
not surprising, because this competitor’s market share was similar to the
ﬁrm’s and made it a natural focal point for attention. In fact, this competitor
was a nearly ideal competitor that was desperately trying to avoid a battle.
The real enemies of the specialty rubber ﬁrm were the specialty divisions of
the tire companies, who were using specialty markets as a dumping ground
for excess capacity. By damaging its good competitor, the specialty rubber
ﬁrm was helping the tire companies get established in the industry and
eroding industry attractiveness.
It is very common for ﬁrms to view the competitor that is closest to them
in market share or has the most similar strategy as the greatest enemy. This
is the competitor that is repeatedly attacked, while other competitors are
ignored. In fact, such a competitor is often a good competitor who offers
very little threat.
Driving Competitors to Desperation. Companies often fail to think
through the consequences of too much success against competitors. Driving
competitors to desperation runs the risk of serious consequences that I have
described earlier. In soft contact lenses, for example, Bausch and Lomb may
have sown the seeds of some of its own problems. It moved very
aggressively against other soft lens manufacturers in the late 1970s, slashing
prices and behaving like a true believer in the experience curve. What
happened was that Bausch and Lomb indeed gained share, but one by one
its desperate competitors sold out. Their acquirors included Revlon,
Johnson & Johnson, and Schering-Plough, all much larger than Bausch and
Lomb and viewing contact lenses as an avenue for growth. With infusions
of capital to its competitors, Bausch and Lomb now has a serious ﬁght to
contend with. It may have converted good competitors into bad ones.


---PAGE BREAK---

Having Too Big a Share. Beyond a point, growing invites problems that
are best avoided by ceding share to good competitors. Moreover, a large
market share may actually lead to lower rates of return. Often the best
course of action for a high share ﬁrm is to look for growth elsewhere rather
than to push for more share in an industry. Similarly, high share ﬁrms may
be better off ﬁnding ways to increase overall industry size or proﬁtability,
rather than try to gain share. They will enjoy the biggest piece of an
expanding pie, and avoid the risks of destabilizing the industry. It is all too
tempting, however, for a ﬁrm to push for incremental gains in relative
position in an industry where it feels strongest.
Attacking a Good Leader. Followers sometimes commit the fatal error of
attacking a good leader. The leader is then forced to retaliate, and what has
been a proﬁtable position for the follower turns into a marginal one.
Western Company launched a market share attack on Halliburton in oil well
completion and stimulation services, for example, despite the fact that
Halliburton competed on differentiation and Western had been very
proﬁtable. Halliburton’s reaction, no doubt a grudging one, has severely
reduced Western’s proﬁts. Halliburton, if anything, has gotten stronger.
Entering an Industry with Too Many Bad Competitors. Entering an
industry with too many bad competitors can doom a ﬁrm to a protracted
siege, even if the ﬁrm has a competitive advantage. The cost of converting
many bad competitors into good ones may be very great, and nullify the
fruits of entry. Faced with an industry with many bad competitors, a ﬁrm
may be better off ﬁnding another industry.
Competitors are both a blessing and a curse. Seeing them only as a curse
runs the risk of eroding not only a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage but also the
structure of the industry as a whole. A ﬁrm must compete aggressively but
not indiscriminately.


---PAGE BREAK---

II
Competitive Scope Within an Industry


---PAGE BREAK---

7
Industry Segmentation and Competitive Advantage
Industries are not homogeneous. Segments of industry have a structure just
as industries do, and the strength of the ﬁve competitive forces often differs
from one part of an industry to another. Segments also frequently involve
differing buyer value chains and/or the value chain a ﬁrm requires to serve
them well. Segments of an industry thus frequently differ widely in their
structural attractiveness and in the requirements for competitive advantage
in them. Crucial strategic questions facing a ﬁrm become (1) where in an
industry to compete and (2) in what segments will focus strategies be
sustainable because barriers can be built between segments.
Industry segmentation is the division of an industry into subunits for
purposes of developing competitive strategy. Industry segmentation for
competitive strategy must be broader than the familiar notion of market
segmentation, though encompassing it. Market segmentation is concerned
with identifying differences in buyer needs and purchasing behavior,
allowing a ﬁrm to serve segments that match its capabilities with distinct
marketing programs. Market segmentation tends to focus on the marketing
activities in the value chain. Industry segmentation combines buyer
purchasing behavior with the behavior of costs, both production costs and
the costs of serving different buyers. Industry segmentation encompasses
the entire value chain. It also exposes the differences in structural
attractiveness among segments, and the conﬂicts in serving segments
simultaneously. This broader approach to segmentation can provide insights
into new segmentation approaches and can be the basis of creating and
sustaining competitive advantage.


---PAGE BREAK---

Industry segmentation is necessary to address the central question of
competitive scope within an industry, or what segments of an industry a
ﬁrm should serve and how it should serve them. It is also the basis for the
choice of focus strategies,1 since it exposes segments that are poorly served
by broadly-targeted competitors in which focus can be both sustainable and
proﬁtable. Broadly-targeted competitors must also understand industry
segmentation, because it reveals areas where they are vulnerable to focusers
and may suggest unattractive segments that are best left to competitors.
Attention to segmentation from a strategic perspective is increasingly
important because new developments in technology are altering some of the
old rules of segmentation, with implications for both focusers and broadly-
targeted ﬁrms.
This chapter describes the way an industry can be segmented for
strategic purposes, as well as some of the implications for creating and
sustaining competitive advantage. I begin by describing the underlying
factors that create industry segments and the observable indicators that can
be used to deﬁne them in practice. These principles provide the basis for
constructing and interpreting an industry segmentation matrix and for
evaluating alternative ways of segmenting an industry. Having deﬁned how
to segment an industry, I develop some important strategic implications that
arise from segmentation. The conditions that make a segment structurally
attractive are identiﬁed, as are the factors that lead to strategic
interrelationships between segments. I then describe how a ﬁrm can choose
the segments on which to base a focus strategy, and test its sustainability
against competitors. The chapter concludes by showing how industry
segmentation relates to industry deﬁnition.
Bases for Industry Segmentation
An industry is a market in which similar or closely related products are
sold to buyers, as shown schematically in Figure 7–1.2 In some industries a
single product variety is sold to all buyers. More typically, however, there
are many existing or potential items in an industry’s product line,
distinguished by such characteristics as size, performance, and functions.
Ancillary services (repair, installation, applications engineering) are also in


---PAGE BREAK---

fact distinct products that can be and often are provided separately from
physical products.3
In some industries there is a single buyer (e.g., in some defense and
space industries). More typically, though, there are many existing or
potential buyers. These buyers are usually not all alike, but vary according
to demographics, the characteristics of the industry in which they compete,
location, and in other ways. Firms provide the link between products and
buyers. Firms produce, sell, and deliver products through value chains
(Chapters 2–4) in competition with each other. In some industries, there are
independent distribution channels between ﬁrms and buyers involved in all
or part of industry sales.
The boundaries of an industry are frequently in ﬂux. Product lines are
rarely static. Firms can create new product varieties that perform new
functions, combine functions in new ways, or split off particular functions
into separate products. Similarly, new buyers can become part of an
industry, existing buyers can drop out, or buyers may alter their purchasing
behavior. The current array of products and buyers reﬂects the products that
ﬁrms have chosen to introduce and the buyers that have chosen to buy them,
and not the products and buyers that an industry could potentially
encompass.
Figure 7–1. An Industry as an Array of Products and Buyers
Structural Bases for Segmentation
The reason that industries must be segmented for competitive strategy
formulation is that the products, buyers, or both within an industry are
dissimilar in ways that affect their intrinsic attractiveness or the way in


---PAGE BREAK---

which a ﬁrm gains competitive advantage in supplying them. Differences in
structural attractiveness and in requirements for competitive advantage
among an industry’s products and buyers create industry segments.4
Segments grow out of both differences in buyer behavior as well as
differences in the economics of supplying different products or buyers.
Product and buyer differences that do not affect structure or competitive
advantage (e.g., differences in the color of an otherwise identical product
variety) may be important for production or marketing, but responding to
them is not essential to competitive strategy.
Structural Differences and Segmentation. Differences in products or
buyers create industry segments if they alter one or more of the ﬁve
competitive forces. Chapter 1 showed how the ﬁve competitive forces
determine overall industry attractiveness. Structural analysis can also be
applied to industry segments; the same ﬁve forces are at work. Economies
of scale or supplier power, for example, can vary among product varieties
even if they are sold to the same buyer. A given buyer may also possess
differing propensities to substitute for different product varieties. Similarly,
the power of buyers or the threat of substitution for the same product variety
can differ from buyer to buyer. Figure 7–2 represents schematically how the
ﬁve forces can vary by segment.5
Figure 7–2. Differences in the Five Forces Among Segments
The television set industry provides an example of how the ﬁve forces
can differ by product variety independently of who the buyer is. TV sets can


---PAGE BREAK---

be segmented by conﬁguration (portables, table models, consoles and
combination units). Small screen portables have become largely a
commodity, while console TVs offer more opportunities for differentiation
through styling, furniture, ﬁnish, and features. Moreover, console set
production employs a different production process and different suppliers
than the production of portables, and is less sensitive to economies of scale.
These differences affect mobility barriers, supplier power, buyer power, and
rivalry pressures. Similar differences which affect the ﬁve forces exist for
other TV product varieties.
Large turbine generators illustrate how differences among buyers may
also often have structural implications, independent of the product variety
they purchase. Investor-owned electric utilities can be distinguished from
municipally-owned utilities from a structural viewpoint. Investor-owned
utilities tend to be more technologically sophisticated and purchase through
a negotiation process, while municipal utilities are less sophisticated and
purchase through public bidding. This creates differences in price
sensitivity and in the ability of a ﬁrm to create mobility barriers in selling to
the two types of utilities such as brand identity, switching costs, and
proprietary product differences.
Both product varieties and buyers in an industry can potentially differ in
all ﬁve of the competitive forces. In TV sets, for example, the distinction
between console and portable sets has implications for mobility barriers,
supplier power, and rivalry. In the turbine generator industry, investor-
owned utilities and municipal utilities differ in their bargaining power, the
rivalry among ﬁrms in serving them, and the opportunity to erect mobility
barriers. Even supplier power can vary for the same product variety
depending on the end buyer’s identity. In bicycles, for example, a bicycle
enthusiast is much more aware of the brand name of key components such
as hubs and derailleurs. This gives parts suppliers greater bargaining power
in selling to ﬁrms targeting enthusiasts. They have far less power in selling
to ﬁrms that sell bicycles to casual bicycle purchasers.
Value Chain Differences and Segmentation. Differences in products and
buyers also create segments if they affect the requirements for competitive
advantage. The value chain can be used to diagnose this. Differences in
product varieties or buyers lead to segments if:


---PAGE BREAK---

• they affect the drivers of cost or uniqueness in the ﬁrm’s value chain
• they change the required conﬁguration of the ﬁrm’s value chain
• they imply differences in the buyer’s value chain
An example of a product difference that affects the value chain is the
difference between standard and premium bicycles. Standard bikes are built
with an automated manufacturing process, while premium bikes are
frequently handcrafted. Many other value activities differ for the two as
well, and the drivers of cost and uniqueness of value activities differ
accordingly. Thus the sources of competitive advantage for standard and
premium bikes are quite different, making them different segments. Another
good example of how different product varieties can affect the value chain
is draft beer compared to canned beer. While the beer is the same, many
other value activities are not.
An example of how differences in buyers can affect the ﬁrm’s value
chain is building insulation. Since many costs in the insulation industry are
driven by regional scale and by the location of buyers in relation to plants,
buyers located in different geographic regions constitute important
segments. This example shows not only how buyers can differ in purchasing
behavior, but also how the behavior of cost in serving buyers can be quite
different, even with the identical product.
Value chains also differ among buyers. The way a hotel chain uses a TV
set is different from how a household uses it, with strong implications for
use criteria and signals of value (Chapter 4). Differences in use criteria and
signals of value among buyers deﬁne segments, because they affect the
requirement for competitive advantage. It is also important to recognize that
the way different product varieties ﬁt into the same buyer’s value chain can
differ—for example, a new part versus a replacement part. Product
differences that affect the buyer’s use and signaling criteria deﬁne segments.
The Array of Industry Segments. In theory, every individual buyer or
product variety in an industry could be a segment, because the ﬁve forces or
the value chain were somehow different for each. In TV sets, for example,
every screen size or feature might potentially constitute a different segment.
Similarly, in turbine generators, every utility has a somewhat different value
chain. In practice, however, product varieties and buyers should be grouped


---PAGE BREAK---

into categories that reﬂect their important differences. Deciding how to
group products and buyers to capture the most important differences is a
key to good segmentation and a subject to which I will return later.
An industry segment is always a combination of a product variety (or
varieties) and some group of buyers who purchase it. In some cases, buyers
do not have important structural differences and segments are deﬁned by
product varieties, and vice versa. Usually, however, structural differences in
both product varieties and buyers are present in industries, leading to
segments consisting of a subset of products sold to a subset of buyers. Note
that product varieties are often associated with particular types of buyers
that purchase them, as was true in both the TV set and turbine generator
industries.
Industry segments must also be deﬁned independently of the scope of
activities chosen by existing competitors. Segments stem from structural
differences within an industry that competitors may or may not have
perceived. A segment may be important even though no competitor is yet
focusing on it. Industry segmentation should include potential product
varieties and buyer groups as well as those that already exist. The tendency
in segmentation is to focus on observed differences in product varieties and
buyers. Yet there are typically product varieties that are feasible but not yet
produced, and potential buyer groups that are not currently being served.
Unobserved or potential segments can be the most important to identify
because they offer opportunities for preemptive moves that create
competitive advantage.
Segmentation Variables
To segment an industry, each discrete product variety (and potential
variety) in an industry should be identiﬁed and examined for structural or
value chain differences from others. Product varieties can be used directly
as segmentation variables. Buyer segments can be identiﬁed in a similar
fashion, by examining all the buyers in the industry and probing for
structural or value chain differences among them. Since buyers vary in a
multiplicity of ways, experience has shown that a good starting point in
identifying buyer segments is to look for buyer differences along three


---PAGE BREAK---

broad and observable dimensions: buyer type, buyer geographic location,
and distribution channel employed. Buyer type encompasses such things as
the buyer’s size, industry, strategy, or demographics.
While these three dimensions of buyers are often related, each has an
independent effect. Location can signiﬁcantly affect purchasing behavior
and the value chain required to serve a buyer even if all other buyer
characteristics are equal. Similarly, in many industries the same buyer is
reached through different channels, though the channel employed is often
related to buyer type (and also to product variety). For example, buyers of
electronic components purchase small, rush orders of chips from
distributors and purchase larger orders directly from manufacturers.
To segment an industry, then, four observable classes of segmentation
variables are used either individually or in combination to capture
differences among producers and buyers. In any given industry, any or all of
these variables can deﬁne strategically relevant segments:
•  Product variety. The discrete product varieties that are, or could be,
produced.
• Buyer type. The types of end buyers that purchase, or could purchase,
the industry’s products.
•  Channel (immediate buyer). The alternative distribution channels
employed or potentially employed to reach end buyers.
• Geographic buyer location. The geographic location of buyers, deﬁned
by locality, region, country, or group of countries.6
Identifying segmentation variables is perhaps the most creative part of
segmenting an industry, because it involves conceiving of dimensions along
which products and buyers differ that carry important structural or value
chain implications. This requires a clear understanding of industry structure
as well as the ﬁrm’s and the buyer’s value chain.
PRODUCT SEGMENTS
To identify product segments, all the physically distinct product types
produced or potentially produced by an industry should be isolated,
including ancillary services that could feasibly be offered separately from
the product. Replacement parts are also a distinct product variety. Groups or


---PAGE BREAK---

bundles of products that can be sold together as a single package should
also be identiﬁed as a product variety, in addition to the items currently sold
separately.7 In the hospital management industry, for example, some ﬁrms
sell a complete management package at a single price, while others sell
individual services such as physician recruiting. The package should be
viewed as a separate product variety for purposes of segmentation.
Similarly, in industries where the product requires service, there are often
three product varieties—the product sold separately, service sold separately,
and the product and service sold together. In many industries, the list of
product varieties that results from going through such a process is quite
long.
Product varieties in an industry can differ in many ways that translate
into structural or value chain differences and hence segments. Some of the
most typical product differences that are good proxies for structural or value
chain differences that deﬁne segments are as follows, along with some
illustrative examples of why they reﬂect segments:
Physical size. Size is often a proxy for technological complexity or how
a product is used, both of which affect the possibilities for differentiation.
For example, different sized forklifts are typically used for different
applications. Size may also imply differences in the value chain required to
produce different varieties. Different sized varieties must often be
manufactured on different machines, and require different components. For
example, a miniature camera requires a different manufacturing process and
higher precision components than a standard camera.
Price level. The price level of product varieties is often associated with
buyer price sensitivity. Price also serves as a good proxy in some industries
for the design and nature of manufacturing or selling value activities.
Features. Product varieties with different features may be associated with
different levels of technological sophistication, different production
processes, and different suppliers.
Technology or design. Differences in technology (e.g., analog versus
digital watches) or design (front opening versus side opening valves) among


---PAGE BREAK---

product varieties can involve different levels of technological complexity,
different production processes, and other factors.
Inputs employed. Sometimes product varieties differ signiﬁcantly in their
use of raw materials or other inputs (e.g., plastic versus metal parts). Such
differences often have implications for the manufacturing process or
supplier bargaining power.
Packaging. Varieties may differ in the way they are packaged and
subsequently delivered, such as in bulk versus bagged sugar or draft versus
canned beer. This translates into value chain differences in both the ﬁrm and
buyers.
Performance. Performance differences such as pressure rating, fuel
economy, and accuracy are related to the technology and design of product
varieties, 
and 
often 
reﬂect 
differences 
in 
R&D, 
manufacturing
sophistication, and testing.
New versus aftermarket or replacement. Replacement products often go
through entirely different downstream value chains than identical new
products, and may be different in other ways such as buyer price sensitivity,
switching costs, and required delivery time.
Product versus ancillary services or equipment. The distinction between
a product and ancillary products or services is often a key indicator of price
sensitivity, differentiability, switching costs, and the value chain required to
provide them.
Bundled versus unbundled. Selling various products as a package
(bundle) versus selling individual items (unbundle) can have implications
for mobility barriers, the ability to differentiate, and the value chain
required (see Chapter 12).
The product differences that are most meaningful for industry
segmentation are those that reﬂect the most important structural differences.
There are often a number of different product descriptors that are related.
Price level, technology, and performance may all be correlated, for


---PAGE BREAK---

example, and reﬂect the same basic differences among products. If each
descriptor is measuring the same difference, the measure that most closely
measures or proxies the structural or value chain differences should be
chosen.
More than one product dimension may deﬁne relevant segments, and all
product differences that affect structure should be identiﬁed. The best
method for segmenting an industry in which there are multiple
segmentation variables will be discussed below. It is also important in
product segmentation to include product varieties that are feasible though
not currently being produced, such as service sold independently of the
product or a product variety with a new mix of features. Good examples are
cordless telephones and the “no name” food items now sold in grocery
stores.
BUYER SEGMENTS
To identify buyer segments, all the different types of end buyers to which
an industry sells must be examined for important structural or value chain
differences. In most industries, there are several ways in which buyers can
be classiﬁed. In consumer goods, for example, some key factors include
age, income, household size, and decision maker. In industrial, commercial,
or institutional products, buyer size, technological sophistication, and nature
of use for the product are among the factors that distinguish buyers.
There is an active debate among marketers about the best means of
segmenting buyers.8 In fact, no one variable can ever capture all the buyer
differences that might determine segments, particularly since differences
that affect the cost of serving buyers (and the value chain for doing so) are
often just as important for segmentation as differences in their purchasing
behavior. Buyer segmentation should reﬂect the underlying structural and
value chain differences among buyers rather than any single classiﬁcation
scheme, because the goal of segmentation is to expose all these differences.
Industrial and Commercial Buyers
Common factors which serve as proxies for structural or value chain
differences that distinguish buyer segments among industrial and


---PAGE BREAK---

commercial buyers are as follows, along with some illustrative examples of
how they reﬂect segments:
BUYER INDUSTRY. The buyer’s industry is often a proxy for how a product
is used in the buyer’s value chain and what fraction of total purchases it
represents. For example, candy bar manufacturers buy and use chocolate
much differently than dairy product ﬁrms, who use less chocolate and have
less need for product quality. Differences such as these can affect factors
such as buyer price sensitivity, susceptibility to substitution, and the cost of
supplying the buyer.
BUYER’S STRATEGY (E.G., DIFFERENTIATION VERSUS COST LEADERSHIP). A
buyer’s competitive strategy is often an important indicator of how a
product is used and of price sensitivity, among other things. Strategy shapes
the buyer’s value chain and the role a product plays in it. For example, a
differentiated high-margin food processor is more concerned with
ingredient quality and consistency than a private label food manufacturer
that competes on cost.
TECHNOLOGICAL SOPHISTICATION. A buyer’s technological sophistication
can be an important indicator of its susceptibility to differentiation and
resulting price sensitivity. Major oil companies tend to be more
sophisticated buyers of oil ﬁeld services and equipment than independents,
for example.
OEM VERSUS USER. Original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) that
incorporate a product into their product and sell it to other ﬁrms often have
differing levels of price sensitivity and sophistication than ﬁrms that use the
product themselves.
VERTICAL INTEGRATION. Whether a buyer is partially integrated into the
product or into ancillary or related products (e.g., in-house service) can
greatly affect the buyer’s bargaining power and a ﬁrm’s ability to
differentiate itself.
DECISION-MAKING UNIT OR PURCHASING PROCESS. The particular individuals
involved in the decision-making process can have a major impact on the


---PAGE BREAK---

sophistication of the purchase decision, the desired product attributes, and
price sensitivity. Many industrial products are purchased in complex
processes involving many individuals (see Chapter 4), and the procedures
often vary markedly even among buyers in the same industry. Some users of
electronic components purchase through trained and dedicated purchasing
agents, for example, and are much more price-sensitive than other
component buyers that employ engineers in purchasing or use purchasing
agents also responsible for purchasing other items.
SIZE. A buyer’s size can indicate its bargaining power, how it uses a
product, the purchasing procedures employed, and the value chain with
which it is best supplied. Sometimes order size is the relevant measure of
size, while in other industries it may be total annual purchases. In still other
cases company size may be the best determinant of bargaining power and
purchasing procedures.
OWNERSHIP. The ownership structure of a buyer ﬁrm may have a major
impact on its motivations. Private companies may value different product
characteristics than public companies, for example, while a division of a
diversiﬁed ﬁrm may be guided by purchasing practices determined by the
parent.
FINANCIAL STRENGTH. A buyer’s proﬁtability and ﬁnancial resources can
determine such things as its price sensitivity, need for credit, and frequency
of purchase.
ORDER PATTERN. Buyers can differ in their ordering pattern in ways that
affect buyer bargaining power or the value chain required to supply them.
Buyers that place regular and predictable orders, for example, may be much
less costly to serve than those whose orders come at erratic intervals. Some
buyers also typically have more seasonal or cyclical purchasing patterns
than others, affecting a ﬁrm’s pattern of capacity utilization.
Consumer Goods Buyers
Typical proxies of buyer differences that deﬁne segments among
consumer goods buyers are as follows, along with illustrative examples of


---PAGE BREAK---

how they reﬂect segments:
DEMOGRAPHICS. Buyer demographics can be a proxy for the desired
product attributes, price sensitivity, and other use and signaling criteria. For
example, single persons have different needs and purchasing patterns for
frozen entrees than families with children. Many aspects of demographics
can be important, including family size, income, health, religion, sex,
nationality, occupation, age, presence of working females, social class, etc.
In banking, for example, wealth, annual income, and the education level of
household members all determine what banking services are purchased and
how price sensitive the buyer is.
PSYCHOGRAPHICS OR LIFESTYLE. Hard-to-measure factors such as lifestyle
or self-image can be important discriminators of purchasing behavior
among consumers. Jetsetters may value a product differently than equally
wealthy conservatives, for example.9
LANGUAGE. Language also may deﬁne segments. In the record industry,
for example, the Spanish speaking market worldwide is a relevant segment.
DECISION-MAKING UNIT OR PURCHASING PROCESS. The decision-making
process within the household can be important to desired product attributes
and price sensitivity. One spouse may be more interested in performance
features of a car, for example, while the other opts for comfort and
reliability.
PURCHASE OCCASION. Purchase occasion refers to such things as whether a
product is purchased as a gift or for the buyer’s own use, and whether the
product is to be part of a special event or used routinely. A buyer’s use and
signaling criteria are often very different depending on the occasion, even if
the buyer is the same person and the product is similar. Purchasers of pens
for gifts, for example, will favor recognized brands names such as Cross
that may carry less weight in purchasing for personal use.
Several buyer dimensions may be important in deﬁning buyer segments.
In oil ﬁeld equipment, for example, buyer size, technological sophistication,
and ownership are all relevant variables. In frozen entrees, household size,


---PAGE BREAK---

age of family members, whether both parents are working, and income are
all relevant variables. Potential buyers of a product not currently purchasing
may also constitute segments. Buyer segmentation variables may also be
related and the task is to select the variables that best reﬂect structural and
value chain differences.
CHANNEL SEGMENTS
To identify segments based on channels, all existing and feasible
channels through which a product can or does reach buyers should be
identiﬁed. The channel employed usually has implications for how a ﬁrm
conﬁgures its value chain and the vertical linkages (Chapter 2) that are
present. The channel can also reﬂect factors which are important cost
drivers such as order size, shipment size, and lead time. Large orders of
electronic components are sold direct, for example, while small orders are
sold through distributors (often to the same buyers). Channels can also
differ greatly in bargaining power. Mass merchandisers such as Sears and
K-Mart have a great deal more power than independent department stores.
Typical differences in channels that deﬁne segments include:
Direct versus distributors. Selling direct removes the need to gain access
to channels and may imply a very different value chain than selling through
distributors.
Direct mail versus retail (or wholesale). Direct mail eliminates the
potential bargaining power of the intermediate channel. It also usually
carries implications for value activities such as the logistical system.
Distributors versus brokers. Brokers typically do not hold inventory and
may handle a different product line than distributors.
Types of distributors or retailers. Products may be sold through retailers
or distributors of very different types, which carry different assortments and
have different strategies and purchasing processes.
Exclusive versus nonexclusive outlets. Exclusivity may affect a channel’s
bargaining power and also the activities performed by the channel versus


---PAGE BREAK---

those performed by the ﬁrm.
There are often several types of channels in an industry. In copiers, for
example, machines are sold direct as well as through copier distributors,
ofﬁce products distributors, and retailers. Channel segmentation must also
include any potential channel that might be feasible. For example, L’eggs
resegmented the hosiery market by discovering a new channel, the direct
sale of hosiery to supermarkets.
GEOGRAPHIC SEGMENTS
Geographic location can affect both buyer needs and the costs of serving
buyers. Geographic location may be important directly as a cost driver and
may also affect the value chain required to reach the buyer. Geographic
location also frequently serves as a proxy for desired product attributes due
to differences in weather, customs, government regulation, and the like. For
example, commercial roofs in the southern United States require less
insulation than in the North, while the rooﬁng membrane is more likely to
be ballasted with gravel in the North than in the South because a roof
designed to take a snow load can handle the extra weight.
Typical geographic segments are based on variables such as the
following:
Localities, regions or countries. Geographic areas may have differences
in such areas as transportation systems and regulations. Geographic buyer
location also plays a key role in deﬁning scale economies. Depending on
the geographic scope of scale economies (Chapter 3), different sized
geographic areas may be the relevant segments. In the residential rooﬁng
shingle industry, regions are the appropriate segments because high
logistical costs limit the effective radius of a plant. In food distribution,
metropolitan areas are the appropriate segments because of dense customer
location and use of trucks for local delivery.
Weather zones. Climatic conditions often have a strong impact on
product needs or on the value chain required to serve an area.


---PAGE BREAK---

Country stage of development or other country groupings. Buyers
located in developing countries may have very different needs than those in
developed countries. In addition, packaging, logistical systems, marketing
systems, and many other aspects of the value chain may differ signiﬁcantly.
Similarly, other groupings of countries may expose similarities that deﬁne
segments.
The relevant measure of geographic location for segmentation purposes
will differ from industry to industry. In most cases, the relevant location to
use in segmentation is the location where a product is actually consumed or
used. However, sometimes the location to which a product is shipped (e.g.,
the warehouse) is more relevant. In other cases, the location of the buyer’s
headquarters or primary dwelling emerges as the most important
geographic segmentation variable, even though the buyer uses the product
somewhere else.
There can also be more than one meaningful geographic segmentation.
For example, regions may be meaningful segments for determining cost
position in industries where the costs of key value activities are driven by
regional scale, whereas countries may be meaningful segments for
determining desired product attributes and the ability to differentiate.
Finding New Segments
Some segmentation variables are readily apparent as a result of industry
convention or competitor behavior. There are often established norms for
dividing buyers or grouping geographic areas, based on historical data
collected by trade associations or government agencies. In the oil industry,
for example, the distinction between majors and independents is an
accepted segmentation. Traditional categorization schemes for product
varieties in an industry are also typical. Competitors may also deﬁne
apparent segments through their choice of focus strategies.
However, segmentation must go beyond conventional wisdom and
accepted classiﬁcation schemes. Correct industry segmentation should
reﬂect important differences for structure or the value chain among
products, buyers, channels, or geography, whether or not they are


---PAGE BREAK---

recognized and used currently. The greatest opportunity for creating
competitive advantage often comes from new ways of segmenting, because
a ﬁrm can meet true buyer needs better than competitors or improve its
relative cost position.
In searching for potential new product segments, the following questions
can be usefully considered:
•  Are there other technologies or designs to perform the required
functions in the buyer’s value chain?
• Could additional functions be performed by an enhanced product?
•  By reducing the number of functions the product performs (and
possibly lowering the price), could the needs of some buyers be better
served?
• Are there different bundles (either narrower or broader) of products and
services that could be feasibly sold as a package?
Off-price retailers are an example of a new segmentation based on
reducing the number of functions the product performs. Firms such as
Loehmann’s eliminate costly services such as credit and returns while
selling through spartan outlets without extensive dressing rooms or sales
help. This stripped down value chain, without many traditional value
activities, has created an entirely new segment. A similar process is
occurring in the hotel/motel industry, where budget chains such as La
Quinta are selling rooms without other services such as restaurants and
bars, and other chains are combining services in new ways.
The possibility of employing new channels also frequently exists. Firms
can sell direct where the norm has been to use agents or distributors or
employ new types of distributors or retailers. Timex did this in watches, and
Avon did it in cosmetics. Any feasible channel is a potential segment.
In identifying new geographic and buyer segments, creativity is often
required in two areas. The ﬁrst is ﬁnding important new ways that
geography or buyers can be divided to reﬂect structural or value chain
differences. As discussed earlier, Stouffer’s discovered important
differences in purchase criteria for frozen entrees by isolating single
households and households with two working parents. The second area for
creativity in geographic or buyer segmentation is in identifying potential


---PAGE BREAK---

new buyer types or geographic areas not presently being served by the
industry. Sometimes reaching a new buyer type or geographic area will
require product modiﬁcations, while in other cases it just requires that a
ﬁrm gain a better understanding of its buyers’ needs and potential new
applications for its product. For example, Arm & Hammer baking soda
found a large market in deodorizing refrigerators, and Johnson & Johnson
Baby Shampoo proved popular with adults. No product change was
required for reaching either new buyer group.
The Industry Segmentation Matrix
Having identiﬁed the relevant segmentation variables with structural or
value chain implications, the next task is to combine them into an overall
segmentation of the industry. The task is usually difﬁcult because there are
many relevant segmentation variables—in some industries there can be
dozens. The challenge is to distill these variables into the most meaningful
segments for developing competitive strategy.
The ﬁrst step in the distillation process is to apply a signiﬁcance test to
each segmentation variable. Only those variables with a truly signiﬁcant
impact on the sources of competitive advantage or industry structure should
be isolated for strategic analysis. Other less important, though still
meaningful, segmentation variables that are identiﬁed can be used for ﬁne
tuning in marketing or operations management.
The basic tool for translating the remaining variables into a segmentation
is the industry segmentation matrix. A simple segmentation matrix based on
two segmentation variables is shown in Figure 7–3, illustrating the oil ﬁeld
equipment industry in which the size of the buyer oil company and the stage
of development of the country in which the buyer is headquartered have
been identiﬁed as the two segmentation variables.
The ﬁrst practical problem in constructing a segmentation matrix is
choosing the number of categories of each segmentation variable to select.
In Figure 7–3 I have chosen three discrete categories of buyer size and two
categories of a country’s stage of development. In reality, buyer size is a
continuous variable and country development goes through many stages.
The way in which each segmentation variable is broken into discrete


---PAGE BREAK---

categories should reﬂect the categories that capture the most signiﬁcant
structural or value chain differences, balanced against the practical need to
limit the number of segments to a manageable number. Deciding on the best
discrete categories for strategic purposes almost always requires judgment
and is an iterative process.
The cells in Figure 7–3 are the individual segments in the industry. It
may well be that some of the cells are presently unoccupied. In addition, if
there were no small independent oil companies based in developing
countries and not likely ever to be any, this segment would be a null cell.
For purposes of illustration, Figure 7–3 shows null cells involving both
large and small independents. Segments can often be eliminated from
consideration if they are null cells. However, it is important to remember
that null cells should be infeasible combinations of the segmentation
variables and not merely cells in which no ﬁrm is currently operating.
Feasible cells where no ﬁrm is operating represent a potential opportunity
and it is important that such segments be highlighted, not eliminated, in
segmentation.
Figure 7–3. A Simple Industry Segmentation Matrix for an Oil Field Equipment Industry
Figure 7–3 portrays a case where there are two relevant segmentation
variables. In practice, there may be many variables grouped under the four
broad categories of product, buyer type, channel, and geography. Looked at
closely, most industries are quite heterogeneous. With many signiﬁcant
segmentation variables, the number of segmentation matrices that could be
plotted multiplies rapidly. The problem, then, is to convert the segmentation
variables into a small number of segmentation matrices that will be most
illuminating for the strategy formulation process.


---PAGE BREAK---

Relationships Among Segmentation Variables
To move from a number of segmentation variables to the most
meaningful segmentation matrices, the ﬁrst step is to probe the relationships
among the segmentation variables. The number of important segmentation
variables can be reduced by collapsing segmentation variables together that
are correlated, or which effectively measure the same thing. For example,
geographic location may be associated with a particular buyer type (e.g.,
automobile companies are located in the Midwest), or buyer type may be
closely related to channel (small rooﬁng contractors are all served through
distributors). Constructing a segmentation matrix with correlated
segmentation variables will produce a matrix in which many cells are null.
Segmentation variables that are highly correlated can be combined,
because one variable is a surrogate for the effect of the other. In less
extreme cases, the correlation among segmentation variables is partial, but
allows a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of possible segments because
many cells in the matrix are null. It is important to identify all the
relationships among the segmentation variables and use this to combine
variables together and identify null cells.
It is also important to understand why variables are related, because this
will often have important ramiﬁcations. If one variable is not a good
surrogate for another but rather a reﬂection of current ﬁrm behavior or
happenstance, combining variables is a mistake. It will obscure unoccupied
segments that may represent an unexploited opportunity. For example, if
small rooﬁng contractors were served through distributors not for economic
reasons but for historical reasons, then eliminating direct sale to small
contractors as a segment would be a mistake. Telemarketing or remote order
entry by salespersons with portable computer terminals might make the
segment feasible though it had not been previously.
Combining Segmentation Matrices
The signiﬁcant and independent segmentation variables that remain after
the process described above represent the potential axes for industry
segmentation matrices. Where there are more than two segmentation


---PAGE BREAK---

variables, the industry segmentation matrix will no longer ﬁt on a two-
dimensional page. One way of proceeding is to construct a number of
different segmentation matrices for each pair of variables. Each of these
matrices can then be analyzed for its strategic implications. This approach is
not fully satisfactory, however, because meaningful segments may be the
result of combining more than two segmentation variables and may be
overlooked.
To deal with more than two segmentation variables, it is usually useful to
create combined segmentation matrices. The process is illustrated in Figure
7–4. In oil ﬁeld equipment there are at least two other relevant buyer
segmentation variables besides buyer type and geographic buyer location:
the technological sophistication of the oil company and its ownership. In
Figure 7–4, I have plotted the four variables in pairs and then combined the
two segmentations together after eliminating null cells.
The process of combining matrices not only reduces the number of
segments by eliminating some null cells, but also exposes correlations
among variables that may have been missed. In Figure 7–4, I have noted the
null cells representing infeasible combinations. Combining matrices is
usually best done by combining all segmentation variables within a
category ﬁrst. In Figure 7–4, for example, I have combined all the buyer
segmentation variables together.
After combining segmentation variables of the same broad category, one
proceeds to combine variables in different categories. In doing so, it is
usually best to create a segmentation matrix in which one axis reﬂects the
combined product segmentation variables and the other axis combines all
the buyer-related variables (buyer type, channel, geography). Where the
number of segmentation variables is manageable, it is possible using this
procedure to construct one two-dimensional industry segmentation matrix.
This matrix may be quite large, but has the advantage of displaying the
entire industry in a way that facilitates strategic analysis. Figure 7–5 shows
such a matrix for oil ﬁeld equipment, after adding to the segmentation two
product segmentation variables—premium versus standard quality products,
and products with ratings for deep versus shallow drilling.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 7–4. Combined Segmentation Matrix for an Oil Field Equipment Industry


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 7–5. Illustrative Industry Segmentation Matrix for an Oil Field Equipment Industry


---PAGE BREAK---

Sometimes the number of relevant segmentation variables and resulting
segments is so great as to make a single matrix unwieldy. The presence of a
very large overall segmentation matrix should prompt the reexamination of
the segmentation variables and the discrete categories of each to ensure that
the differences are truly signiﬁcant. Where this is the case, it may be
desirable to use two or three segmentation matrices in subsequent analysis
to avoid missing important strategic implications.
The industry segmentation matrix should contain potential segments and
not just segments that are currently occupied. Potential segments may imply
entirely new segmentation variables (e.g., channel is added because there is
the possibility that some direct sales may be possible in the future instead of
handling all sales through distributors) or new discrete categories of existing
variables (e.g., a new performance rating for an alloy).
A segmentation matrix is an analytical tool, not an end in itself. The
analyst should start with the longest list of segmentation variables to avoid
overlooking possibilities. Only over the course of the analysis are variables
combined or eliminated and the working segmentation matrix reﬁned. The
whole process usually involves trying a number of different segmentation
schemes in which the product and buyer differences that are most important
for industry structure are gradually exposed.
A segmentation matrix should be tested by examining the strategies of
competitors. If the scope of competitors’ activities is plotted on the matrix,
new segments or segmentation variables may be exposed. Conversely,
competitors’ activities may draw attention to segments that must inevitably
be served together. I will have more to say about this below when
interrelationships among segments are discussed. Figure 7–6 summarizes
the steps required in industry segmentation.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 7–6. The Industry Segmentation Process
Industry Segmentation and Competitive Strategy
Industry segments differ in their attractiveness and the sources of
competitive advantage for competing in them. The key strategic questions
that arise out of segmentation are:
• where in the industry a ﬁrm should compete (segment scope)
• how its strategy should reﬂect this segmentation


---PAGE BREAK---

A ﬁrm can adopt a broadly-targeted strategy that addresses many
segments, or exclusively address a small number of segments in a focus
strategy. A broadly-targeted ﬁrm must also be aware of the vulnerabilities it
faces because segments have structural differences, just as a focused ﬁrm
must recognize and deal with the threat of broadly-targeted ﬁrms competing
in its segment or segments together with others. Segmentation is also
dynamic and must change to reﬂect structural changes.
The Attractiveness of a Segment
The ﬁrst issue in deciding where to compete in an industry is the
attractiveness of the various segments. The attractiveness of a segment is a
function of its structural attractiveness, its size and growth, and the match
between a ﬁrm’s capabilities and the segment’s needs.
STRUCTURAL ATTRACTIVENESS
The structural attractiveness of a segment is a function of the strength of
the ﬁve competitive forces at the segment level. The analysis of the ﬁve
forces at the segment level is somewhat different than at the industry level.
In a segment, potential entrants include ﬁrms serving other segments, as
well as ﬁrms not presently in the industry. Substitutes for the product
variety in a segment are often other product varieties in the industry, as well
as products produced by other industries. Rivalry in a segment involves both
ﬁrms focusing exclusively on the segment and ﬁrms that serve other
segments well. Buyer and supplier power tend to be more segment-speciﬁc,
but may well be inﬂuenced by buyer purchases in other segments or
supplier sales to other segments. Thus the structural analysis of a segment is
usually inﬂuenced heavily by conditions in other segments, more so than
the structural analysis of an industry is affected by other industries.
The segments in an industry will often differ widely in structural
attractiveness. In large turbine generators, for example, the segment
consisting of large-capacity generators sold to large, privately-owned
utilities is structurally attractive. Large-capacity generators are very
sophisticated technologically and the scale and learning curve barriers to
developing and producing them are high. Large units also offer many more


---PAGE BREAK---

opportunities for differentiation than smaller units. Greater thermal
efﬁciency of large units creates lower costs of use for buyers, reducing
buyer price sensitivity. Large utilities also tend to be more technologically
sophisticated buyers and appreciate more features, enhancing competitors’
ability to differentiate themselves. Large utilities also command the
ﬁnancial resources to be less price sensitive. Finally, the selling process to
private utilities involves secret negotiations rather than public bidding in
which the lowest qualiﬁed bid must be selected.
Analyzing the attractiveness of each segment is an important ﬁrst step in
deciding where to compete. As a test of the analysis, it is often quite
illuminating to compute a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability in the various segments in
which it competes and to compare this to both the structural analysis and
any industry proﬁtability data by segment that are available. Focused
competitors may provide data on the proﬁtability of the segments they
occupy, for example. Differences in proﬁtability by segment can be truly
striking. Existing segment proﬁtability is not necessarily an indication of
potential proﬁtability, however, because a ﬁrm may not be optimizing its
strategy for each segment or, for that matter, for any segment.
SEGMENT SIZE AND GROWTH
Segments will frequently differ in their absolute size and growth rate.
Size and growth will be important in their own right to the choice of where
to compete. Size and growth also have an impact on structural
attractiveness. The expected growth rate of each segment is important to
rivalry and to the threat of entry, while size may affect the attractiveness of
a segment to large competitors. Sometimes ﬁrms can sustain a position in
smaller segments because large ﬁrms are not interested in them.
Determining the size and expected growth of segments is typically not
easy. Data are hardly ever collected in ways that exactly match meaningful
segment boundaries, especially segments determined by demand and cost
considerations rather than industry convention. Hence a ﬁrm may need to
invest in special data collection or market research to produce estimates of
size and growth by segment.
FIRM POSITION VIS-À-VIS A SEGMENT


---PAGE BREAK---

A ﬁrm’s resources and skills, reﬂected in its value chain, will usually be
better suited to some segments than others, inﬂuencing the attractiveness of
a segment for a particular ﬁrm. Each segment will have somewhat different
requirements for competitive advantage that are highlighted in constructing
the segmentation matrix. The tools described in Chapters 3 and 4 can be
used to determine a ﬁrm’s relative position for competing in various
segments and the possibilities for changing it.
Segment Interrelationships
Segments are often related in ways that have an important effect on the
segments in which a ﬁrm wants to compete. Segments are related where
activities in the value chain can be shared in competing in them—I call such
opportunities 
segment 
interrelationships. 
There 
are 
often 
many
opportunities to share value activities among segments. For example, the
same sales force can sell to different buyer types, or the same
manufacturing facilities can produce different product varieties.
Figures 7–7 and 7–8 illustrate a typical situation where interrelated value
chains serve two segments. Strongly related segments are those where the
shared value activities represent a signiﬁcant fraction of total cost or have
an important impact on differentiation. Segment interrelationships are
analogous to interrelationships among business units competing in related
industries. Segment interrelationships are within an industry, however,
while interrelationships among business units are between industries.10
Similarly, segment interrelationships are analogous to interrelationships
involved in competing in different geographic areas.
The analysis of interrelationships is treated in detail in Chapter 9, where
I focus on interrelationships among business units. The same concepts
apply here, and I will summarize them brieﬂy. Interrelationships among
segments are strategically important where the beneﬁts of sharing value
activities exceed the cost of sharing. Sharing value activities leads to the
greatest beneﬁt if the cost of a value activity is subject to signiﬁcant
economies of scale or learning, or sharing allows a ﬁrm to improve the
pattern of capacity utilization of the value activity. Economies of scale or
learning in a value activity imply that sharing across segments may yield a


---PAGE BREAK---

cost advantage relative to single-segment competitors. Sharing activities
among segments is also beneﬁcial where it increases differentiation in the
value activity or lowers the cost of differentiation. Sharing a value activity
is most important to differentiation where the value activity has a signiﬁcant
impact on differentiation and sharing allows a signiﬁcant improvement in
uniqueness or a signiﬁcant reduction in the cost of providing it. The ﬁrm
with a shared service organization across segments, for example, will gain
an advantage over the single segment competitor if service is vital to
differentiation and sharing lowers the cost of hiring better service personnel.
Sharing a brand name across segments is also often a source of
differentiation.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 7–7. Interrelated Value Chains for Different Segments
The beneﬁts of interrelationships among segments are offset by costs of
coordination, compromise, and inﬂexibility in jointly serving segments with
shared activities. Coordination costs simply reﬂect the greater complexity of
operating in multiple segments with shared value activities. Compromise
costs occur when the value chain designed to serve one segment is not
optimal in serving another segment, and serving both undermines a ﬁrm’s
ability to serve either. For example, the brand name, advertising, and image
appropriate to a premium product may be inconsistent with the needs of a


---PAGE BREAK---

low-end product variety or vice versa. Here a ﬁrm has to create and
advertise two separate brand names if it wants to operate in both segments.
K. Hattori, for example, uses the Seiko name for higher-priced watches, and
the Pulsar name for medium-priced watches. Even then, retailers often tell
customers that a Pulsar is really a Seiko.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 7–8. Segment Interrelationships Displayed on the Value Chain


---PAGE BREAK---

A less extreme form of compromise cost is where the optimal value
chain for serving one segment is somewhat different from the optimal value
chain for serving another, but the same chain will serve both at some
penalty in cost or differentiation. For example, a sales force selling to two
buyer segments may not be as effective as a sales force specializing in one,
or a manufacturing process with the ﬂexibility to produce two product
varieties may not be as efﬁcient as one that is designed to produce one.
Segment spillover is a form of compromise that occurs when a ﬁrm tries
to serve multiple segments. Buyers in one segment may demand the same
terms as buyers in another. For example, the prices charged in one buyer
segment may spill over to other segments because buyers demand equal
treatment, a problem a single segment competitor does not have. Because
the bases for segmentation include differences in the optimal value chain,
the need to compromise in jointly serving segments is quite prevalent.
The need to compromise in jointly serving segments can partially or
completely nullify the ability of a ﬁrm to gain competitive advantage from
sharing value activities among segments. The ﬁrm is thus forced to trade the
cost of creating parallel value activities to serve different segments (e.g., a
separate production process or a different brand name) against the cost of
compromise. In extreme cases, the compromise required to serve multiple
segments goes beyond nullifying the advantages of sharing value activities
and creates disadvantages. Because of major inconsistencies in such areas
as brand image or production process, for example, competing in one
segment can make it very difﬁcult to operate in another segment even with a
completely separate value chain.
The ﬁnal cost of sharing activities among segments is the cost of
inﬂexibility. Sharing value activities limits the ﬂexibility of modifying
strategies in the different segments, and may create exit barriers in leaving a
segment. The cost of inﬂexibility, as well as the other costs of sharing, are
discussed extensively in Chapter 9.
The net competitive advantage of competing in multiple segments versus
focusing on one or a few is a function of the balance between the
advantages of sharing value activities and the costs. In most industries the
pattern of segment interrelationships is not symmetric. Some pairs of
segments have stronger interrelationships than others. A ﬁrm may also be
able to share some value activities across one group of segments and


---PAGE BREAK---

another group of value activities across another, perhaps overlapping, group
of segments.
As a result of the pattern of segment interrelationships, ﬁrms often
cluster in the group of segments they serve. In copiers, for example, Xerox,
Kodak, and IBM have traditionally competed in high-volume copiers, while
Ricoh, Savin, Canon, Minolta, and several others have served the low-
volume convenience copiers. High-volume copiers are characterized by low
unit manufacturing volumes, direct sales forces, and different technological
issues than low-volume machines, which are mass-produced and sold
through distributors. Only through having what amounts to a separate
company (Fuji Xerox) has Xerox spanned the whole product range, while
Canon has had to broaden its line upward painstakingly through major
investments in the new value activities needed to compete in the high end.
This example illustrates the point that the greater the cost of sharing
activities among segments, the more the broadly-targeted ﬁrm is required to
create essentially separate value chains if it is to be successful. Yet separate
value chains negate the beneﬁts of broad targeting.
A good way to test a ﬁrm’s understanding of interrelationships among
segments is to plot competitors on the segmentation matrix (see Figure 7–
9). If all competitors in one segment also compete in another, chances are
good that strong interrelationships are present. By looking at the pattern of
competitors, 
one 
can 
often 
gain 
insight 
into 
the 
pattern 
of
interrelationships.11 However, competitors may well have failed to
recognize or exploit all segment interrelationships.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 7–9. Competitor Positions on the Segmentation Matrix
Interrelationships among segments may suggest further collapsing of the
industry segmentation matrix. Segments with very strong interrelationships
can be combined if a ﬁrm cannot logically serve one without serving the
other. Once a ﬁrm has entered one such segment the barriers to entering the
adjacent segment are low. By examining interrelationships, therefore, an
industry segmentation matrix may be simpliﬁed for strategic purposes.
Segment Interrelationships and Broadly-Targeted Strategies
Interrelationships among segments provide the strategic logic for
broadly-targeted strategies that encompass multiple segments if they lead to
a net competitive advantage. Strong interrelationships among segments
deﬁne the cluster of segments a ﬁrm should serve. Strong interrelationships
will also deﬁne the logical paths of mobility of ﬁrms in the industry from
one segment to another. A ﬁrm competing in one segment will be most
likely to enter other segments where there are strong interrelationships.
The 
broadly-targeted 
competitor 
bets 
that 
the 
gains 
from
interrelationships among segments outweigh the costs of sharing, and
designs its strategy to strengthen the interrelationships and minimize the
coordination and compromise costs. Developments in manufacturing
technology are working today to lower the cost of compromise in serving
different product segments because of enhanced ﬂexibility to produce
different varieties in the same facility. These or other developments that
increase the ﬂexibility of value activities without a cost or differentiation
penalty will work toward the beneﬁt of broadly-targeted competitors.
A broadly-targeted competitor should usually not serve all industry
segments, however, because the beneﬁts of sharing value activities are
nearly always outweighed in some segments by the cost of compromise.
Serving all segments is also often not desirable because all segments are not
structurally attractive. A broadly-targeted ﬁrm may have to serve some
unattractive segments, however, because they contribute to the overall cost
or differentiation of shared value activities, or to defending its position in
structurally attractive segments. As will be discussed further in Chapter 14,
occupying some unattractive segments may prevent a competitor from


---PAGE BREAK---

establishing beachheads in those segments from which it can build on
interrelationships into the ﬁrm’s segments. The gap left by U.S. automobile
ﬁrms in less proﬁtable small cars, for example, seems to have provided the
Japanese automakers with the opportunity to enter the U.S. market.
The Choice of Focus
Focus strategies rest on differences among segments, either differences in
the ﬁrm’s optimal value chain or differences in the buyer value chain that
lead to differing purchase criteria. The existence of costs of coordination,
compromise, or inﬂexibility in serving multiple segments is the strategic
underpinning of sustainable focus strategies. By optimizing its value chain
for only one or a few segments, the focuser achieves cost leadership or
differentiation in its segment or segments compared to more broadly-
targeted ﬁrms that must compromise. Focus strategies involve the entire
value chain and not just marketing activities, as in market segmentation.
Focus strategies can encompass more than one segment and encompass
several segments with strong interrelationships. However, the ability of a
ﬁrm to optimize for any segment is generally diminished by broadening the
target. Note that a ﬁrm can focus within an industry at the same time as it
achieves interrelationships with business units competing in other industries
that do not force it to compromise in serving the target segments. The
choice of competitive scope involves simultaneously understanding
interrelationships at both levels (see Chapter 15).
Firms can choose different groups of segments on which to focus, which
may or may not overlap. Figure 7–10 illustrates a case where a number of
ﬁrms are supplying information products to ﬁnancial services ﬁrms.
Company A has adopted a product-based focus strategy of supplying one
product variety (data bases) to all buyers. Company B, on the other hand,
has adopted a buyer-based focus strategy in which it sells the full array of
products to insurance companies. Company C has yet another focus strategy
which concentrates exclusively on providing consulting advice to ﬁnance
companies. Its buyers either acquire the data elsewhere or generate it
themselves. Company C’s focus strategy does not overlap with the segments
served by companies A and B.12


---PAGE BREAK---

As noted above, focus strategies involving several segments rest on the
presence of strong interrelationships among the segments that outweigh the
suboptimization of serving more than one. For example, company A has
maximized interrelationships based on shared R&D and production of only
data bases, which offset the fact that each buyer type would ideally prefer a
somewhat different type of data base and perhaps a different delivery
system. Company B, on the other hand, has chosen a buyer-based focus
strategy that gains competitive advantage through optimizing its delivery
and selling system for insurance companies. Company C has opted for the
potential differentiation beneﬁts of offering only consulting to ﬁnance
companies and the internal beneﬁts of product specialization, while
forgoing potential scale economies of a broader focus. Thus each company
has built a focus strategy based on different interrelationships and different
competitive advantages, and each bears different costs of compromise.
Figure 7–10. Alternative Focus Strategies in a Financial Information Industry
Interesting competitive issues arise in segments where focus strategies
with different segment interrelationships overlap. In Figure 7–10 this occurs
in the upper left-hand segment in the matrix. In that segment, the different
focus strategies create competitive advantages and disadvantages of
different types for the two ﬁrms competing in the segment. Company A
brings extensive low-cost data bases and an acute understanding of data


---PAGE BREAK---

base design, while Company B brings an in-depth understanding of
insurance companies and cost advantages from offering a full line. Just as
interrelationships can lead to competitive advantages, they can also make a
ﬁrm inﬂexible in competing in a segment. For example, company A could
not easily modify its data base management system to better respond to the
needs of insurance company buyers because of the effect this would have on
its activities with banking and ﬁnance companies. The relative position of
companies A and B in an overlapping segment is a function of net
competitive advantage of interrelationships with other segments.
Constraints in responding that arise from interrelationships can lead to a
competitive interaction in which ﬁrms try to shift competition in a segment
in the direction that best exploits their own segment interrelationships or
advantages, while forcing competitors to compromise theirs.
The Feasibility of New Segments to Focus On
The feasibility of a focus strategy in a segment depends on the size of a
segment and whether it will support the cost of a tailored value chain. Even
if a tailored value chain would be more responsive to the needs of a
particular new segment, the costs of the tailored chain may not be
recoupable. Thus many potential segments should not be served with focus
strategies.
There are four ways that new segments emerge as viable for focus
strategies. The ﬁrst is that tailoring gets less costly. Falling economies of
scale may allow a focus strategy, for example. The second reason focus on a
new segment becomes viable is that the segment grows enough to overcome
the ﬁxed cost of serving it. A third reason is that ﬁrms exploit
interrelationships with other industries to overcome scale thresholds in
serving the segment. Finally, a segment may become viable if a ﬁrm
pursues it globally, using volume in many countries to overcome scale
economies. Here the ﬁrm is pursuing geographic interrelationships.
Firms can preempt new focus strategies by perceiving new segmentation
schemes or by identifying opportunities to make new segments viable.
Recent reductions in scale economies have occurred in some technologies,
including computerized manufacturing and design. These, coupled with


---PAGE BREAK---

enhanced ability to exploit interrelationships among business units (Chapter
9) and compete globally, will be continually creating opportunities for new
focus strategies in the 1980s.
The Sustainability of a Focus Strategy
I have discussed how a ﬁrm can choose a segment or small group of
segments on which to focus, based on the attractiveness of those segments
and the interrelationships among them. A ﬁnal issue in choosing a focus
strategy is the sustainability of the focus strategy against competitors. The
sustainability of a focus strategy is determined by three factors:
•  Sustainability against broadly-targeted competitors. The size and
sustainability of the competitive advantage created through focus vis-
à-vis more broadly-targeted competitors.
• Sustainability against imitators. The mobility barriers to imitating the
focus strategy or being outfocused by a competitor with an even
narrower target.
• Sustainability against segment substitution. The risk that buyers will be
drawn away to other segments the focuser does not serve.
SUSTAINABILITY AGAINST BROADLY-TARGETED COMPETITORS
Broadly-targeted competitors may either already compete in a focuser’s
segment or be potential entrants to the segment as an extension of their
existing base in other segments. The focuser’s competitive advantage over a
more broadly-targeted competitor is a function of:
•  the degree of compromise a broadly-targeted competitor faces in
serving the focuser’s segments and other segments at the same time
•  the competitive advantage of sharing value activities with other
segments in which the broadly-targeted competitor operates
The more different the focuser’s value chain is from the value chain
required to serve other segments, the more sustainable is the focus strategy.
In the airconditioning industry in the United States and Europe, for


---PAGE BREAK---

example, the distribution channels that serve the residential and commercial
market are separate from those that serve the industrial market. In Latin
America, Asia, and the Middle East, however, the same channels tend to
stock the whole line. A focus strategy has been much more successful and
sustainable in the United States and Europe than in other parts of the world,
because focusers can tailor the value chain to the channel that specializes in
their target segment. The focus strategy is more sustainable as buyer needs
in the target segment are more different and unusual vis-à-vis other
segments.
The problems of Royal Crown in the soft drink industry illustrate these
principles. Royal Crown focuses on colas, unlike Coke and Pepsi, which
supply a broader line of soft drink ﬂavors. Supplying only colas does not
involve a signiﬁcantly different value chain than supplying a broad line.
Buyer needs and purchasing behavior are not much different for colas than
for other ﬂavors except for the ﬂavor preference. Conversely, supplying a
broad line allows signiﬁcant beneﬁts of sharing activities in production,
distribution, and marketing. Hence Royal Crown’s focus strategy leads to no
competitive advantage against its broadly-targeted competitors, only
disadvantages. On the other hand, Mercedes gains strong advantages
through focus in automobiles by using a tailored value chain compared to
its broad-line competitors.
Mead’s strategic evolution in the paper container industry illustrates how
the factors underlying the sustainability of a focus strategy can change. In
response to intense cost competition in high volume containers in the late
1970’s, Mead chose a focus strategy targeted at low volume, high value-
added segments. In the early 1980’s, however, new continuous-run paper
corrugators were developed that operated faster but at the same time
required much less setup time. This made it increasingly possible for broad
line competitors to service small orders economically. Mead was forced to
modify its focus strategy and serve a broader range of segments while
investing in the new equipment. In this case, the value chain required to
serve Mead’s target segments became less different from that required to
efﬁciently serve the high volume segments.
The sustainability of a focus strategy will erode if a segment’s
differences from others fall over time, if technological change reduces the
cost of compromise in serving multiple segments or increases the ability to


---PAGE BREAK---

reap interrelationships (see Chapter 9), or if a tailored value chain for the
segment becomes too expensive relative to a more standardized chain.
Hence there is an important dynamic element in choosing the segments on
which to focus, reﬂecting an ongoing tradeoff between the advantages of
focus on a particular segment and the gains of sharing through competing in
multiple segments.
SUSTAINABILITY AGAINST IMITATORS
The second type of risk facing a focuser is that another ﬁrm will choose
to replicate the focus strategy, either a ﬁrm new to the industry or one
dissatisﬁed with its existing strategy. The sustainability of a focus strategy
against imitators is based on the sustainability of the competitive advantage
a focuser possesses, analyzed using the concepts in Chapters 3 and 4. The
mobility barriers to imitating a focus strategy are the scale economies,
differentiation, channel loyalty, and/or other barriers unique to the focus
strategy. The height of the barriers against imitation of a focus strategy thus
depends on the structure of the particular segment. Imitating Kodak’s high-
end focus in copiers, for example, requires that a ﬁrm overcome barriers
due to proprietary technology as well as economies of scale in establishing
an in-house sales and service network.
The size of a segment can affect the threat of imitation of a focus
strategy. In a small segment, even modest scale economies may be
signiﬁcant relative to segment size if they cannot be offset by
interrelationships, and competitors may not be interested in entering.
Conversely, in a growing industry there is the continual possibility not only
that a focus strategy will be imitated but also that a focuser will be
“outfocused” as ever-narrower segments become viable. In the rapidly
growing information industry, for example, outfocusing is pervasive as
ﬁrms develop ever more specialized data bases for narrower target buyer
groups.
SUSTAINABILITY AGAINST SEGMENT SUBSTITUTION
The ﬁnal determinant of the sustainability of a focus strategy is the risk
of segment substitution. A focus strategy concentrating on a segment is


---PAGE BREAK---

vulnerable to the disappearance of that segment. This may be the result of
changes in the environment, technology, or competitor behavior. The risk of
segment substitution is analyzed in the same way as substitution in general
(see Chapter 8). Segment substitution can be inﬂuenced by competitors just
as industry-level substitution can—if anything, even more so. Competitors
often attempt to shift demand away from a focuser’s segments through
techniques such as marketing, technological innovation, or even lobbying
for government standards that worsen conditions in the segment. Where a
focuser faces competitors serving much larger segments, there is a risk that
their advertising spending and other marketing may shape buyer attitudes
and lead buyers away from the focuser’s segment.
Pitfalls and Opportunities for Focusers and Broadly-Targeted Competitors
Several important lessons emerge from this analysis both for focusers
and for broadly-targeted competitors:
Successful focus strategies must involve compromise costs for
competitors. Focusing on a segment or group of segments is not sufﬁcient to
achieve competitive advantage in and of itself. The chosen segments must
involve buyers with different needs, or require a value chain that differs
from that which serves other segments. It is differences between the
focuser’s segment and other segments that lead to suboptimization by
broadly-targeted competitors, and provide the source of a sustainable
competitive advantage for the focuser.
Identifying a new way of segmenting an industry can be a major
opportunity. A properly constructed industry segmentation matrix will often
expose segments that are not reﬂected in the behavior of existing
competitors. By identifying a new way of segmenting the industry, a ﬁrm
can often design a focus strategy around a product variety, buyer group,
channel, or geographic subdivision that has not previously been recognized
as a segment but that has structural or value chain differences. New
segments can be narrower or broader than segments currently recognized.
Its differences imply that the new segment needs a distinctive strategy and


---PAGE BREAK---

value chain, and that competitors serving it together with other segments
will be suboptimizing.
The ﬁrm that recognizes a meaningful new segmentation ﬁrst can often
gain a sustainable competitive advantage preemptively. Federal Express, for
example, saw the small parcel requiring overnight delivery as a segment
that no ﬁrm had focused on before. Federal Express designed a strategy
around this segment involving a reconﬁgured value chain, and gained
enormous advantages over competitors who were serving it as part of
broader strategies. Similarly, Century 21 was ﬁrst to recognize a broader
nationwide segment in real estate brokerage.
Broad targeting does not necessarily lead to competitive advantage
where there are industry segments. A broadly-targeted competitor must gain
sustainable competitive advantage from competing in multiple segments if
it is to enjoy above-average returns. These competitive advantages usually
come from the interrelationships among segments. A cost leadership
strategy rests on achieving a low-cost position through the scale and other
advantages of competing in many segments. A differentiation strategy is
based on achieving uniqueness in meeting use or signaling criteria that are
widely valued by many segments. Without some tangible competitive
advantage from breadth, the structural differences among segments will
usually guarantee that a broadly-targeted competitor will be “stuck in the
middle.”
Broadly-targeted ﬁrms often serve too many segments. A ﬁrm aiming at
an overly broad strategic target runs the risk of suboptimization, increasing
its vulnerability to focusers. Reducing the number of segments served may
decrease vulnerability, as well as increase proﬁtability through eliminating
unattractive segments. A broadly-targeted ﬁrm should consider dropping
out of segments where:
• it gains little advantages from interrelationships with other segments
• it is forced to modify its entire strategy in order to serve the segment
• the segment is structurally unattractive
• sales and growth potential in the segment is limited


---PAGE BREAK---

•  defensive considerations do not require presence in the segment to
block competitors
The relevant segments and breadth of target must be continually
examined. The strategically meaningful segments in an industry will evolve
over time due to shifts in buyer behavior, the emergence of new buyer
groups, and technology that alters segment interrelationships. Thus the
choice competitive scope within an industry must be continually
reexamined. A ﬁrm cannot automatically accept a historically important
segmentation as meaningful, despite the fact that old segmentations have a
tendency to fade slowly from managers’ minds. Viewing the choice of
segments served as a permanent decision will inevitably bring strategic
disaster.
New technology is changing old assumptions about segmentation. New
technology, particularly microelectronics and information systems, is
creating opportunities for both new focus and new broadly-targeted
strategies. Flexibility in manufacturing, logistics, and other value activities
is making it possible for broadly-targeted ﬁrms to tailor activities to
segments while maintaining a single value chain. This is reducing
opportunities for sustainable focus in some industries. At the same time, the
same technological revolution is making strategies tailored to new segments
viable. Computer-aided design, for example, is lowering the design cost of
new product varieties. Firms must pay particular attention to how the new
technologies might shake up the traditional logic of focus or broad targeting
in their industries.
Industry Segmentation and Industry Deﬁnition
Drawing industry boundaries is always a matter of degree. Structural and
value chain differences among product varieties and buyers work towards a
narrower industry deﬁnition. Industry segmentation is thus a tool to probe
for narrower industry deﬁnitions by exposing structural heterogeneity
within an industry. Interrelationships among segments and business units
(Chapter 9) create possibilities for broader industry deﬁnitions.


---PAGE BREAK---

A useful working industry deﬁnition should encompass all segments for
which segment interrelationships are very strong. Segments where
interrelationships with other segments are weak may sometimes be separate
industries from a strategic viewpoint. Related industries linked by strong
interrelationships may in strategic terms be a single industry.
Where one actually chooses to draw industry boundaries is not so
essential as long as both segmentation and strategic interrelationships are
examined as part of structural analysis. Such an analysis will expose all the
key determinants of competitive advantage that derive from competitive
scope.


---PAGE BREAK---

8
Substitution
All industries face the threat of substitution. Substitution is the process by
which one product or service supplants another in performing a particular
function or functions for a buyer. The analysis of substitution applies
equally to products and processes, because the same principles govern a
buyer’s choice to do something in a new way anywhere in its value chain.
Substitution is one of the ﬁve competitive forces determining the
proﬁtability of an industry, because the threat of substitution places a
ceiling on industry prices. At the same time, substitution plays a prominent
role in determining industry and a ﬁrm’s demand. Penetration against
substitutes is a major reason why industries and ﬁrms grow, and the
emergence of substitutes is a major reason why they decline. Substitution is
also inextricably tied to a ﬁrm’s competitive scope within an industry,
because it widens or narrows the range of segments in an industry.
How can a ﬁrm best defend against a substitute? What is the best
strategy for promoting substitution if the ﬁrm is on the offensive? These are
important questions in competitive strategy in many industries. This chapter
will present a framework for analyzing substitution and answering those
questions. I will ﬁrst consider how to identify substitutes, an essential but
often subtle step in substitution analysis. Next I will describe the economics
of substitution, which deﬁne the threat of a substitute and provide the
underpinnings of any strategic moves intended to inﬂuence it. I will then
outline how the threat of substitution changes over time. With this as a
background, the factors that inﬂuence the path of substitution will be
identiﬁed. Substitution proceeds in some characteristic ways over time,


---PAGE BREAK---

which are important to recognize both in assessing the extent of the threat
and in forecasting the penetration of a substitute. Finally, I will describe the
strategic implications of the framework for both offensive and defensive
strategy towards substitutes. The discussion is framed in terms of
substitution at the industry level (e.g., carbon ﬁber substituting for titanium
and aluminum), but the same basic principles apply to the substitution of
one product form for another.
Identifying Substitutes
The ﬁrst step in substitution analysis is to identify the substitutes an
industry faces. This seemingly straightforward task is often not easy in
practice. Identifying substitutes requires searching for products or services
that perform the same generic function or functions as an industry’s
product, rather than products that have the same form. A truck differs
greatly from a train, but they both perform the same generic function for the
buyer—point-to-point freight transportation.1
The function a product performs depends on its role in the buyer’s value
chain. A product is used by the buyer in performing some activity or
activities—a truck or a train is used in inbound or outbound logistics, for
example, while skis are used as part of a buyer’s recreation in winter. As
discussed in Chapter 4, a product often affects not only the buyer value
activity in which it is used but also many other activities. A component used
in a product passes through inbound logistics, is held in inventory before it
is used, and must be serviced in the ﬁeld after sale, for example. Similarly,
baby diapers are not only worn by the baby but also must be put on by the
parent, laundered if they are reuseable, and purchased and stored. All the
impacts of a product on the buyer are relevant in deﬁning substitutes and
their relative performance. Finally, the value activity in which a product is
used may be connected to other activities through linkages. The precision of
a part can inﬂuence the need for product adjustment and for after-sale
servicing, for example. Linkages affecting a product can also inﬂuence
substitution, because they often create possibilities for discovering new
ways to combine activities.


---PAGE BREAK---

In the simplest form of substitution, one product substitutes for another
in performing the same function in the same buyer value activity. This is the
case of a ceramic engine part substituting for a metal engine part. Though
the substitution is direct, linkages can still exist. A ceramic part may require
different handling, for example. Even in simple substitutions, it is also
important to deﬁne the function of a product in the activity generically
rather than literally—what the product does rather than how it does it. The
generic function of a product is often very broad, particularly in consumer
goods. A manufacturer of metal downhill skis faces substitution not only
from epoxy or ﬁberglass skis but also from cross-country skis, other winter
sports equipment, other leisure products that can be used in winter, and
from the buyer taking more leisure time in the summer rather than winter.
The generic function of metal skis, most broadly deﬁned, is recreation. The
more generically the function of an industry’s product is expressed, the
greater the number of potential substitutes there usually are.
In the more complex forms of substitution, a substitute performs a
different range of functions than an industry’s product and/or affects buyer
activities in a different way. In the case of a truck substituting for a train, for
example, loading, unloading, packaging, and shipment size may all be
different though both perform the same transportation function. A substitute
may also perform a wider or narrower range of functions than an industry’s
product. For example, a word processor is not only a substitute for the
functions of a typewriter but also for other functions such as calculating and
small-quantity copying; a heat pump performs both heating and cooling,
while a conventional boiler system can be used only for heating; a
disposable diaper removes the need for laundering. Conversely, a wafﬂe
maker performs fewer functions than a toaster oven, and a specialty retailer
sells only one line of goods that are a subset of the product assortment of a
department store. In identifying substitutes, then, it is necessary to include
products that can perform functions in addition to those of an industry’s
product, as well as products that can perform any signiﬁcant function
among those the industry’s product can perform.
Because a substitute can perform a wider or narrower range of functions,
chains of substitution for a product can go in very different directions. For
example, the functions of a racetrack include both gambling and
entertainment. Substitutes for the gambling function include casinos, off-


---PAGE BREAK---

track betting, and bookies, while substitutes for the entertainment function
are even more numerous and include movies, books, sporting events, and so
on. The more functions a product performs in the buyer’s value chain, the
greater the number of chains of substitutes.
While one usually thinks of substitutes only in terms of different
products, in many industries there are at least four other options that must
be considered as substitutes in a broad sense. One option is that the buyer
does not purchase anything at all to perform the function, the most extreme
form of a substitute with a narrower range of functions. In water meters, for
example, the primary substitute is not to meter water usage at all. Similarly,
the leading U.S. salt producer, Morton-Norwich, is being threatened by
concern over the health effects of sodium that has reduced consumption.
A second potential substitute is to lower the usage rate of the product
required to perform the function. In aluminum, for example, new beverage
cans require thinner walls and hence less aluminum. Similarly, in offshore
drilling rigs, new directional drilling techniques and down-hole
measurement of the drilling process promise to reduce the amount of rig
time required to drill.
A third substitute that is often overlooked is used, recycled, or
reconditioned products. In aluminum, for example, perhaps the most
threatening substitute facing primary aluminum producers is secondary
(recycled) aluminum. Secondary consumption has grown rapidly in both the
United States and Japan. Used products are important substitutes for new
products in many industries producing durable goods, such as automobiles
and recreational vehicles. Reconditioned products are an important
substitute in aircraft engine components, where remachined and recoated
engine parts are a threat to new spare parts.
A ﬁnal potential substitute is for the buyer to perform the function
internally, or backward integration. For example, the key substitute for
many distribution industries is for the buyer to purchase directly from the
manufacturer and perform the distribution function internally. Or in
property and casualty insurance, a buyer can self-insure or establish a
captive insurance subsidiary.
The relevant substitutes will differ by industry segment (Chapter 7).
Different buyers use a product in different ways and hence value its
functions differently. At a racetrack, for example, some buyers will come to


---PAGE BREAK---

enjoy the spectacle and an evening with friends, while others will spend
most of their time at the betting windows or consulting tip sheets. Thus the
relevant substitutes will differ by buyer or buyer segment. Similarly,
different product varieties are used differently and hence may face different
substitutes. Thus the pattern of substitutes changes by industry segment,
and a ﬁrm’s most threatening substitutes will be a function of what
segments it actually serves.
Several substitutions can occur simultaneously. In the video game
industry, for example, programmable video games with replaceable
software cartridges are substituting for dedicated games that cannot be
changed, at the same time that personal computers (on which game
programs can be run) are substituting for programmable games. Multiple
substitutions often involve the broadening or narrowing of product
functions, as this example illustrates.
Multiple substitutions interact in shaping the overall substitution rate in
an industry and may lead to counterintuitive consequences. Aspartame is a
new artiﬁcial low calorie sweetener, for example, that is substituting for
saccharin. Both aspartame and saccharin are substituting for sugar. The
success of aspartame is expected by some observers to increase rather than
decrease the demand for saccharin for a time, by expanding the overall
market for artiﬁcial sweeteners faster than it substitutes for saccharin. Here
the later substitute beneﬁts an earlier substitute. The process can also work
in reverse. The success or failure of the ﬁrst substitute can make it harder
(or easier) for the next one.
Even if an industry faces no direct substitutes, it may still be affected by
substitution if there is the threat of substitution downstream if the buyer’s
product faces substitutes. For example, diesel engines and gasoline engines
are contending substitutes for use in medium-sized trucks, diesel engines
having long replaced gasoline engines in heavy trucks. If diesel engines win
out, the demand for gasoline engine parts will fall, even though the parts
themselves face no substitutes directly. Downstream substitution can also
occur when the buyer’s product depends on the sale of a complementary
product that is threatened. If microwave ovens replace conventional ovens,
for example, not only will the manufacturers of parts for conventional ovens
be adversely affected but so will the manufacturers of cookware used in


---PAGE BREAK---

conventional ovens. In downstream substitution, the buyer no longer needs
to perform the function of the ﬁrm’s product.
Downstream substitution can both lower industry demand, and can alter
buyer behavior. A threat of downstream substitution will often be
transmitted to suppliers in the form of greater price sensitivity. It may also
lead buyers to look for help from their suppliers in meeting the threat
through innovations in suppliers’ products or other actions that raise the
buyer’s differentiation or lower the buyer’s cost.
The number of substitutes for an industry’s product will vary widely
from industry to industry. Potential substitutes will differ in how they
replace a product and in the level of threat they represent. It is important in
substitution analysis to begin with the longest list of potential substitutes,
because ﬁrms are much more prone to be blindsided by a substitute than to
take a particular substitute too seriously.
The Economics of Substitution
One product substitutes for another if it offers buyers an inducement to
switch that exceeds the cost or overcomes the resistance to doing so. A
substitute offers an inducement to switch if the substitute provides the buyer
with more value relative to its price than the product currently being used.
There is always some cost of switching to a substitute because of the
disruption and potential reconﬁguration of buyer activities that must result,
however. The threat of a substitute will vary depending on the size of the
inducement relative to the required switching costs.
In addition to relative value to price and switching cost, the pattern of
substitution is inﬂuenced by what I term the buyer’s propensity to switch.
Faced with equivalent economic inducements for substitution, different
buyers will often evaluate substitution differently.
The threat of substitution, then, is a function of three factors:
•  the relative value/price of a substitute compared to an industry’s
product
• the cost of switching to the substitute
• the buyer’s propensity to switch


---PAGE BREAK---

This simple statement of the economics of substitution masks the often
subtle analysis required to understand it. The inducement a substitute offers
to switch is properly measured over the entire period the buyer will use it,
and discounted to the present. The cost of switching to a substitute is
typically incurred immediately or even before the substitute provides any
beneﬁts at all. Both relative value/price (RVP) and the costs of switching
are functions of a wide variety of factors, and are subject to change over
time. Both can also involve considerable uncertainty. Understanding both
requires a clear understanding of how a product affects the buyer’s value
chain, as well as the structure of the industry producing the substitute.
Understanding the buyer’s propensity to switch requires a further
knowledge of the buyer’s competitive circumstances, resources, and other
characteristics that play a part in predicting its behavior towards a
substitute.
Relative Value/Price
The value/price of a substitute is the value it provides to the buyer
compared to the price the buyer pays for it. Relative value/price is the
value/price of a substitute relative to the value/price of the product it seeks
to replace (which I term the product). When there are no switching costs
and the product is consumed quickly, the relevant RVP is solely a function
of current conditions. Future circumstances are not important because the
buyer can rapidly and without cost shift back and forth between the
substitute and the product depending on the RVP at the time. When there
are costs of switching or the product is durable, however, the relevant
measure of the attractiveness of a substitute is the expected RVP of the
substitute over the planning horizon.
The current prices of a substitute and a product are relatively easy to
determine. The expected relative prices over the planning horizon are what
should enter the RVP calculation, and must reﬂect the price changes
forecasted over time. The purchase prices of both a substitute and a product
must be adjusted for any discounts, rebates, or free ancillary products or
services involved in their purchase. In ofﬁce equipment, for example, free
service is often part of the deal with a buyer, and must be included in


---PAGE BREAK---

comparing the prices of substitutes such as copiers and offset duplicators.
Prices must be also adjusted for any tax credits the buyer gains in purchase.
The relative value of a substitute is based on exactly the same factors that
determine differentiation, discussed in Chapter 4. A substitute is valuable if
it lowers buyer cost or improves buyer performance relative to the product.
This value must be perceived by the buyer, however, and hence a
substitute’s ability to signal value relative to the product is part of the value
comparison. As with relative price, it is the expected relative value of the
substitute over its period of use that enters into RVP, not just its current
value.
The role of signaling in substitution is often as or more important than its
role in differentiation. Substitution frequently involves a new product
replacing a well established one. The substitute is typically unproven and its
value may be quite uncertain, while the established product is proven and its
qualities are well known. The ability of the substitute to signal value may,
as a result, take on a signiﬁcance that exceeds the role of signaling in
differentiation.
The relative value of a substitute depends on its cumulative impact on
the buyer’s value chain compared to the product’s, including both direct and
indirect impacts. The principles of the analysis are the same as described in
Chapter 4, though in practice there tend to be greater complexities in the
analysis in substitution not usually present when comparing one brand of a
product to another. A substitute and a product are often not directly
comparable, and a substitute is more likely to involve a different pattern of
impacts on the buyer’s value chain than a competing brand. Two brands of
cloth diapers have essentially the same impact on the household, for
example, while disposable diapers are used very differently than cloth
diapers. The differing patterns of use of a substitute and a product typically
necessitate adjustments in order to determine the relative value of a
substitute.
The following adjustments in measuring impact on buyer cost or buyer
performance are commonly necessary when comparing the value of a
substitute with the value of a product:
Usage Rate. The effect of a substitute on a buyer’s cost depends on the
amount of the substitute necessary to perform the same function. A


---PAGE BREAK---

substitute can lower buyer cost if less usage of it is required for a given
result. For example, aspartame is much sweeter than saccharin, which
means that less is necessary to achieve a comparable sweetening effect.
Aspartame’s much higher price per pound must thus be adjusted
accordingly. The usage of a substitute required for a given outcome will be
affected by such factors as its purity, concentration, reject rate, or operating
speed.
Delivered and Installed Cost. The effect of a substitute on buyer cost
depends on the delivered and installed cost of the substitute relative to the
product. Delivered and installed cost may include such factors as the cost of
transportation, installation, calibration, expanding or modifying space to
house the substitute, and many other costs that frequently differ for a
substitute and the product.
Financing Cost. The effect of a substitute on buyer cost depends on the
cost of ﬁnancing the purchase of the substitute relative to the product. In
comparing mobile homes and conventional houses, for example, it is
important to recognize that mobile homes are ﬁnanced as vehicles while
conventional houses are ﬁnanced as real estate. Interest rates and/or terms
differ for these different types of ﬁnancing, generally in the form of easier
credit availability but higher rates for ﬁnancing mobile homes. Financing
costs can be a large fraction of total cost in some industries.
Relative Variability of Price or Availability. The cost of a substitute to
the buyer is a function of expected ﬂuctuations in its price or availability (of
both the product and ancillary items such as parts or service). Price
ﬂuctuations are often costly for a buyer to deal with, as are periods of tight
supply. One of the potential beneﬁts of ceramics, for example, is that it uses
a plentiful and cheap raw material while metal parts are subject to greater
price ﬂuctuations because of changing metal prices. Both price ﬂuctuations
and the risk of nonavailability are partly a function of how many credible
sources there are for a substitute relative to the product.
The cost of a substitute to the buyer is also affected by whether adequate
capacity is present to serve key buyers’ needs, particularly in the case of
important inputs. Buyers are often unwilling to switch until enough capacity


---PAGE BREAK---

and suppliers are available to place the buyer in a tenable bargaining
position. This creates the need in many substitutions to add capacity ahead
of demand.
Direct Costs of Use. The effect of a substitute on buyer cost depends not
only on its initial cost, but also on the present value of the cost of using the
substitute over its entire life compared to that product. Direct costs of use
involve such things as:
• cost of labor (reﬂecting the quality of labor necessary)
• consumables such as materials, fuel, or ﬁlters
• insurance
• time before replacement
• frequency and cost of maintenance
• cost of spare parts
• breakdown time (valued at its opportunity cost or the cost of reserve
capacity)
• costs of maintaining the space required
• salvage value
• dismantling cost
In consumer goods, the cost of labor to use the substitute is the implicit
cost of the buyer’s time. In frozen entrees, for example, a major beneﬁt to
the buyer is time savings in preparation compared to most other meal types.
Valuing a consumer’s time is often difﬁcult because it does not involve a
money cost, though the techniques described in Chapter 4 provide a place to
start.
In many industries, such as elevators and aircraft engines, the costs of
using a substitute over its life are equal or are greater than the initial
purchase price, and can be decisive in determining its attractiveness. For
example, radial truck tires get approximately 25 percent more mileage than
bias ply tires. Radials also have lower downtime from punctures, and can be
retreaded twice compared to once for bias ply tires. Radials also improve
the fuel efﬁciency of a truck on the order of 2 to 6 percent. These
improvements in cost of use more than offset the 40 to 50 percent price
premium for radial truck tires.


---PAGE BREAK---

Indirect Costs of Use. The relative cost of use of a substitute must reﬂect
costs throughout the buyer’s value chain, and not just costs in the value
activity in which a substitute is directly employed. Such indirect or system
impacts are often overlooked by both ﬁrms and buyers. An automated
material handling conveyor, for example, can reduce the number and
required skill levels of workers on the assembly line, the number of lift
trucks needed in the factory, and the required strength of shipping
containers compared to conventional materials handling methods. Similarly,
disposable diapers eliminate the need for storage and laundering of soiled
diapers in addition to making diapering the baby easier because of attached
fastening tapes and a form-ﬁtting shape. Another example is the electronic
cash register, which can help a retailer to lower required inventory and to
control operating costs better than a mechanical cash register that cannot
generate extensive on-line transactions data.
A substitute may affect the cost of other activities in the buyer’s value
chain if it:
• affects productivity in other value activities
• inﬂuences the need for other raw materials or their required quality
• requires different ancillary equipment
• affects the need for inventory
• affects the frequency and complexity of required quality control checks
• affects the amount and type of packaging materials needed in shipping
• affects product weight and hence transport costs
Buyer Performance. The value of a substitute must reﬂect any
differences in its impact on the buyer’s performance relative to the product.
An electronic switching system for telecommunications can be more easily
adapted to new requirements than an electromechanical switch, for
example. A color TV provides more realistic pictures than a black and
white set and therefore greater entertainment. Another example of a
substitution based heavily on improving buyer performance is disposable
diapers. Disposable diapers offer greater cleanliness than cloth diapers and
are softer and less likely to cause diaper rash. As is often true in
differentiation, the performance of a substitute from the buyer’s perspective
may involve intangibles such as perceived status and the quality of personal


---PAGE BREAK---

relationships. The effect of a substitute on buyer performance is not always
easy to measure, though it always can be estimated.
The substitution of robotics for a conventional manned machine tool
provides an example of a complex substitution that involves direct cost of
use effects, indirect cost of use effects, and effects on buyer performance. A
robot reduces labor cost by increasing capital cost, and may increase the
output rate of the production step in which it is employed. Robots can also
save raw material cost and do not take sick leave, though they must be
maintained. Indirectly, robots can alter the material preparation needed in
previous production steps as well as material handling needs. Potential
performance effects of robots include higher reliability, greater ﬂexibility,
and higher workplace safety.
Number of Functions. The effect of a substitute on buyer cost and
performance must be adjusted for the range of functions it can perform
relative to the product. Wider functionality usually improves the relative
value of a substitute if buyers value the additional functions. This is not
always the case, however, since wider functionality may come at the
expense of the quality of performance of particular key functions. For
example, personal computers that play video games have many more
functions than video game machines, but video game machines are still
easier to use and the games playable on them have better quality graphics.
Lower functionality usually reduces the value of the substitute but this can
be offset by the corresponding reduction in price or superior performance of
the narrower range of functions. Changing functionality can not only affect
buyer performance but also alter the buyer’s cost of use, as the electronic
cash register example demonstrated.
Attaching a value to additional functions (or missing functions) that
affect performance in RVP calculations is often difﬁcult, just as it is in
differentiation analysis. The problem is particularly severe in consumer
goods, because buyer performance often involves satisfying intangible
needs. The principle of valuing different functionality is to examine how the
functions involved impact the buyer’s value chain, and calculate the effect
on buyer cost or performance. One approach to valuing particular functions
is to look for stand-alone products that perform the functions, and see what
buyers are willing to pay for them. Valuing differences in functions that


---PAGE BREAK---

affect buyer cost is typically easier than valuing those that affect buyer
performance.
Cost and Performance of Complementary Products. The effect of a
substitute on buyer cost and performance may be a function of the cost and
performance of complementary products used with it relative to those used
with the product.2 For example, movie theaters face the threat of
substitution by home TV and videotape recorders, among other products.
The cost to the buyer of going to a movie in a theater includes the time and
cost of transportation to the theater and parking, and the cost of buying
popcorn. The cost of these complementary purchases that are not necessary
with home entertainment is one of the reasons movies fell from 8.2 percent
of U.S. recreational expenditures in 1936 to under 3 percent by the mid-
1970s.3 Similarly, substitution of recreational vehicles such as motor homes
depends on such complements as gasoline, roads, and campgrounds.
Uncertainty. There is usually some uncertainty involved in how a
substitute will affect the buyer’s cost or performance, and this must be
reﬂected in the RVP calculation. One major source of uncertainty is the
possibility that the substitute will be improved in subsequent generations of
the product. This can substantially delay switching by buyers. Uncertainty
can be introduced into RVP by lowering the assumed value of a substitute
by some discount factor.
Perception of Value. It is the buyer’s perception of the RVP of a
substitute that will determine the threat of a substitute, not necessarily the
reality of RVP. Buyer awareness of a substitute is often not as great as that
of the established product, and knowledge about the beneﬁts and features of
a substitute is often incomplete. Relative inability to signal value will thus
effectively reduce the perceived RVP of a substitute. Buyers are least likely
to perceive the beneﬁts of a substitute when:
• the advantage of the substitute is in lowering the costs of use over time
rather than immediately
• the advantages of the substitute are indirect and involve a number of
value activities rather than direct advantages in the value activity in


---PAGE BREAK---

which the substitute is employed
• the advantages of the substitute are in raising performance over time
rather than immediately
• gaining the advantages of the substitute requires a signiﬁcant change in
behavior or use patterns by the buyer
• the credibility of the substitute’s beneﬁt is hard to assess
In all these cases, a buyer may not fully understand the impact of a
substitute on its value chain; hence the need for signaling value through a
variety of means is great. The substitution of robotics for conventional
production equipment, described earlier, is a good example of a substitution
where accurate perception of value has been a barrier to substitution,
particularly in the United States relative to Japan.
While it is more common that buyers have difﬁculty recognizing the
value of a substitute, sometimes the opposite occurs. Sometimes
substitution occurs for glamour or to appear progressive, with little
understanding of the actual value of the substitute. In power supplies, for
example, some buyers are changing to the new switch mode technology
whose needs are probably better met by the older linear technology. In such
cases, time may lower the perception of a substitute’s actual value.
A substitute signals value in the same ways a ﬁrm does generally (see
Chapter 4), using tools such as advertising, the sales force, demonstrations,
and placement of units with opinion leaders. The stock of knowledge about
a substitute as well as the expenditures by the substitute industry on
signaling will determine how accurately the value of a substitute is
perceived. Word of mouth and other sources of information not directly
controlled by a ﬁrm are also vital.
Switching Costs
Substitution always involves some costs of switching to the substitute for
the buyer, which are weighed against RVP. The higher the switching cost
relatively, the more difﬁcult substitution will be. Switching costs in
substitution are analogous to those of changing from one supplier to another
in an industry.4 Switching costs are usually higher in substitution than in


---PAGE BREAK---

switching suppliers, however, because substitution may require switching to
a new supplier plus switching to a new way of performing a function.
Switching costs potentially arise from all the impacts a substitute has on
the buyer’s value chain. Both the value activity in which the substitute is
employed as well as other value activities it indirectly affects may require
one-time costs of changeover. Switching costs most common in substitution
are the following:
Identifying and Qualifying Sources. Finding sources for the substitute
and gathering information about them are switching costs. So is the need to
test a substitute to see if it meets performance standards. The cost of
qualifying a 64K memory chip to replace a 16K chip has been estimated at
$50,000, for example, and the process can take as long as a year.
Cost of Redesign or Reformulation. A buyer’s product or value activities
must often be redesigned to accept a substitute. Reformulating a consumer
food product to accept high-fructose corn syrup instead of sugar, for
example, requires out-of-pocket costs as well as the time and opportunity
cost involved in testing the reformulated product. Redesign costs can affect
many value activities. The layout of an entire plant must be changed to get
the beneﬁts of a new materials handling system, for example. Similarly,
purchasing synthetically produced gas made from coal gasiﬁcation instead
of natural gas requires a user to modify gas burning equipment because of
synthetic gas’s slightly different qualities. The cost of redesign or
reformulation will be lower if the buyer is changing product generations or
building a new facility anyway.
Retraining or Relearning Costs. Switching to a substitute often requires
learning how to use the substitute or changing use patterns. A typist who
has been using a manual typewriter must get used to the much lighter touch
of an electric one, for example, while a cook must learn a new set of
cooking procedures to use a microwave. Similarly, plant engineers and
maintenance personnel must go down the learning curve with a new type of
machine tool.


---PAGE BREAK---

The cost of retraining includes the cost of downtime and higher reject
rates during the shakedown period and other such costs besides the out-of-
pocket costs of learning or training themselves. Retraining costs will be
highest where a substitute is used very differently from the product. Shifting
from black and white to color TV is easy, for example, while shifting from
conventional ovens to microwave ovens requires learning about oven
operation, procedures, cooking times, and how to get the best results with
different foods.
Changing Role of the User. Quite apart from the need to learn new
behavior, substitution frequently involves a change in role for the user that
can be a positive or negative inﬂuence on the cost of switching. Automating
a manufacturing process can relegate equipment operators or engineers to
passive or noncritical roles, for example, which can be reﬂected in subtle or
open resistance to a substitute. A husband or wife who cooks for the family
may resist a food product that removes all the opportunity for a personal
touch that demonstrates caring.
Risk of Failure. The risk that a substitute will fail to perform is a cost of
switching. The cost of failure will vary widely from product to product. In
ﬁber optics, the severe consequences of failure because of the role of ﬁber
optics as the communications link in larger systems have made buyers
conservative in switching from copper wire and cable.
New Ancillary Products. Changing to a substitute may require
investments in new related equipment or material such as testing gear, spare
parts, and software. While the cost of use of such ancillary products is
included in the RVP of a substitute, the one-time cost of reequipping is a
cost of switching. The need to invest in new ancillary products depends
primarily on the compatibility of the equipment or parts used with the
substitute with those used with the product, and the extent to which the
substitute involves different types of interfaces with related products. Like
redesign costs, the cost of investing in new ancillary products is lowest
when the ancillary products would have been replaced anyway.


---PAGE BREAK---

Switching Costs Versus Switching Back Costs. Both the cost of failure of
a substitute and the risk that its RVP will shift adversely are a function of
the cost of switching back to the original product. If it is easy and
inexpensive to switch back, the risk of switching is lower. The cost of
switching back to the original product is usually less than the cost of
switching to the substitute, because prior use of the product implies that the
buyer already knows how to use it and has the required ancillary products.
However, some switching costs, such as changeover costs and layout
changes, cannot be avoided in switching back. There may also be some
unique cost of switching back, such as confusing the buyer.
The cost of switching back usually rises as a function of the time since
substitution, though some switching back costs are typically present no
matter how short the experience with the substitute is. The relationship
between switching cost and switching back costs has implications for
substitution strategy that I will discuss below.
Buyer Propensity to Substitute
Buyers with different circumstances and in different industries do not all
have equal propensities to substitute when faced with a comparable
economic motivation. Differences in their circumstances lead buyers to
respond to a given RVP and switching cost differently. While such
differences might be treated as factors that modify RVP or switching costs,
it is more helpful in practice to isolate them.
Resources. Substitution often involves up-front investments of capital
and other resources. Access to such resources will differ from one buyer to
another.
Risk Proﬁle. Buyers often have very different risk proﬁles, the result of
such things as their past history, age and income, ownership structure,
background and orientation of management, and nature of competition in
their industry. Buyers prone to risk taking are more likely to substitute than
buyers that are risk-averse.


---PAGE BREAK---

Technological Orientation. Buyers experienced with technological
change may be less concerned with some kinds of substitution risks, while
extremely aware of others that a less technologically sophisticated buyer
would be oblivious to.
Previous Substitutions. The second substitution may be easier for a buyer
than the ﬁrst, unless the ﬁrst substitution has been a failure. The buyer’s
uncertainties over undertaking a substitution may have diminished if a past
substitution has been successful, or risen if a past substitution has led to
difﬁculties. In the soft drink industry, this seems to have worked to the
beneﬁt of aspartame.
Intensity of Rivalry. Buyers under intense competitive pressure and
searching for competitive advantage will tend to substitute more quickly to
gain a given advantage than those that are not.
Generic Strategy. The RVP of a substitute will have different signiﬁcance
depending on the competitive advantage that industrial, commercial, or
institutional buyers are seeking or the value of time and particular
performance needs of the household buyer. A substitute that offers a cost
saving will tend to be of more interest to a cost leader than a differentiator,
for example.
Many of these factors that shape the buyer’s propensity to substitute will
be a function of the particular decision maker who is involved in the
purchase decision.
Segmentation and Substitution
Both the identity of substitutes and the threat of substitution often differ
by industry segment. This is because the economics of substitution are
different for different product varieties and buyers, reﬂecting their structural
and value chain differences. Thus a merging of the analysis in Chapter 7
and that in this chapter will not only expose differences in the substitution
threat among segments but also assist in the construction of the industry
segmentation matrix itself.


---PAGE BREAK---

The threat of substitution will vary by buyer group if RVP, switching
costs, or the propensity to substitute vary. The RVP of a substitute often
varies among buyers in an industry because of differences in how they use a
product, the value they attach to various product attributes, and the other
impacts of the product on their value chain. In the racetrack case discussed
earlier, for example, buyers attending primarily for entertainment will have
different substitutes than buyers attending primarily for gambling.
Similarly, the advantages of radial truck tires in mileage and retreading
ability will have more value to a long-haul ﬂeet operator than to a local
pickup and delivery service. In the same vein, the value of the convenience
of disposable diapers is probably higher to families with two working
spouses than to families in which one spouse stays home.
Switching costs also differ from buyer to buyer within an industry.
Retraining costs are a function of existing procedures. The need for
redesign or new ancillary products will relate to the speciﬁcs of how a
product is used. Buyer propensity to substitute can also vary dramatically
among buyers, a function of buyer resources, orientation, and so on. In
many consumer goods, for example, substitution occurs ﬁrst with high-
income buyers who have the resources to purchase new items while they are
expensive.
A good example of how substitution threat varies by buyer segment is in
the adoption of personal computers by small businesses. Personal
computers are a substitute for manual methods (e.g., standard ofﬁce
machines) and computer service bureaus. As Figure 8–1 indicates, the
degree of penetration of personal computers in small businesses is
correlated to the size of the business. Personal computers have penetrated
much further within larger companies because those ﬁrms have more
complex paperwork needs and thus a greater need for automation, and also
greater resources to invest in capital purchases.
The substitution threat can vary not only for buyer segments but also for
different product varieties, geographic areas, and channels. In each case the
substitute may perform different functions or be used in different ways and
hence its RVP or switching costs may differ. Full-size ofﬁce typewriters are
more vulnerable to substitution from word processors than are portable
electric typewriters, for example, because the special features and correcting


---PAGE BREAK---

capabilities of word processors are more valuable in ofﬁce uses than for
intermittent personal typing.
The penetration of a substitute often follows such segment differences. A
substitute penetrates by expanding the number of segments it serves,
penetrating new segments in order of the size of RVP of the substitute and
the cost of switching in them. Thus the interaction of segmentation and
substitution is often vital to understanding the path of substitution, a subject
that I will treat below.
Figure 8–1. Use of Personal Computers in Small Business, 1981
Changes in the Substitution Threat


---PAGE BREAK---

The threat of a substitute often changes over time, with a corresponding
impact on the pattern of substitution. Many of the sources of change in the
substitution threat are predictable and can often be inﬂuenced through a
ﬁrm’s offensive or defensive substitution strategy. Changes in the threat of
substitution occur in ﬁve broadly deﬁned areas that follow directly from the
economics of substitution:
• changes in relative price
• changes in relative value
• changes in buyer perception of value
• changes in switching cost
• changes in propensity to substitute
Relative price will change if (1) the relative costs of a substitute and the
product change, and the change is partially or completely passed on to
buyers, or (2) their relative proﬁt margins change. Relative value will
change if valuable improvements proceed at different rates for the substitute
and the product. Buyer perception of value will be a function of information
dissemination. Switching cost will change if a substitute is redesigned or if
early substituters bear some of the cost for later switchers. Buyer propensity
to switch will be a function of evolving buyer attitudes, resources and
competitive conditions.
Changes in the threat of substitution over time are determined by
industry structure and competitor behavior in both the substitute industry
and the threatened industry, with the substitute industry on the offensive and
the threatened industry on the defensive. The two industries are engaged in
a battle to inﬂuence the substitution process. Industry structure will shape
the nature of competition in both industries and the way ﬁrms behave
toward the substitution process. Because competitors’ moves will inﬂuence
the course of the substitution process in one direction or another, where
competitors place bets is vital. If competitors in the substitute industry are
better capitalized, for example, they can tip the balance in its favor because
they will make greater investments to reduce costs, signal value, or set low
initial prices. Similarly, other competitor strategic moves can impact the
substitution process, such as RCA’s decision to widely license its color TV
patents. Determining future changes in the threat of substitution is thus an


---PAGE BREAK---

exercise in forecasting the effects of industry structure and competitor
behavior on each of the components of the substitution calculation.
Some important determinants of changes in each of the ﬁve areas that
determine substitution are as follows:5
CHANGING RELATIVE PRICE
Changes in Relative Cost. A substitute and a product are in a
competition to improve relative cost. A substitute often improves its relative
cost as substitution proceeds through the operation of economies of scale or
the learning curve. For example, the price of carbon ﬁbers fell from $100
per pound in the early 1970s to $20 to $25 in 1982 for these reasons,
promoting the substitution of carbon ﬁbers for steel and aluminum in
automotive and aircraft applications. Another factor that often lowers the
relative cost of a substitute over time is that technological change reduces
the amount necessary to perform the required function, as illustrated in the
aluminum and offshore drilling examples earlier in this chapter. Such
improvements, of course, come at the expense of the volume of the
substitute sold. A substitute’s cost can just as easily escalate, however, if its
success forces up the cost of its key raw materials.
There may be fewer opportunities to reduce cost in the industry being
threatened by a substitute because of its age and maturity. Moreover,
penetration of the substitute may reduce the scale and capacity utilization of
ﬁrms in the threatened industry, raising their costs. However, industries that
have been sleepy have achieved remarkable cost reductions under the threat
of a substitute, so one cannot generalize about how relative costs will
change.
The relative cost behavior of a substitute over time is analyzed using the
framework in Chapter 3. The important cost drivers for both the substitute
and the product should be identiﬁed. Cost behavior over time will be a
function of the interplay of these cost drivers coupled with the likely
behavior of competitors. Sometimes the projection of past cost trends for
the substitute and the product will clearly indicate future relative cost. It is
dangerous to count on the continuation of past trends, however, because the
threatened industry may respond and the early pace of cost reduction by the
substitute may be unsustainable. Predicting relative cost changes thus often


---PAGE BREAK---

requires that the impact of increasing scale, learning, and other factors on
cost is estimated for a substitute and compared to the ability of the product
to reduce cost through redesign, relocation, or introduction of new process
technologies. The sources of cost dynamics described in Chapter 3 will
suggest other important relative cost changes that might occur, such as
differential inﬂation.
Changes in Proﬁt Margins. The prices of a substitute and a product
contain proﬁt margins.6 The relative proﬁt margins of a substitute and a
product are a key factor that can shift over time. A common reason for the
change in relative margins is that the threatened industry lowers its margins
to ﬁght the substitute. Video game margins are falling rapidly to ﬁght
personal computers, for example. The extent to which a threatened
industry’s margins can be reduced before ﬁrms begin to exit is a function of
how high margins were initially, and whether exit barriers keep ﬁrms in the
industry despite low returns.
The margins of a substitute can also change as substitution proceeds,
depending on industry structure in the substitute industry. If early entrants
into the substitute industry were skimming and entry barriers are not high,
the substitute’s margins can fall dramatically as new companies enter. Initial
success in penetration may also lead ﬁrms selling the substitute to set low
penetration prices. Rivalry in selling a substitute often increases over time
as it becomes more standardized and explosive growth slackens, as is
happening in personal computers. Increasing penetration of the substitute
may also raise the threat of backward integration by buyers. All these
factors can squeeze a substitute’s margins. Margins of a substitute and a
product, then, will be a function of the inﬂuence of their changing industry
structures over time, partly in response to each other.
CHANGING RELATIVE VALUE
The relative value to the buyer of a substitute will often change because
of changing technology, better service, and a myriad of other causes.
Producers of a substitute may gain expertise in tailoring their value chains
to meet buyer needs, though producers of the threatened product will look
for ways to enhance value as well. While any of the factors that determine
buyer value described in Chapter 4 may be changing, three important


---PAGE BREAK---

sources of change are the relative pace of technological change in the
substitute and the product, the development of infrastructure, and
institutional factors.
A substitute and the threatened product are engaged in a technological
race to see which can improve value faster. The likely pace and extent of
technological change can be analyzed using the concepts in Chapter 5. A
substitute may have the edge in technological change if it is a new industry,
but several examples in Chapter 5 have shown how a threatened product or
process can often achieve signiﬁcant technological improvements. The
relative pace of technological change is also strongly inﬂuenced by the
resources and skills of competitors. In the substitution of plastics and
aluminum for steel, for example, the greater technological orientation of
plastics and aluminum ﬁrms was one of the factors leading to a faster pace
of change in those industries.
RVP often changes in favor of the substitute over time as better
infrastructure develops to support it. As a substitute becomes established,
for example, it frequently spawns independent repair shops and is added to
the product lines of established wholesalers. Availability improves and the
perceived risk of shortages falls.
RVP of a substitute can also change as a result of a wide variety of other
exogenous inﬂuences and institutional factors. The rapid substitution of
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) for materials such as aluminum in residential
siding was set back by the revelation that vinyl chloride was a possible
carcinogen. Similarly, the penetration of solar heating has been buffeted by
shifts in government policy and a ﬂuctuating energy price outlook, while
the relative value of food products has been altered by rising concerns about
cholesterol and sodium. Such exogenous inﬂuences are often as hard to
predict as they are powerful.
CHANGING BUYER PERCEPTION OF VALUE
The perception of value by buyers frequently changes over time in
substitution because time and marketing activity are working to alter the
way buyers view a substitute compared to a product. A substitute may gain
in perceived value position over time as buyers become more and more
familiar with how to use it. One of the inhibiting factors in the use of carbon


---PAGE BREAK---

ﬁbers in aircraft wings and other applications (as a substitute for steel,
titanium, or aluminum), for example, has been that most engineers had no
idea how to design with ﬁbers. Yet the properties of carbon ﬁbers are
sufﬁciently unique that their beneﬁts can be fully reaped only if the designer
understands the material. As this has begun to happen, the perceived value
of ﬁbers is increasing. While time often beneﬁts a substitute, it can also hurt
it. Many substitutes emerge amid overinﬂated buyer perceptions of their
value, and time and trial are moderating inﬂuences.
The perception of a substitute and a product can also be affected by the
relative intensity and creativity of signaling activities. Campaigns to
increase the awareness of a substitute are pitted against efforts by the
threatened industry to improve its perceived value. The U.S. record
industry, for example, has responded to ﬂattening sales at the expense of
video entertainment products with its “Gift of Music” campaign. Record
manufacturers contribute one-half cent per record for advertising, stressing
the value of records as a gift. The appropriate signaling activities will
depend on signaling criteria for the product.
CHANGING SWITCHING COSTS
The costs of switching to a substitute often change over time, frequently
in a downward direction. One reason is that early switchers can bear some
of the costs for later switchers, by developing procedures, designs, or
standards. An early switcher from steel to aluminum beverage cans, for
example, might develop product standards and methods of lithographing
labels on the cans that can easily be copied. Switching costs can also fall
over time because the substitute is redesigned to be more compatible with
ancillary equipment, or suppliers develop procedures to minimize the
buyer’s switching costs. In addition, third parties may spring up to lower the
cost of switching, such as consultants, installers and training ﬁrms. In ofﬁce
equipment, for example, consultants and training ﬁrms are proliferating to
ease the changeover to ofﬁce automation.
Switching costs are partly determined by a buyer’s technological
choices, and thus change over time as buyers alter their products and
processes. In the substitution of aluminum for steel and cast iron, for
example, new buyer technology has reduced switching costs. Automakers


---PAGE BREAK---

have built more ﬂexible plants that can machine either aluminum or cast
iron, while can makers’ new lines can accept both aluminum and tinplate
can stock.
CHANGING PROPENSITY TO SWITCH
The propensity to switch to a successful substitute frequently grows over
time. Early success with a substitute allays buyer risk aversion, at the same
time as competitive considerations lead buyers to switch so as not to have a
disadvantage relative to early switchers.
Substitution and Overall Industry Demand
In addition to taking share from existing products, a substitute can raise
or lower overall industry demand. A substitute with a longer useful life than
the product it is replacing will lower overall demand after the initial period
when the substitute stimulates faster replacement. This pattern seems to
have occurred in the substitution of longer-lasting radial tires for bias ply
tires.
The penetration of a substitute can also increase overall industry demand
if the substitute expands the industry or increases the usage or replacement
rate. Portable cassette players such as Sony’s Walkman, for example, have
surely expanded the total market for cassette players at the same time as
they have taken share from conventional cassette players. Similarly, the
introduction of disposable ballpoint pens, championed by BIC Corporation,
led to substitution for conventional pens but also stimulated the purchase of
more ballpoint pens per buyer. Any impact of a substitute on overall
demand for a product must be combined with a forecast of the path of
substitution in order to predict the absolute volume of sales of a substitute
over time.
Substitution and Industry Structure
Penetration of a substitute may have second order effects on the resulting
industry structure. A substitute may shift the buyer’s cost structure, for


---PAGE BREAK---

example, in ways that increase or decrease price sensitivity. A substitute
may also require new suppliers, and entry barriers may differ from those of
the product it replaces. Thus the substitute must be analyzed as a new
industry, not merely as a change in product. The substitute industry can be
more or less attractive structurally than the industry it replaces, a fact that
has important implications for strategy towards a substitute.
The Path of Substitution
The path of substitution in an industry is a function of how RVP, the
perception of RVP, switching costs, and the propensity of buyers to switch
evolve over time. The rate of penetration of substitutes differs widely from
industry to industry. Some substitutes gain quick acceptance, while others
penetrate slowly or not at all and are discontinued. In many industries,
however, the path of substitution for successful substitutes looks like an S-
curve, when substitution as a percent of total demand is plotted against time
(see Figure 8–2).
The S-shaped substitution curve is closely related to the familiar product
life cycle curve, because products early in their life cycles are frequently
substituting for some other products. An S-shaped substitution path is not
characteristic of every successful substitution. However, it is important to
understand why an S-curve might occur so that the economic factors that
underlie it are recognized.7 Where the underlying economics of a particular
substitution suggest an S-curve path, a number of techniques are available
to help forecast the rate of substitution.
In an S-curve path such as that shown in Figure 8–2, substitution is
initially modest and often continues at low levels for a considerable period
of time in what can be called the “informing and testing phase.” Unless a
product ﬂaw emerges with the substitute or the threatened industry responds
to nullify the substitute’s advantages, the penetration of the substitute then
often climbs rapidly in a “takeoff phase” toward an upper bound that
represents maximum penetration. This upper bound is determined by the
number of buyers for whom the substitute is potentially valuable. The upper
bound of substitution can itself change over time as changes in technology
or buyer needs bring buyers in or out of the pool.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 8–2. A Typical S-Shaped Substitution Path
The reasons that an S-shaped substitution curve occurs reﬂect a set of
assumptions about the interplay of actual and perceived RVP, switching
costs, and the buyer’s propensity to switch over time. Initially, the
performance of a substitute is likely to be uncertain, and there may be few
capable ﬁrms to supply it. Many buyers are not even aware of the substitute
or what its characteristics are. The price of the substitute is likely to be high
because of its low volume or because suppliers are skim-pricing. Though
the value of the substitute is often uncertain, however, the cost of switching
is usually very clear and made particularly high by the unfamiliarity of both
buyers and suppliers with how the substitute should be used. Moreover, the
cost of switching must be borne up front, before the beneﬁts of the
substitute are realized.
During the informing and testing period, some adventurous buyers or
buyers who attach a particularly high value to the substitute’s qualities will
switch to the substitute to experiment with it or will switch permanently
because the RVP of the substitute to them appears particularly high. During
this period, either the substitute begins to prove its value or product ﬂaws
become apparent. The product ﬂaws prove uncorrectable (and penetration
never increases), or the substitute is improved (sometimes the substitute is
completely withdrawn from the market and then reintroduced). At the same
time, marketing activity and word of mouth tend to widen the group of


---PAGE BREAK---

buyers that are aware of the substitute and thus the perception of value
improves.8
Assuming that the substitute eventually achieves acceptable performance
with early buyers, the rate of penetration of the substitute can start to
increase rapidly along the S-pattern for a number of reasons. First, the
uncertainty of perceived value and the risk of failure of the substitute both
fall as early buyers have successful experiences. Second, once a few buyers
successfully switch, competitive pressures force other buyers to switch to
maintain their cost position or differentiation (or self-image for consumers).
Third, the cost of switching may decline for reasons discussed earlier.
Fourth, rising adoption leads to increasing awareness of the substitute and
raises its credibility. Fifth, rising penetration of the substitute often reduces
its cost through economies of scale and learning.9 Sixth, introduction of
new varieties of the substitute opens up new industry segments. Finally,
increasing penetration of the substitute prompts its suppliers to become
more aggressive in pricing, marketing, and R&D, often as a result of entry
by new competitors into the substitute industry. All of these factors tend to
be self-reinforcing, and can lead to the extremely rapid penetration of the
substitute.
Eventually, the penetration of a substitute begins to approach 100 percent
of the buyers to which the substitute is attractive. As this happens,
penetration tends to level off as the penetration of new buyers becomes
more and more difﬁcult. However, improvements in RVP or new varieties of
a substitute may widen the pool of potential buyers beyond those initially
foreseen, fueling new opportunities for growth of the substitute. The upper
bound in Figure 8–2 can thus expand to contain a larger and larger number
of buyers.
At the same time, the buyers’ usage of the substitute may change in ways
that increase or decrease demand. In TV sets, for example, sales of black
and white sets were very robust even after color sets began to penetrate
because buyers bought second, third, and even fourth TV sets. Similarly, in
the substitution of electric shavers for conventional razors, the recent
introduction of small, portable electric razors may well be shifting the upper
bound of penetration of electric shavers by making them more versatile and
less expensive. Thus the upper bound in Figure 8–2 can include a growing
volume of units.


---PAGE BREAK---

The length of the informing and testing phase is a function of a number
of factors. Clearly important is the size of the RVP improvement offered by
the substitute—the bigger the inducement, the shorter the period will be.
The length of time necessary to prove the performance of a substitute also
differs by product, and can greatly inﬂuence the length of the testing period.
The performance of an automatic drip coffee maker can be proven in weeks
or months, for example, while a new piece of capital equipment may require
years of production line testing to assess its true performance. The period
required for the industry producing the substitute to make necessary
improvements in performance or cost, and to build adequate capacity to
serve major buyers, also inﬂuences the length of the testing phase. Finally,
the intensity of competition of the buyer’s industry and the signiﬁcance of
the speciﬁc RVP of the substitute to that competition inﬂuence the length of
the testing phase, by determining the pressures for imitation if one buyer
switches to a substitute.
The steepness of the takeoff phase is a function of how compelling in an
industry are the reasons for rising penetration described above. In selling a
substitute to an intensely competitive buyer industry, for example, takeoff
can be very rapid. The steepness of takeoff is also a function of the time
required to change over to a substitute and the adequacy of capacity. The
purchasing cycle in the buyer industry is also important, because buyers are
more likely to switch to a substitute when they would normally reorder or
replace the product anyway. This reduces the switching costs associated
with scrapping a product which has years of useful life remaining or where
the buyer has substantial inventory on hand. For similar reasons, switching
to a substitute in durable goods tends to occur faster when the buyer
industry is growing and therefore investing in new facilities and equipment.
The response of the threatened industry is also clearly important to the
path of substitution. An aggressive response by the threatened industry can
sometimes stop the penetration of a substitute altogether or delay it
considerably. Conversely, entry into the substitute industry by credible
competitors can accelerate penetration, as IBM’s entry into personal
computers and Kodak’s entry into instant cameras seem to have done.
Smooth substitution curves such as the one portrayed in Figure 8–2 are
most characteristic of industries where there are many buyers of a
substitute. Where there are few buyers, a decision by a major buyer can


---PAGE BREAK---

dramatically shift the curve overnight. In such cases, substitution analysis is
best conducted on a buyer-by-buyer basis.
Segmentation and the Substitution Path
The substitution path in an industry is often very closely related to
industry segmentation. Early penetration occurs in industry segments where
a substitute offers the highest RVP, requires the lowest switching costs,
and/or encounters the most adventurous or highest value buyers. Early
segments support the cost reduction or performance improvement necessary
to penetrate later segments. The high value of the substitute to early
segments either offsets the high initial cost of the substitute, or allows its
producers to earn extremely high proﬁts. Margins often will fall over time
in the substitute industry as additional segments are penetrated where the
substitute has lower value.
The substitution of minicomputers provides a good example of how the
substitution path relates to industry segmentation. The early segments
penetrated by minicomputers were scientiﬁc and computer center
applications where computational power was needed but where users could
do their own programming, adapt machines to their needs, and perform
some maintenance in-house. Later penetration was in applications such as
industrial controls, where the buyer was still sophisticated and support
requirements were moderate. Only after some time did minicomputers
develop the service and support capabilities to penetrate small business
applications.
The same factors that lead to early penetration in some segments also
mean that the rate of penetration within segments will vary. Since segments
vary in RVP and switching costs, penetration will proceed much faster in
some segments than others. Hence the industry substitution curve is actually
a collection of segment substitution curves.
Substitution Forecasting Models
The observation that successful substitution often follows an S-shaped
penetration curve can be used in forecasting. A variety of models that are


---PAGE BREAK---

based on the assumption of S-shaped penetration have grown out of
research on diffusion processes. Data from the early years of a substitution
can be used to forecast the entire substitution curve using such models,
under the assumption that an S-shaped process will occur. The forecasted
substitution curve may then become a base case from which an analysis of
the underlying economics of a substitution can begin. Adjusting the
standard S-shaped curve to reﬂect the economics of a particular substitution
allows a prediction of the extent of substitution in future years. The premise
underlying such a procedure is that the tendency toward an S-shaped
penetration curve is strong enough so that the plotting of such a curve—
derived from the early penetration data—is a useful beginning point for
analysis.
The most commonly used diffusion model is the so-called “logistic
function,” a form of exponential function.10 The functional form of the
relationship as applied to substitution is as follows:
where F = fraction of the total potential market that has switched to a
substitute
K = a constant set equal to the early growth rate of a substitute
The logistic function makes two important assumptions: (1) if
substitution has progressed as far as a few percent, it will proceed to
completion; and (2) the fractional rate of fractional substitution of a
substitute for the product is proportional to the remaining amount of the
product left to be substituted for. It is the latter assumption that produces the
S-curve shape. If F/(1—F) is plotted as a function of time on
semilogarithmic paper, the logistic function results in a substitution curve
that is a straight line with the slope K as shown in Figure 8–3.11
If the logic underlying an S-shaped substitution curve is believed to hold
in a particular substitution process, as well as the assumption about a
constant fractional rate of fractional substitution, the logistic function can
be used to forecast the path of substitution that will occur. To do this, data
on substitution history are used to determine F/(1 — F) for each year. Then


---PAGE BREAK---

F/(1 — F) is plotted on semilogarithmic paper against time, and a straight
line is ﬁtted through the early history. Extending this line projects the future
substitution path under the assumption that it will follow the logistic
curve.12
Figure 8–3. A Typical Logistic Curve
The procedure is shown in Figure 8–4, which plots the early substitution
history of aluminum for steel in beer cans. The early history ﬁts the logistic
curve quite closely. Based on this history, we could expect the extent of
substitution by 1982 to be approximately 91 percent if the assumptions of
the logistic curve hold. The accuracy of this forecast, however, depends on
how well the logistic curve reﬂects the economics of substitution in the
particular industry. One important issue is the size of the potential market,
and hence the upper bound. In the beverage can case the upper bound is
fairly clear. Where the upper bound is increasing, the logistic curve will
have a tendency to overestimate the rate of penetration. Another important
issue later in the substitution process is whether the intensity of use of the
substitute required to perform its function will change over time.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 8–4. Early Substitution of Steel for Aluminum in Beer Cans
Perhaps the most important issue in whether substitution will follow the
logistic curve growing out of the early substitution history is the extent to
which the RVP that is driving the substitution will change over time. The
logistic curve assumes a stable motivation for substitution. If RVP falls, the
penetration of a substitute may actually decrease, something that never
happens with the logistic curve. If the RVP of a substitute improves, on the
other hand, the rate of penetration will increase from early history—the
substitution path may jump to a new curve. Figure 8–5 illustrates how this
has actually happened in beer cans.
After 1976, the introduction of two-piece steel can technology helped
slow the penetration of aluminum cans. Working with steel companies,


---PAGE BREAK---

Crown Cork and Seal introduced a cheaper way of making steel cans that
reduced the RVP of aluminum cans. In 1978, however, Miller Beer (number
two in the beer industry) announced a major test of aluminum cans against
steel. The rate of substitution slowed further pending the outcome. Miller’s
decision in 1979 was to switch to aluminum. Once Miller’s switch occurred,
substitution accelerated to a faster pace than before 1976, in part because
Miller legitimized the substitute. An additional factor in the faster
penetration of aluminum after 1979 was the growing recycling of aluminum
cans, which are more recyclable than steel cans. As infrastructure allowed
for more widespread recycling, the RVP of aluminum became even better
than before because recycling reduced the cost of metal. By 1982,
penetration of aluminum was actually about 98 percent instead of the 91
percent that would have been forecasted using the early history.
As the beverage can example illustrates, the logistic curve is not a
substitute for substitution analysis. It is a simple tool that can serve as a
starting point for more careful analysis of the economics of substitution.13
The substitution path will vary from industry to industry, and will be
affected by technological changes and competitive moves. In order for the
logistic curve to be meaningfully used, the factors that determine RVP,
switching costs, and propensity to substitute in a particular industry must be
understood and expected changes in them forecasted. Since the economics
of a substitute often differ by industry segment, logistic curves should
usually be plotted at the segment level and not the industry level. Beer
producers, for example, have different needs in cans than other can users. A
logistic curve for aluminum’s substitution against steel in cans overall
would not be as meaningful as one for beer cans alone.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 8–5. Substitution of Steel for Aluminum in Beer Cans
Substitution and Competitive Strategy
The economics of substitution carry a variety of strategic implications
for ﬁrms attempting to promote substitution, as well as for ﬁrms attempting
to defend against it. Defenses against substitution are, by and large, the
reverse of offensive strategies that promote substitution. I will ﬁrst describe
some principles of promoting substitution and then turn to defense.
Promoting Substitution


---PAGE BREAK---

A ﬁrm can trigger or accelerate substitution through strategic moves that
enhance RVP, lower switching costs, or raise the propensity of buyers to
switch. While none of these moves are without costs and risks, the
following concepts for promoting substitution can be considered:
1.  Target early switchers. As the section “Segmentation and
Substitution” emphasized, some buyers and buyer segments in an industry
will be much more likely to adopt a substitute than others because of greater
RVP from the substitute, lower switching costs, or greater propensity to
switch. The order of segments that are targeted for penetration is one of the
most important components of a substitution strategy. A ﬁrm attempting
substitution should focus its efforts on the most likely early switchers ﬁrst,
and use the track record it gains with these buyers and their support to
trigger the self-reinforcing takeoff phase. Early switchers may be buyers
who are redesigning their products, are replacing equipment, face a pressing
need for the value the substitute provides, or are adventurous purchasers. To
reach these buyers, a ﬁrm may have to subsidize trial. For example, Mauna
Loa macadamia nuts are sold on very favorable terms to some airlines to
gain trial of target buyers.
2. Improve the ﬁrm’s offering in areas with the highest RVP impacts. The
impact of improvements in the product and elsewhere in the value chain on
substitution will be greater the more RVP is affected. With a sophisticated
understanding of the bases of RVP, drawn from the framework presented
earlier, a ﬁrm can determine its R&D and marketing priorities accordingly.
In color TV, for example, picture quality was much more important to RVP
initially than features or styling, given the preferences of buyers substituting
from black and white sets with high picture quality. Similarly, in many
industries the problem is not actual product performance but the buyer’s
uncertainty about it. Here, guarantees can be an effective tool to promote
substitution.
3. Reduce or subsidize switching costs. Investments to reduce switching
costs can have a major role in stimulating substitution, presuming a
substitute has superior RVP. A ﬁrm should direct part of its technical
development to improvements that lower switching costs, and create


---PAGE BREAK---

mechanisms for information dissemination among buyers that have the
same effect. This may be as simple as manuals or newsletters.
A ﬁrm may also ﬁnd it advantageous to subsidize switching costs for
some buyers. A ﬁrm need not subsidize the switching costs of all buyers,
but only a core group of buyers whose adoption of a substitute is likely to
trigger the takeoff phase. These buyers should be opinion leaders who will
serve as credible signals of value to other buyers. Subsidizing switching
costs can involve such things as free training, paying for product
reformulation or testing, supplying or assisting in the design of ancillary
equipment, providing free assistance in modifying production procedures,
giving high trade-in allowances, offering money-back guarantees, and
giving free in-home demonstrations.
4. Invest in signaling. A major barrier faced by a substitute may be the
lack of awareness and knowledge by potential buyers. A ﬁrm must identify
the most important signaling criteria used by buyers to judge the value of a
substitute, and invest to inﬂuence them. Buyers often misperceive the RVP
of a substitute, particularly where RVP is not obvious but has the
characteristics described earlier in this chapter. Hence the importance of
signaling can frequently be great to successful substitution.
5. Use tapered forward integration or induce backward integration to
create pull-through. A strategy practiced successfully by the aluminum
industry, among others, is to forward integrate selectively into downstream
products to create pull-through demand for a substitute. A related strategy is
to induce end users to backward integrate into the intermediate industry to
get around intermediate producers who are unwilling to substitute. By
integrating forward and creating demand with end users, a ﬁrm can
sometimes force recalcitrant intermediate buyers to bear the switching costs
of substitution. Forward integration can also demonstrate the performance
of the substitute, and be a means for developing procedures for its use or for
lowering switching cost.
Tapered forward integration is most effective where the end user faces
few, if any, costs of switching to a substitute, while intermediate buyers face
signiﬁcant switching costs. This was the case in metal cans, where beverage


---PAGE BREAK---

companies could switch to aluminum cans relatively easily but can
companies faced heavy investment costs in new equipment.
6. Ensure multiple sources and/or adequate capacity. Often major buyers
will not incur the costs and risk of substitution when there is only one
source for a substitute or if there is insufﬁcient capacity for it on stream to
meet expected future demand. Substitution can be accelerated by remedying
these concerns, through encouraging entry into the substitute industry or by
building capacity ahead of demand. This is an example of how good
competitors can beneﬁt a ﬁrm (Chapter 6).
7. Promote improvements in complementary products or infrastructure.
A ﬁrm can often improve RVP or switching costs if it can stimulate
improvements in the cost or quality of necessary complementary goods or
infrastructure. This may justify investing in technology for complementary
products and sharing the results freely with other ﬁrms. It may also suggest
the formation of joint ventures or other relationships with producers of
complementary goods, or creating needed infrastructure such as service
facilities.14 RCA originally trained many of the repair personnel who
serviced all color TV sets, for example.
8. Price to balance capturing R VP against creating barriers. The price
of a substitute must share some of the value created with the buyer in order
to give the buyer an inducement to switch. How close the price of a
substitute approaches RVP should depend on industry structure. Where
there are high entry barriers, a ﬁrm may be better off substituting slowly by
penetrating high-value segments ﬁrst at high prices and moving prices down
gradually to capture lower-value segments. Where there are ﬁrst-mover
advantages (Chapter 5), the ﬁrm instead should sacriﬁce short-term proﬁts
to penetrate quickly and build barriers that protect long-term proﬁts. With
low barriers, a ﬁrm must attempt to reap proﬁts quickly before entry erodes
its position.
9. Conceive of new functions to widen a substitute’s market. Conceiving
of new functions a substitute can perform may greatly expand the potential
market. This not only is important in product design and selecting features,


---PAGE BREAK---

but also in pricing strategy. In fresh ﬂowers, for example, European retailers
recognized that low prices could open up a whole new function for ﬂowers
—everyday use in decorating—in addition to the traditional use of fresh
ﬂowers in weddings and for other special occasions. As a result, the
European market for ﬂowers is much bigger than the U.S. market, where
pricing has tended to be higher. Many industries have accepted maturity of
demand rather than looked for new substitution possibilities.
10. Harvest if competitive position in the substitute is not sustainable.
Investments to build share in a substitute are indicated if a ﬁrm can sustain
its competitive advantage in the substitute industry and if the industry
structure is attractive. Otherwise, a ﬁrm may be better off skimming proﬁts
early in the substitution process rather than pricing to deter entry or widen
the market. A successful substitute is not necessarily a good business.
Defense Against Substitutes
The ﬁrst step in defense against substitutes is to identify all of them. This
is often a difﬁcult task, because it requires a look at the basic functions a
product performs. Strategies to combat substitutes are the reverse of many
of the steps described above:
• improve RVP relative to the substitute by reducing costs, improving the
product, improving complementary goods, etc.
• modify the product image
• raise switching costs
• block pull-through attempts by aggressive selling efforts directed at the
buyers’ buyers
Where switching back costs are high, a ﬁrm must invest aggressively in a
short-term holding action to deter switching while it seeks more
fundamental long-term improvements in RVP. With high switching back
costs, buyers lost to a substitute will be hard to regain.
In addition to these actions, a number of other possibilities in defending
against substitutes warrant consideration:


---PAGE BREAK---

1.  Find new uses unaffected by the substitute. Sometimes a product
facing substitution can be repositioned into entirely new uses. A good
example is Arm & Hammer baking soda. As a result of a ten-year
marketing campaign, Arm & Hammer is used in over 50 percent of
American refrigerators for odor control, a use that has far surpassed the
original use of baking soda.
2.  Redeﬁne competition away from the strengths of the substitute. A
substitute’s RVP advantage generally stems from either low price or certain
dimensions of value. A good defensive strategy may be to attempt to
inﬂuence industry competition away from these advantages. Repelling a low
price substitute might involve such actions as longer warranties, more
engineering support, or new product features.
3. Enlist suppliers to help in defense. Suppliers of important purchased
inputs often have a big stake in ﬁghting substitution too, and can bring
important resources and technological skills to the defense. Suppliers of
inputs that are large cost items or that have an important inﬂuence on value
are the best candidates for alliances.
4.  Redirect strategy toward segments least vulnerable to substitution.
Some product or buyer segments will be less vulnerable to substitution than
others. A ﬁrm under attack from substitutes may be better off focusing its
defensive investments on such segments. A ﬁrm may also exit from or
harvest its position in the segments most vulnerable to substitution. Early
withdrawal from these segments can allow the ﬁrm to generate the most
cash from harvesting or from liquidating assets, while exiting later will
generate little or no cash.15
5. Harvest instead of defend. Depending on the likely future RVP of a
substitute and the feasibility of defensive strategies, the best strategy for a
ﬁrm facing substitution may be to harvest its position instead of investing in
defense at all. Such strategy involves such actions as concentrating attention
on the segments where substitution will be the slowest, and raising prices.


---PAGE BREAK---

6. Enter the substitute industry. Rather than viewing a substitute as a
threat, it may be better to view it as an opportunity. Entering the substitute
industry may allow a ﬁrm to reap competitive advantages from
interrelationships between a substitute and the product, such as common
channels and buyers.16
Industry Versus Firm Substitution Strategy
A substitution process is partly under the control of a ﬁrm and partly a
function of the industry as a whole. No matter what it does, the individual
ﬁrm is affected by such things as the industry’s image and the consistency
of industrywide product offerings, which inﬂuence buyer attitude and
confusion about the beneﬁts of a substitute. This implies that industrywide
actions can usefully supplement individual ﬁrm efforts to promote or defend
against substitution. For example, New Zealand producers of kiwi fruit have
greatly stimulated its substitution for other fruits through an industry-
sponsored R&D program to breed one uniform variety of fruit (down from
twenty) and adoption of this single variety by all the growers.17 This
campaign has been reinforced by advertising of the fruit.
Some industrywide activities that can promote (or prevent) substitution
include:
• Image advertising of the product. Total industry advertising can affect
overall industry demand.
•  Collective R&D expenditures to develop uses for the product, or
techniques for integrating the product into buyers’ value chains.
• Establishment and enforcement of product standards to allay buyers’
fears of poor quality or inadequate performance.
•  Gaining the necessary regulatory approvals for the product to lower
buyers’ switching costs and perceived risks.
•  Joint actions to improve the quality, availability, and cost of
complementary products, thereby improving RVP.
Expenditures made by a ﬁrm to promote or discourage substitution also
may beneﬁt competitors, who get a free ride. In order to deal with this
problem, collective industry action through trade associations or other


---PAGE BREAK---

industry groups is a common approach to promoting or defending against
substitution. For example, the coal industry has recently embarked on a
television and print advertising campaign in the United States to improve
the image of coal as an abundant, easy-to-obtain, and “American” fuel.
Without some collective action, fragmented industries often have difﬁculty
promoting or ﬁghting substitution because of the free-rider problem.
Pitfalls in Strategy Against Substitutes
Substitution is a positive or negative force, to some degree, in every
industry. Yet ﬁrms often make some common errors in dealing with
substitutes. A discussion of these will provide a summary of some of the
important concepts in this chapter:
Failing to Perceive a Substitute. Firms often fail to recognize substitutes
at all until the substitution process is well under way, because they view
their product’s function too narrowly, do not recognize the different
substitutes faced by different segments, or overlook downstream
substitution.
Not Understanding R VP. The determinants of RVP are complex, and
ﬁrms often have a simplistic view of why a substitute is succeeding or
failing. For example, they may believe that superior product performance is
the cause of substitution when the real reason is lower cost of use for the
buyer because of easier installation. Not knowing why a substitute is
succeeding or failing can be a ticket to the wrong offensive or defensive
strategy, or to an unpleasant surprise when a substitute takes off.
Misreading of Slow Early Penetration. The slow early penetration of a
substitute can be misread as a sign that it is not a serious threat, rather than
as a manifestation of the S-shaped nature of the substitution process. While
many substitutes do indeed fail, slow early penetration is not a reliable sign
that this will happen. What is necessary is a careful analysis of RVP, and
early buyer experience with the substitute.


---PAGE BREAK---

A Static View of RVP. Both offensive and defensive strategy towards
substitution should be driven by the future as well as present RVP of a
substitute. A ﬁrm can mistakenly direct its product and marketing
improvements toward the wrong areas, or fail to plan for improvements in
RVP or reduction in margins by the substitute over time.
Fighting Versus Joining. Many ﬁrms invest heavily to defend against
substitutes when long-term RVP is compellingly against them. Similarly,
their defense against a substitute is across the board, instead of reﬂecting
differences in vulnerability to the substitute in different segments. Early
moves to focus on certain segments, harvest, or enter the substitute industry
are sometimes called for.
Accepting Maturity. Perhaps the most unfortunate pitfall of all is
accepting the maturity of one’s product, and not considering substitution as
a possibility. Firms often look inward, and become preoccupied with
battling rivals. It may be better to expand the size of the pie through
substitution. The age of an industry is not a reliable indicator of the
substitution possibilities. Industry maturity may be just an illusion.


---PAGE BREAK---

III
Corporate Strategy and Competitive Advantage


---PAGE BREAK---

9
Interrelationships among Business Units
As strategic planning theory and practice have developed, most ﬁrms have
come to recognize two types of strategy: business unit strategy and
corporate strategy. Business strategy charts the course for a ﬁrm’s activities
in individual industries, while corporate strategy addresses the composition
of a ﬁrm’s portfolio of business units. Reﬂecting this distinction, most
major ﬁrms have divided their businesses into some type of strategic
business units (SBUs), and instituted formal planning processes in which
SBUs submit plans for review by top management on an annual or biannual
basis. At the same time, corporate strategy has become increasingly viewed
as portfolio management, typically using some variation of the portfolio
planning techniques that were widely adopted in the 1970s.1
As these developments in formal planning have been occurring, the
concept of synergy has become widely regarded as passé. The idea that
combining different but related businesses could create value through
synergy was widely accepted and used as a justiﬁcation for the extensive
diversiﬁcation that took place in the United States in the 1960s and early
1970s. Statements describing hoped-for areas for synergy accompanied
many merger announcements, and were common in annual reports. By the
late 1970s, however, the enthusiasm for synergy had waned. Synergy, it
seemed, was a nice idea but rarely occurred in practice. Instead of in
synergy, the answer seemed to lie in decentralization where business unit
managers would be given authority and responsibility and rewarded based
on results. Recent popular business writing has identiﬁed decentralization as
a foundation of many successful ﬁrms, and many major corporations now


---PAGE BREAK---

practice decentralization with near-religious reverence. Decentralization,
coupled with disenchantment with synergy, has reinforced the view that
portfolio management is the essential task of corporate strategy.
The failure of synergy stemmed from the inability of companies to
understand and implement it, not because of some basic ﬂaw in the concept.
Firms often used it to justify actions taken for other reasons. Ill-deﬁned
notions of what constituted synergy underlay many companies’ acquisition
strategies. Even in instances where companies possessed a genuine
opportunity to harness synergy, they often failed because the tools for
analyzing it were lacking or they could not overcome the substantial
organization problems of implementation.
Compelling forces are at work today, however, that mean that ﬁrms must
reexamine their attitude toward synergy. Economic, technological, and
competitive developments are increasing the competitive advantage to be
gained by those ﬁrms that can identify and exploit interrelationships among
distinct but related businesses. These interrelationships are not the fuzzy
notions of “ﬁt” which underlay most discussions of synergy, but tangible
opportunities to reduce costs or enhance differentiation in virtually any
activity in the value chain. Moreover, the pursuit of interrelationships by
some competitors is compelling others to follow suit or risk losing their
competitive position.
These developments have made horizontal strategy, which cuts across
divisional boundaries, perhaps the most critical item on the strategic agenda
facing a diversiﬁed ﬁrm. Horizontal strategy is a coordinated set of goals
and policies across distinct but interrelated business units. It is required at
the group, sector, and corporate levels of a diversiﬁed ﬁrm. It does not
replace or eliminate the need for separate business units and/or business
unit strategies. Rather, horizontal strategy provides for explicit coordination
among business units that makes corporate or group strategy more than the
sum of the individual business unit strategies. It is the mechanism by which
a diversiﬁed ﬁrm enhances the competitive advantage of its business units.
Horizontal strategy is a concept of group, sector, and corporate strategy
based on competitive advantage, not on ﬁnancial considerations or stock
market perceptions. Corporate strategies built on purely ﬁnancial grounds
provide an elusive justiﬁcation for the diversiﬁed ﬁrm. Moreover, the
beneﬁts of even successful ﬁnancial strategies are often temporary. Without


---PAGE BREAK---

a horizontal strategy there is no convincing rationale for the existence of a
diversiﬁed ﬁrm because it is little more than a mutual fund.2 Horizontal
strategy—not portfolio management—is thus the essence of corporate
strategy.
Strategically important interrelationships have long been present in many
diversiﬁed ﬁrms. Little attention has been given to identifying and
exploiting them systematically, however, and many interrelationships have
remained untapped. Achieving interrelationships involves far more than
simply recognizing their presence. There are a number of organizational
barriers to achieving interrelationships in practice, which are difﬁcult to
surmount even if the strategic beneﬁts are clear. Without organizational
mechanisms to facilitate interrelationships that work in tandem with a
decentralized corporate organizational structure, horizontal strategy will
fail.
This chapter will provide a framework for analyzing interrelationships
among business units and how they relate to competitive advantage. First, I
will describe the reasons for the growing importance of interrelationships,
and show how they affect many ﬁrms. I will next describe the three broad
types of interrelationships among business units: tangible interrelationships,
intangible interrelationships, and competitor interrelationships. Then I will
discuss how each form of interrelationship leads to competitive advantage,
and how interrelationships can be identiﬁed.
Chapter 10 will draw together the principles of interrelationships to
describe how a ﬁrm can formulate a horizontal strategy for its existing
business units, and a diversiﬁcation strategy for entry into new industries.
Chapter 11 goes on to treat the organizational issues involved in achieving
interrelationships. In achieving interrelationships, strategy and organization
are inextricably linked. There are strong parallels between interrelationships
among business units, segment interrelationships (see Chapter 7), and
geographic interrelationships, or interrelationships among activities located
in different regions or countries. My focus in this chapter is on
interrelationships among business units in different industries, but many of
the principles of strategy can be readily applied to these other forms of
interrelationships.3


---PAGE BREAK---

The Growing Importance of Horizontal Strategy
Horizontal strategy is something that few ﬁrms today can afford to
ignore. Interrelationships among business units and the ability to exploit
them have been increasing in the last decade, and powerful and
interconnected forces are likely to accelerate the trend in the 1980s and
1990s.4
Diversiﬁcation philosophy is changing. The philosophy guiding many
ﬁrm’s diversiﬁcation strategies has shifted markedly since the early 1970s.
Most now emphasize related diversiﬁcation. This has led to more attention
being paid to “ﬁt,” and widespread pruning of corporate portfolios.
Unrelated or marginally related business units added during earlier phases
of diversiﬁcation have been sold off, and many ﬁrms have boosted their
stock price through this process, including Borden, Scoville, Trans World
Corporation, and IU International. A signiﬁcant fraction of today’s merger
activity involves ﬁrms selling divisions to other ﬁrms where the ﬁt is closer.
Emphasis is shifting from growth to performance. The environment in
most of the developed world is one of relatively slow growth coupled with
growing global competition, a dramatic change from the previous decades.
The emphasis has thus shifted from growth to improving competitive
advantage. While largely independent business units may have been an
appropriate vehicle for pursuing growth, a more difﬁcult environment has
made it increasingly important to coordinate business unit strategies to
exploit interrelationships. Buyers, themselves under pressure, are often a
force for coordination. Increasingly sophisticated purchasing by hospitals,
for example, is compelling ﬁrms such as Johnson & Johnson and American
Hospital Supply to integrate the sales forces and distribution systems of
business units serving hospitals in order to maintain competitive advantage.
Both of these ﬁrms have been among the strongest advocates of
decentralization.
Technological change is proliferating interrelationships and making
them more achievable. Technology is breaking down barriers between
industries and driving them together, particularly those based on


---PAGE BREAK---

electronics/information technology. Microelectronics, low-cost computers,
and communications technology are permeating many businesses and
causing technologies to converge. As these technologies are assimilated into
many products and production processes, the opportunities for shared
technology development, procurement, and component fabrication are
increasing. The rush of many large diversiﬁed ﬁrms such as Gould and
United Technologies to acquire electronics ﬁrms is a manifestation of this
trend.
These same technologies are changing the functions of products and
making them parts of larger systems, sometimes controlled centrally with a
common computer. Integrated aircraft cockpits, ofﬁce automation,
telecommunications, and lighting, heating, airconditioning, security, and
elevator systems in buildings are just a few examples where historically
distinct businesses are now becoming strongly related.
New technology is also making it possible to share activities across
business unit lines where it was not feasible previously. So-called “ﬂexible
automation” is one important example, in which a computer-controlled
machine can produce a variety of similar products with minimal setup time.
While ﬂexible automation is penetrating slowly and its limits have yet to be
deﬁned, it is enhancing the possibilities for sharing component fabrication
and assembly facilities among business units with related products.
Flexibility that allows sharing also holds promise in other areas such as
automated testing and computer-aided design.
The growing sophistication of information systems is also a powerful
force in opening up possibilities for interrelationships. With the increasing
capacity to handle complex on-line data, information technology is allowing
the development of automated order processing systems, automated
materials handling systems, automated warehouses, and systems to
automate other value activities outside of manufacturing. These systems can
often be shared among related businesses.5 Information technology is also
restructuring distribution channels and the selling process in industries such
as banking and insurance, in ways that can facilitate sharing.
At the same time that technology is creating interrelationships, it is also
reducing costs of exploiting them. The ease of communication has
increased just as dramatically as its costs have fallen, reducing the costs of
coordinating the activities of business units. Information processing


---PAGE BREAK---

technology has allowed management information systems to be established
in areas such as logistics, inventory management, production scheduling,
and sales force scheduling. Flexibility in activities has become increasingly
possible. While sharing activities may have involved unmanageable
complexity and unacceptable costs in the past, this is less often the case
today.
Multipoint competition is increasing. A ﬁnal compelling motivation for
horizontal strategy is a logical outgrowth of the other three. As more and
more ﬁrms seek out or are forced to pursue interrelationships among
business units, there is an increasing presence of what I term multipoint
competitors. Multipoint competitors are ﬁrms that compete with each other
not only in one business unit but in a number of related business units. For
example, Procter & Gamble, Kimberly-Clark, Scott Paper, and Johnson &
Johnson compete with each other in varying combinations of consumer
paper products industries including disposable diapers, paper towels,
feminine napkins, toilet tissue, and facial tissue. General Electric,
Westinghouse, Square D, and Emerson Electric similarly meet each other in
a number of electrical products industries. Where a ﬁrm has multipoint
competitors, it must view its competitors more broadly than at the business
unit level because competitive advantage will be more broadly determined.
Many important industry sectors are being affected by these forces.
Financial services are being revolutionized by interrelationships created by
information technology and unleashed by regulatory changes. Such ﬁrms as
American Express, Citicorp, Sears, Prudential-Bache, and Merrill Lynch are
aggressively linking previously separate ﬁnancial services industries
together. In health care, I have already noted how producers of medical
equipment and supplies are beginning to pursue interrelationships more
aggressively. A few health care providers are also just beginning to see the
possible interrelationships in operating facilities such as hospitals, nursing
homes, retirement communities, and home care services, though these
interrelationships are not yet being exploited. Entertainment ﬁrms have
begun to recognize the possibilities for coordinated strategies in different
media. Information companies such as McGraw-Hill and Dun and
Bradstreet are moving to combine many data base products. Computers and


---PAGE BREAK---

telecommunications ﬁrms are combining together and/or invading each
other’s turf, as evidenced by such recent moves as IBM’s link with Rolm
and AT&T’s entry into computers. Automation of the factory and the ofﬁce
is connecting many industries and spawning broadly-based strategies by
such ﬁrms as GE, Westinghouse, and Xerox. This list of industries being
connected by interrelationships is by no means exhaustive.
The forces leading to increasing interrelationships are also illustrated in a
study I conducted of business units in 75 diversiﬁed Fortune 500 ﬁrms in
1971 and 1981. These 75 ﬁrms had organized their thousands of business
units into 300 groups in 1971 and 315 groups in 1981. The nature and
strength of the interrelationships among business units in each group were
examined for both time periods. The number and strength of potential
interrelationships within the groups increased over the ten-year period, as
portfolios were reconﬁgured. However, the ﬁrms’ success at exploiting the
potential interrelationships was less clear. From examining how ﬁrms
changed their organizational structure over the period, it does appear that
ﬁrms became more prone to group related businesses together.
Many factors point to the growing importance of horizontal strategy, and
imply that past experience with synergy is a poor guide for the future. At
the same time, though, many ﬁrms have not converted potential
interrelationships into sources of competitive advantage. The same ﬁrms
that are assembling groups of related business units continue to manage
them like a portfolio. Thus diversiﬁed ﬁrms must learn how to manage
interrelationships at the same time as they will increasingly have to identify
and build upon them.
Interrelationships among Business Units
There are three broad types of possible interrelationships among
business units: tangible interrelationships, intangible interrelationships, and
competitor interrelationships. All three types can have important, but
different, impacts on competitive advantage and are not mutually exclusive:
Tangible Interrelationships. Tangible interrelationships arise from
opportunities to share activities in the value chain among related business


---PAGE BREAK---

units, due to the presence of common buyers, channels, technologies, and
other factors. Tangible interrelationships lead to competitive advantage if
sharing lowers cost or enhances differentiation enough to exceed the costs
of sharing. Business units that can share a sales force, for example, may be
able to lower selling cost or provide the salesperson with a unique package
to offer the buyer. Achieving tangible interrelationships often involves
jointly performing one value activity while in other cases it involves
multiple activities. When sister business units cross-sell each other’s
product, for example, they are sharing both of their sales forces.
Intangible Interrelationships. Intangible interrelationships involve the
transference of management know-how among separate value chains.
Businesses that cannot share activities may nevertheless be similar in
generic terms, such as in the type of buyer, type of purchase by the buyer,
type of manufacturing process employed and type of relationship with
government. For example, beer and cigarettes are both frequently purchased
recreational products sold on the basis of image as well as taste, while
trucking and waste treatment both involve the management of multiple
sites.
Intangible interrelationships lead to competitive advantage through
transference of generic skills or know-how about how to manage a
particular type of activity from one business unit to another. This may lower
the cost of the activity or make it more unique and outweigh any cost of
transferring the know-how. For example, Philip Morris applied product
management, brand positioning, and advertising concepts learned in
cigarettes to the beer business, substantially changing the nature of
competition and dramatically enhancing the competitive position of the
Miller brand. It performed marketing activities for cigarettes and beer
separately, but used expertise gained in managing activities in one industry
to manage them more effectively in another.
Often intangible interrelationships are manifested in a ﬁrm’s use of the
same generic strategy in a number of business units, reﬂecting
management’s skills in executing a particular strategy. For example,
Emerson Electric and H. J. Heinz compete by using cost leadership
strategies in many of their business units. Emerson and Heinz have learned


---PAGE BREAK---

how to manage many activities to achieve low cost, and transfer this know-
how to similar but separate value activities in many business units.
Competitor Interrelationships. The third form of interrelationship,
competitor interrelationships, stems from the existence of rivals that
actually or potentially compete with a ﬁrm in more than one industry. These
multipoint competitors necessarily link industries together because actions
toward them in one industry may have implications in another. While
competitor interrelationships occur without tangible or intangible
interrelationships being present and vice versa, the two often coexist
because tangible and intangible interrelationships can provide the basis for
diversiﬁcation. Competitors in one industry, therefore, often expand in the
same directions.
Competitor 
interrelationships 
make 
tangible 
and 
intangible
interrelationships all the more important to recognize and exploit. A
multipoint competitor may compel a ﬁrm to match an interrelationship or
face a competitive disadvantage. Multipoint competitors can also have an
overlapping but different set of business units linked by different
interrelationships than the ﬁrm’s, making the matching of such
interrelationships difﬁcult.
The three types of interrelationships can occur together, as has already
been suggested. Tangible interrelationships involving some value activities
can be supplemented by intangible interrelationships in others. Activities
shared between two business units can be improved by know-how gained
from similar activities in other business units. Both tangible and intangible
interrelationships are often present when multipoint competitors are present.
Each type of interrelationship, however, leads to competitive advantage in a
different way.
Synergy is not one idea, then, but three fundamentally different ideas.
Thus it is no surprise that what is meant by synergy has been vague.
Synergy has most often been described in terms that suggest that what was
meant was intangible interrelationships—transference of skills or expertise
in management from one business unit to another. This form of
interrelationship is perhaps the most ephemeral, however, and its role in
creating competitive advantage often is uncertain though potentially


---PAGE BREAK---

signiﬁcant. Hence it is not surprising that many ﬁrms have had great
difﬁculty realizing the fruits of synergy in practice.
I will discuss all three forms of interrelationships in this chapter.
Tangible and competitive interrelationships have the most compelling link
to competitive advantage, and are easier to implement. Intangible
interrelationships are fraught with pitfalls and are often difﬁcult to
implement, but can still be a powerful source of competitive advantage in
some industries. All three types play a role in horizontal strategy, as will be
discussed in Chapter 10.6
Tangible Interrelationships
The value chain provides the starting point for the analysis of tangible
interrelationships. A business unit can potentially share any value activity
with another business unit in the ﬁrm, including both primary and
supporting 
activities. 
For 
example, 
Procter 
& 
Gamble 
enjoys
interrelationships between its disposable diaper and paper towel businesses.
Certain raw materials can be procured and handled jointly, the development
of technology on products and processes is shared, a joint sales force sells
both products to supermarket buyers, and both products are shipped to
buyers via the same physical distribution system. The interrelationships are
shown schematically in Figure 9–1. As this example illustrates, tangible
interrelationships between two business units can involve one or many value
activities. If most value activities are shared between two business units,
however, they are not strategically distinct business units but in fact one
business unit.
Sharing an activity can lead to a sustainable competitive advantage if the
advantage of sharing outweighs the cost, provided the sharing is difﬁcult for
competitors to match. Sharing leads to a competitive advantage if it reduces
cost or enhances differentiation. Sharing always involves some cost,
however, that ranges from the cost of coordinating among the business units
involved to the need to modify business unit strategies to facilitate sharing.
Sharing and Competitive Advantage


---PAGE BREAK---

Sharing a value activity will lead to a signiﬁcant cost advantage if it
involves an activity that represents a signiﬁcant fraction of operating costs
or assets (I term this a large value activity), and sharing lowers the cost of
performing the activity. Sharing will signiﬁcantly enhance differentiation if
it involves an activity important to differentiation in which sharing either
increases the uniqueness of the activity or reduces the cost of being unique.
Thus sharing leads to a competitive advantage if it affects the drivers of cost
position or differentiation described in Chapters 3 and 4.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 9–1. Illustrative Interrelationships Between Value Chains in Paper Products


---PAGE BREAK---

SHARING AND COST
Sharing will have a material impact on overall cost position only if the
value activities involved are a signiﬁcant proportion of operating costs or
assets, or will be in the future. In the Procter & Gamble example, the shared
value activities add up to more than 50 percent of revenues. Sharing does
not necessarily lower cost, however, unless it favorably affects the other
cost drivers of an activity. Sharing has the potential to reduce cost if the cost
of a value activity is driven by economies of scale, learning, or the pattern
of capacity utilization.7 Sharing increases the scale of an activity and
increases the rate of learning if learning is a function of cumulative
volume.8 Sharing may also improve the pattern of capacity utilization of an
activity if the involved business units utilize the activity at different times.
For example, a sales force or logistical system that is utilized heavily during
only part of the year serving one business unit may be utilized during other
periods by another. All three beneﬁts of sharing for cost position can
potentially occur simultaneously.9
Sharing activities among business units is, then, a potential substitute for
market share in any one business unit. A ﬁrm that can share scale- or
learning-sensitive activities among a number of business units may
neutralize the cost advantage of a high market share ﬁrm competing with
one business unit. Sharing is not exactly equivalent to increasing market
share in one business unit, however, because a shared activity often involves
greater complexity than an equivalent scale activity serving one business
unit. The complexity of a shared logistical system involving ten product
varieties may increase geometrically compared to one that must handle only
ﬁve. The added complexity becomes a cost of sharing.
If scale, learning, or the pattern of utilization are not important cost
drivers, sharing is likely to raise costs. Firms often mistakenly pursue
sharing solely because of excess capacity in an activity. If sharing does not
lead to scale or learning advantages or improve the long-term pattern of
utilization, however, the costs of sharing will usually mean that sharing
creates a disadvantage. The correct solution would have been to reduce
capacity in the activity rather than share it.
Figure 9–2 illustrates how these principles can be used to highlight
activities where sharing is potentially important to cost position.


---PAGE BREAK---

Interrelationships involving value activities in the upper right-hand quadrant
of the diagram are of potentially greatest signiﬁcance due to their large
costs and sensitivity to scale, learning, or utilization. Interrelationships
involving value activities in the upper left-hand quadrant are not currently
important because sharing will not reduce cost, though the value activities
represent a large fraction of costs or assets. However, changes in the
technology 
for 
performing 
such 
activities 
can 
quickly 
make
interrelationships crucial if their cost becomes more sensitive to scale,
learning, or utilization. The change in order processing technology from
manual systems to on-line computers in many distribution industries, for
example, has begun to create important advantages from sharing order
processing across related product lines. Interrelationships involving value
activities in the lower right-hand quadrant can become important for cost
position if changes in the cost structure raise the percentage of operating
costs or assets they represent. The increasing capital cost of a plant and
supporting infrastructure, for example, will raise the potential advantage of
sharing facilities.
Figure 9–2. Shared Value Activities and Cost Position
SHARING AND DIFFERENTIATION


---PAGE BREAK---

Sharing affects differentiation in two ways. It can enhance differentiation
by increasing the uniqueness of an activity, or it can lower the cost of
differentiation. Chapter 4 described how many activities can affect buyer
value and, thus, differentiation. Sharing will be most important to
differentiation if it affects value activities that are important to actual value
or to signaling value. In consumer electronics, for example, sharing product
development is important to differentiation because differentiation is
heavily affected by product design. Sharing will also be important to
differentiation where it reduces the cost of expensive forms of
differentiation, such as an extensive sales and service network (e.g., IBM in
ofﬁce products).
Sharing can make an activity more unique both directly and through its
impact on other drivers of uniqueness. Sharing enhances uniqueness
directly if the shared activity is more valuable to buyers because it involves
more than one business unit. Selling several products through the same
sales force may increase convenience for the buyer, for example, or allow
for the differentiation advantages of bundling (see Chapter 12). In
telecommunications, for example, buyers want system solutions and one-
vendor accountability. Similarly, joint product development may lead to
greater compatibility among related products. Sharing may also increase
uniqueness indirectly, through increasing scale or the rate of learning in an
activity. As described in Chapter 4, both scale and learning may allow an
activity to be performed in a unique way.
Sharing can reduce the cost of differentiation through its impact on the
cost drivers of differentiating activities. Sharing product development
among business units can reduce the cost of rapid model changes if product
development is subject to economies of scale, for example, while shared
procurement can lower the cost of purchasing premium quality ingredients
or components. The added complexity of a shared activity is a cost of
sharing, however, that must be weighed against the beneﬁts to
differentiation.
THE ADVANTAGES OF SHARING AND BUSINESS UNIT POSITION
Sharing an activity will usually not lead to an equal improvement in cost
or differentiation for each of the business units involved. Differences in the


---PAGE BREAK---

scales of the business units are one important reason. A business unit that
uses a large volume of a component may not gain much of a cost advantage
from sharing fabrication of the component with a business unit that uses a
small volume of it. However, the unit that is the smaller user may enjoy a
tremendous improvement in cost position through gaining the beneﬁts of
the larger unit’s scale. The advantages to the unit that is the smaller user
may allow it to substantially improve its market position. Given such
asymmetries, it should come as no surprise that larger business units are
rarely enthusiastic about interrelationships with smaller units.10
Differences in the structure of the industries in which business units
compete may also lead to differential beneﬁts from sharing. A small
improvement in cost position may be very important in a commodity
industry, for example, but less signiﬁcant in an industry where product
differentiation is high and ﬁrms compete on quality and service. The
signiﬁcance of an interrelationship also depends on the strategies of the
business units involved. An interrelationship may lead to uniqueness that is
valuable for one business unit but much less valuable to another. It is rare,
then, that all the business units involved in an interrelationship will perceive
it as equally advantageous. This point has important implications for
horizontal strategy and for the ability of senior managers to persuade
business units to pursue interrelationships.
The Costs of Sharing
Interrelationships always involve a cost, because they require business
units to modify their behavior in some way. The costs of sharing a value
activity can be divided into three types:
• cost of coordination
• cost of compromise
• cost of inﬂexibility
The cost of coordination is relatively easy to understand. Business units
must coordinate in such areas as scheduling, setting priorities, and resolving
problems in order to share an activity. Coordination involves costs in terms
of time, personnel, and perhaps money. The cost of coordination will differ


---PAGE BREAK---

widely for different types of sharing. A shared sales force requires continual
coordination, for example, while joint procurement may require nothing
more than periodic communication to determine the quantity of a purchased
input required per period by each business unit. Different business units
may also see the cost of coordination differently. The costs of coordination
are often viewed as higher by smaller business units, who see a continual
battle over priorities and the risk of being dictated to by larger units.
Business units that do not manage a shared activity or are located at a
distance from it also tend to fear that their best interests will not be
protected.11
The cost of coordination will be inﬂuenced by the potentially greater
complexity of a shared activity noted earlier. The added complexity
involved in sharing will vary, depending on the speciﬁc activity. Sharing a
computerized order entry system among business units will usually add
little complexity, for example, in contrast to sharing a logistical system
between two business units with large product lines. The added complexity
of a shared activity can sometimes offset economies of scale or reduce the
rate of learning compared to an activity serving one business unit. Thus
sharing can both increase scale and/or learning at the same time as it alters
the relationship between scale or learning and cost. This is important
because changing the scale-or learning-sensitivity of an activity may beneﬁt
or hurt the ﬁrm’s cost position depending on its circumstances.
Computerization generally has reduced the cost of handling the complexity
of sharing. That is one of the reasons why interrelationships are getting
more important.
A second, often more important, cost of sharing is the cost of
compromise. Sharing an activity requires that an activity be performed in a
consistent way that may not be optimal for either of the business units
involved. Sharing a sales force, for example, may mean that the salesperson
gives less attention to both business units’ product and is less
knowledgeable about either product than a dedicated sales force would be.
Similarly, sharing component fabrication may mean that the component’s
design cannot exactly match one business unit’s needs because it must also
meet another’s. The cost of compromise may include costs not only in the
shared value activity but also in other linked value activities. Sharing a sales
force, for example, may reduce the availability of salespeople to perform


---PAGE BREAK---

minor service functions, thereby increasing the number of service
technicians required. Policy choices required to facilitate sharing, then, can
adversely affect the cost or differentiation of one or more of the business
units involved.
That business units must in some way compromise their needs to share
an activity is almost a given. The cost of compromise may be minor, or may
be great enough to nullify the value of sharing. For example, attempting to
share a logistical system among business units producing products of
widely differing sizes, weights, delivery frequencies, and sensitivities to
delivery time may well lead to a logistical system that is so inappropriate to
any of the business unit’s needs that the cost savings of sharing are
overwhelmed. However, sharing a brand name or sharing procurement of
commodities may involve little or no compromise.
The cost of compromise to share an activity will often differ for each of
the affected business units. A business unit with a product that is difﬁcult to
sell may have to compromise the most in employing a shared sales force,
for example. The cost of compromise may also differ because the particular
value activity plays a differing role in one business unit compared to
another because of its strategy. The compromise involved in joint
procurement of a common grade of milk or butter may be more serious for a
business unit of a food manufacturer pursuing a premium quality strategy
than it is for one attempting to be the low-cost producer if the common
grade is not top quality.
The cost of compromise required to achieve an interrelationship is much
less if the strategies of the business units involved are consistent with
respect to the role of the shared value activity. Achieving such consistency
often involves little or no sacriﬁce to the affected business units if their
strategic directions are coordinated over time. A particular component can
be highly effective in the products of two business units if both units design
their products with the component in mind, for example. If the design
groups of the two business units are allowed to proceed independently,
however, the chances are high that the common component will not meet
either business unit’s needs. Consistency among business units’ strategies
that facilitates sharing will rarely happen naturally. An example of both the
opportunities to shape the cost of compromise and the indirect costs of
compromise that must be weighed comes from General Foods’ successful


---PAGE BREAK---

new Pudding Pops. Pudding Pops were designed to melt at a higher
temperature than ice cream so that distribution then could be shared with
General Foods’ Birds Eye frozen vegetables. While frozen foods are
transported at zero degrees Fahrenheit, ice cream must be transported at 20
degrees below zero or it will build up ice crystals. While the beneﬁts in
shared logistics were clear, however, sharing had some unforseen
consequences elsewhere in the value chain. Because Pudding Pops had to
be ordered by supermarket frozen food managers along with vegetables,
instead of with other freezer case novelty items, Pudding Pops were often
forgotten. As this example illustrates, the beneﬁts and costs of an
interrelationship must be examined throughout the value chain and not just
in the activity shared.
The cost of compromise is frequently reduced if an activity is designed
for sharing rather than if previously separate activities are simply combined
or if an activity designed to serve one business unit simply takes on another
with no change in procedures or technology. Recent events in ﬁnancial
services have highlighted this point. Merging computer systems initially
designed for separate ﬁnancial products has proven difﬁcult, though a
system designed to process many products would be effective. Similarly,
attempting to sell insurance and other ﬁnancial products through a
distribution system designed for selling stocks and bonds has not served any
of the products very well and has created organizational problems.
However, a new conception of a brokerage ofﬁce is emerging that combines
brokers, customer service personnel to handle simple problems and screen
clients, and specialists to sell other ﬁnancial products together with a new
shared information system. The cost of compromise in sharing distribution
is likely to be much less as a result.
The third cost of sharing is the cost of inﬂexibility. Inﬂexibility takes two
forms: (1) potential difﬁculty in responding to competitive moves, and (2)
exit barriers. Sharing can make it more difﬁcult to respond quickly to
competitors because attempting to counter a threat in one business unit may
undermine or reduce the value of the interrelationship for sister business
units. Sharing also can raise exit barriers. Exiting from a business unit with
no competitive advantage may harm other business units sharing an activity
with it.12 Unlike other costs of sharing, the cost of inﬂexibility is not an
ongoing cost but a potential cost should the need for ﬂexibility arise. The


---PAGE BREAK---

cost of inﬂexibility will depend on the likelihood of the need to respond or
exit.
Some costs of coordination, compromise, or inﬂexibility are involved in
achieving any interrelationship. These costs, particularly any required
compromise to achieve an interrelationship, will be very real concerns
raised by business units when sharing is discussed. They may appear far
more obvious than the advantages of the interrelationship, which may
appear theoretical and speculative. Business units will also tend to view a
potential interrelationship in the light of their existing strategy, rather than
weigh its cost if their strategies are modiﬁed to minimize the costs of
sharing. Finally, the value of interrelationships is often clouded by
organizational issues involved in sharing, including those of turf and
autonomy which are addressed in Chapter 11. Thus business units can
sometimes oppose interrelationships that may result in a clear competitive
advantage to them.
The advantages of sharing an activity must be weighed against the costs
of coordination, compromise, and inﬂexibility to determine the net
competitive advantage of sharing. The assessment of the competitive
advantage from an interrelationship must be performed separately for each
of the involved business units, and the value of an interrelationship to the
ﬁrm as a whole is the sum of the net advantages to the involved business
units. The net competitive advantage from sharing an activity will almost
inevitably vary for each business unit involved. In some cases, the net value
of an interrelationship may even be negative from the viewpoint of one
business unit because of the required compromise, but will be more than
offset by a positive net value for other affected business units. For this
reason and because of the natural biases in approaching interrelationships
noted above, then, business units will often not readily agree on pursuing
interrelationships that will beneﬁt a ﬁrm as a whole. Interrelationships will
only happen under such circumstances if there is an explicit horizontal
strategy.
While there are always costs of sharing, forces are at work to reduce
them in many industries. The new technologies described earlier in this
chapter are having the effect of reducing the cost of coordination,
compromise, and, to a lesser extent, the cost of inﬂexibility. Easier
communication and better information systems make coordination easier.


---PAGE BREAK---

Low-cost computers and information systems also introduce ﬂexibility into
value activities, or the technical capability to minimize the cost of
compromise. Programmable machines and robots can adapt to the different
needs of business units sharing them. Many ﬁrms are only beginning to
perceive these possibilities for lowering the cost of sharing, but continue to
base their assessment of interrelationships on outdated methods.
Difﬁculty of Matching
The 
sustainability 
of 
the 
net 
competitive 
advantage 
of 
an
interrelationship will depend on the difﬁculty competitors have in matching
it. Competitors have two basic options in matching the competitive
advantage of an interrelationship: (1) duplicating the interrelationship, or
(2) offsetting it through other means such as gaining share in the affected
business unit or exploiting a different interrelationship. The ease of
duplicating an interrelationship will vary depending on whether competitors
are in the same group of related industries involved. The most valuable
interrelationships from a strategic point of view are those involving
industries that competitors are not in and that have high barriers to entry.
For example, Procter & Gamble’s advantage from the interrelationships
between its disposable diaper and paper towel business units is quite
sustainable because its paper towel competitors are blocked from entering
the diaper business by enormous entry barriers. A competitor may also face
higher or lower costs of coordination and compromise than the ﬁrm in
achieving 
an 
interrelationship 
depending 
on 
the 
strategies 
and
circumstances of its business units. Other things being equal, then, a ﬁrm
should pursue most aggressively those interrelationships that its competitors
will ﬁnd the most difﬁcult to match because of the costs of coordination or
compromise.
The ability of competitors to offset an interrelationship is a function of
whether they can ﬁnd some other way of improving position in the affected
business unit through changes in its strategy or by pursuit of different
interrelationships.13 Since nearly any value activity can potentially be
shared, a competitor may be able to forge an interrelationship among a
different group of business units or share different value activities among


---PAGE BREAK---

the same group of businesses. If a ﬁrm, through pursuing an
interrelationship, causes a competitor to respond by pursuing different
interrelationships, it faces the danger that the ultimate outcome will be an
erosion in its relative position.
A ﬁnal consideration in assessing the difﬁculty of matching an
interrelationship is whether the same beneﬁts can be achieved by a
competitor through a coalition or long-term contract. Sometimes a ﬁrm can
gain the beneﬁts of sharing through a joint venture or other form of
coalition with another ﬁrm, without actually entering another industry.
While such coalitions may be difﬁcult to forge, they should always be
considered in assessing the value of an interrelationship and how to achieve
it.
Identifying Tangible Interrelationships
To aid in identifying the tangible interrelationships present in a ﬁrm, a
useful starting point is to catalog all the forms of sharing that occur in
practice as well as the alternative ways they can create competitive
advantage. Figure 9–3 divides forms of sharing into ﬁve categories:
production, market, procurement, technology, and infrastructure. I have
included shared human resource management as part of shared
infrastructure. It is useful to separate these categories of interrelationships
because they raise different issues in sharing. Interrelationships ultimately
stem from commonalities of various types among industries, such as
common buyers, channels, or production processes. These commonalities
deﬁne potential interrelationships; whether the interrelationships lead to a
competitive advantage is a function of the beneﬁts and costs described
earlier. The sources of each category of interrelationship and the possible
forms of sharing to capture it are shown in Table 9–1.
MARKET INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Market interrelationships involve the sharing of primary value activities
involved in reaching and interacting with the buyer, from outbound logistics
to service. When business units have only the geographic location of their
buyers in common, sharing is usually restricted to physical distribution


---PAGE BREAK---

systems, order processing, and to servicing and sales if the products have
similar sales and servicing needs. Richer opportunities for sharing are
present when business units also have common buyers, common channels,
or both. If buyers or channels are the same, sharing of physical distribution
or order processing systems among business units usually involves less
complexity and lower costs of sharing. In addition, common buyers or
channels open up a wide variety of other possible forms of sharing shown in
Table 9–1.
The subtleties in identifying potential market interrelationships stem
from the tendency to view the buyer or channel too broadly. A wide variety
of products and services are sold to oil companies, for example, including
drilling equipment, reﬁnery equipment, and transportation equipment such
as oil tankers and tanker trucks. Thus oil companies might be identiﬁed as a
common buyer by business units in many industries. The various products
are sold to different parts of the oil company, however, which often have
little contact with each other. Even within a product category such as
drilling equipment, equipment used in exploration is frequently sold to a
different organizational unit than production equipment. Even in instances
when the same unit of the oil company makes the purchase, the particular
individuals making the purchase decision or inﬂuencing the decision maker
will often differ for different pieces of equipment. Engineers may be
responsible for choosing some high-technology equipment such as blowout
preventers, for example, while purchasing agents often choose more
standard items such as pipe.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 9–3. Categories of Tangible Interrelationships


---PAGE BREAK---

TABLE 9–1 Possible Sources of Interrelationships
Another example of viewing the buyer too broadly is becoming apparent
from recent experience in ﬁnancial services. The traditional buyer of stocks
and bonds is a different individual than the average life insurance buyer.
Both are different individuals than the typical buyer of futures. These
differences 
are 
nullifying 
simplistic 
efforts 
to 
achieve 
market
interrelationships in ﬁnancial services. Meaningful opportunities for
exploring market interrelationships among business units are usually
present only where the decision makers for the products are the same or
have some contact with each other.
The same issues arise in identifying common channels. Though two
products might both be sold through department stores, few actual channel
interrelationships are likely to be present if one is sold through discount


---PAGE BREAK---

department stores and the other through exclusive department stores such as
Lord & Taylor and Neiman-Marcus. There are also often different buying
executives responsible for different classes of products in the same channel.
In most supermarket chains, for example, frozen foods are typically bought
by a different buyer than meats, even though some frozen foods are meat
products. Even if the decision makers are different, however, opportunities
for sharing logistical and order processing systems may exist with both
common buyers and common channels.
Whether products sold to a common buyer are substitutes or
complements can also affect the advantage of sharing market-related
activities. Shared marketing can yield less of a cost advantage when
products are substitutes because the buyer will purchase either one product
or the other but not both. However, offering substitute products to buyers
can reduce the risk of substitution because losses in one product can be
compensated in the other (see Chapter 8). Joint marketing of substitutes can
also enhance a ﬁrm’s differentiation.
When business units sell complementary products to common buyers,
the advantage of sharing is often greater than if the products are unrelated
or substitutes. Complementary products usually have correlated demand
that facilitates the efﬁcient utilization of shared value activities, and other
practices such as common branding, joint advertising and bundling. The
strategic issues raised by complementary products, a subset of market
interrelationships, are treated separately in Chapter 12.
The potential competitive advantages of the important forms of market
interrelationships and the most likely sources of compromise cost are shown
in Table 9–2. Indirect activities such as market research, sales force
administration and advertising production (e.g., artwork, layout) can often
be shared more easily than direct activities because they require lower
compromise costs.14 The beneﬁts of market interrelationships can often be
enhanced by changes in the strategies of the involved business units that
reduce the cost of compromise. Standardizing sales force practices,
repositioning brands to make their images more compatible, or
standardizing delivery standards or payment terms may make sharing easier,
for example.


---PAGE BREAK---

PRODUCTION INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Interrelationships in production involve the sharing of upstream value
activities such as inbound logistics, component fabrication, assembly,
testing, and indirect functions such as maintenance and site infrastructure.
All these forms of sharing require that activities be located together. Doing
so can lead to a compromise cost if the suppliers or buyers of the business
units sharing the activities have greatly different geographic locations since
inbound or outbound freight costs may be increased. Shared procurement is
different from production interrelationships because merging facilities is not
implied. Purchased inputs can be procured centrally but shipped from
suppliers to dispersed facilities.
Production interrelationships can be illusory when apparently similar
value activities are examined closely. For example, though the machines
themselves are generically the same, a job-shop manufacturing process for
one product may involve different machine tolerances than another, or lot
sizes or run lengths can be quite different. As with market
interrelationships, indirect value activities offer particularly attractive
opportunities for sharing because the compromise costs are often low. For
example, such activities as building operations, maintenance, site
infrastructure, and testing laboratories can be shared despite the fact that the
actual manufacturing processes are different.
Table 9–3 shows the potential competitive advantages of important forms
of production interrelationships, and the likely sources of compromise cost.
The balance will depend on the strategies of the involved business units. For
example, two business units with differentiation strategies are more likely to
have similar needs in terms of component speciﬁcations, manufacturing
tolerances, and testing standards than if one business unit pursues cost
leadership while another offers a premium product.
TABLE 9–2 Determinants of Net Competitive Advantage from Market
Interrelationships
FORM OF
SHARING
POTENTIAL COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGES
MOST LIKELY SOURCES OF
COMPROMISE COST
Shared brand
Lower advertising costs
Product images are


---PAGE BREAK---

name
inconsistent or
conﬂicting
 
Reinforcing product
images/reputations
Buyer is reluctant to
purchase too much from
one ﬁrm
 
 
Diluted reputation if one
product is inferior
Shared
advertising
Lower advertising costs
Appropriate media or
messages are different
 
Greater leverage in purchasing
advertising space
Advertising effectiveness
reduced by multiple
products
Shared
promotion
Lower promotion costs
through shared couponing
and cross couponing
Appropriate forms and
timing of promotion
differ
Cross selling of
products to
each others’
buyers
Lower cost of ﬁnding new
buyers
Product images are
inconsistent or
conﬂicting
 
Lower cost of selling
Buyer is reluctant to
purchase too much from
one ﬁrm
Interrelated
pricing of
complementary
products
See Chapter 12
See Chapter 12
Bundled selling See Chapter 12
See Chapter 12
Shared
marketing
department
Lower cost of market research Product positionings are
different or inconsistent


---PAGE BREAK---

 
Lower marketing overhead
Buyer’s purchasing
behavior is not the same
Shared channels Enhanced bargaining power
with the channels leading to
improvements in service,
shelf positioning,
maintenance/repair/support,
or channel margins
Channel gains too much
bargaining power vis-à-
vis the ﬁrm
Channel unwilling to
allow a single ﬁrm to
account for a major
portion of its sales
 
One-stop shopping for the
buyer improves
differentiation
Use of shared channel
will erode support from
other channels
 
Lower cost of channel support
infrastructure
 
Shared sales
force or sales
ofﬁces
Lower selling costs or sales
force infrastructure costs
Different buyer
purchasing behavior
 
Better quality salespersons
Buyer reluctance to
purchase large amounts
from a single
salesperson
 
More products to sell improves
access to the buyer or
enhances buyer convenience
Salesperson is not
allowed adequate time
with the buyer to present
a number of products
effectively
 
Better sales force utilization if
the pattern of utilization is
not the same
Different type of
salesperson is most
effective Certain
products get more
attention than others


---PAGE BREAK---

Shared service
network
Lower servicing costs
Differences in equipment
or knowledge necessary
to make typical repairs
 
More sophisticated or
responsive servicing, due to
improved technology or
denser service locations
Differences in the need
for timeliness in service
calls
 
Better capacity utilization if
demand for service is
inversely correlated
Differing degrees to
which the buyer
performs service in-
house
Shared order
processing
Lower order processing costs
Differences in the form
and composition of
typical orders
 
Lower cost of employing
improved technology that
improves responsiveness or
billing information
Differences in ordering
cycles that lead to
inconsistent order
processing needs
 
Better capacity utilization if
order ﬂows are inversely
correlated
 
 
One-stop shopping for the
buyer improves
differentiation
 
TABLE 9–3 Determinants of Net Competitive Advantage from
Production Interrelationships
FORM OF SHARING
POTENTIAL COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGES
MOST LIKELY SOURCES
OF COMPROMISE COST


---PAGE BREAK---

Shared inbound
logistical system
Lower freight and
material handling costs
Input sources are located
in different geographic
areas
 
Better technology
enhances delivery
reliability, reduces
damage, etc.
Plants are located in
differing geographic
areas
 
Sharing allows more
frequent, smaller
deliveries that reduce
inventory or improve
plant productivity
Varying physical
characteristics of inputs
imply that a logistical
system which can
handle all of them is
suboptimal
 
 
Needs for frequency and
reliability of inbound
delivery differ among
business units
Shared components
(identical
components used in
different end
products)
Lower cost of component
fabrication
Needs for component
design and quality differ
among business units
 
Better technology for
component
manufacturing improves
quality
 
Shared component
fabrication facilities
(similar or related
components are
produced using the
Lower component costs
High setup costs for
different component
varieties


---PAGE BREAK---

same equipment and
facilities)
 
Better fabrication
technology improves
quality
Needs for component
quality or tolerances
differ among business
units
 
Capacity utilization is
improved because
demand for similar
components is not
perfectly correlated
Flexible manufacturing
equipment has higher
cost than specialized
equipment
 
 
Larger workforce in one
location leads to
potential hiring,
unionization or
productivity problems
Shared assembly
facilities (similar or
related end products
are assembled using
the same
equipment/lines)
Lower assembly costs
High setup costs for
different products
 
Better assembly
technology improves
quality
Needs for quality or
tolerances differ
 
Utilization is improved
because demand is not
perfectly correlated
Flexible assembly
equipment is higher cost
 
A shared materials
handling system can
Larger workforce in one
location leads to
potential hiring,


---PAGE BREAK---

feed different assembly
lines
unionization or
productivity problems
Shared testing/quality
control
Lower testing cost
Testing procedures and
quality standards differ
 
Better technology
increases the
extensiveness of testing
and improves quality
control
Flexible testing facilities
and equipment are
higher cost
Shared indirect
activities (including
maintenance, plant
overhead, personnel
department,
cafeteria, etc.)
Lower indirect activity
costs
Differing needs for
indirect activities among
business units
 
Improved quality of
indirect activities
Larger workforce in one
location leads to
potential hiring,
unionization, or
productivity problems
PROCUREMENT INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Procurement interrelationships involve the shared procurement of
common purchased inputs. Common inputs are frequently present in
diversiﬁed ﬁrms, particularly if one looks beyond major raw materials and
pieces of capital equipment. Suppliers are increasingly willing to make
deals based on supplying the needs of plants located around the world, and
negotiate prices reﬂecting total corporate needs. Some ﬁrms go overboard in
shared procurements, however, because they fail to recognize the potential
costs of compromise or they establish a rigid procurement process that does
not allow for opportunism in negotiating attractive opportunities.


---PAGE BREAK---

The potential competitive advantage of shared procurement and the
likely sources of compromise cost are shown in Table 9–4:
TABLE 9–4 Determinants of Net Competitive Advantage from
Procurement Interrelationships
FORM OF SHARING
POTENTIAL COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGES
MOST LIKELY SOURCES
OF COMPROMISE COST
Joint procurement of
common inputs
Lower costs of inputs
Input needs are different
in terms of quality or
speciﬁcations, leading
to higher costs than
necessary in business
units requiring less
quality
 
Improved input quality
Technical assistance and
delivery needs from
suppliers vary among
business units
 
Improved service from
vendors in terms of
responsiveness, holding
of inventory, etc.
Centralization can reduce
the information ﬂow
from factory to
purchasing, and make
purchasing less
responsive
TECHNOLOGICAL INTERRELATIONSHIPS
Technological interrelationships involve the sharing of technology
development activities throughout the value chain. They are distinguished
from production interrelationships because their impact is on the cost or
uniqueness of technology development, while production interrelationships
involve sharing activities involved in the actual production of the product on
an ongoing basis. It is important to recognize, however, that


---PAGE BREAK---

interrelationships in process development often occur together with
production or market interrelationships. Interrelationships in process
technology typically grow out of interrelationships in the primary activities.
As with other forms of interrelationships, apparently promising
technological interrelationships can be illusory. Scientiﬁc disciplines that
overlap for two business units may be of minor importance to success
compared to scientiﬁc disciplines that do not overlap. Harris Corporation,
for example, thought it could reduce the development expense involved in
entering word processing through adapting software from its text editing
system sold to newspapers. Harris discovered that the text editing system
had so many features that were speciﬁc to the needs of newspapers that
development of a word processing system had to start from scratch.
Truly signiﬁcant technological interrelationships are ones involving
technologies important to the cost or differentiation of the products or
processes 
involved, 
as 
microelectronics 
technology 
is 
to 
both
telecommunications and data processing. Many products have superﬁcial
technological similarities, making the identiﬁcation of true technological
interrelationships difﬁcult. As with other types of interrelationships, the net
competitive advantage of a technological interrelationship will differ
depending on the industry and strategies of the business units involved. For
example, the beneﬁts of sharing microelectronics technology will tend to be
greater for two consumer products business units than for a defense
business unit and a consumer business unit. Rockwell International learned
this lesson when it put a team of engineers from its defense business into its
Admiral TV set division. The sensitivity to cost was so much greater in TV
sets than in defense equipment that sharing did not succeed. The same thing
occurred in business aircraft, where a design developed originally for
military use (the Sabreliner) proved too expensive for the commercial
market.
Table 9–5 shows the potential competitive advantages that can stem from
sharing technology development as well as the most likely sources of
compromise costs.
INFRASTRUCTURE INTERRELATIONSHIPS


---PAGE BREAK---

The ﬁnal category of interrelationships involve ﬁrm infrastructure,
including such activities as ﬁnancing, legal, accounting, and human
resource management. Some infrastructure activities are almost always
shared in diversiﬁed ﬁrms, as described in Chapter 2. In most cases, the
effect of sharing on competitive advantage is not great because
infrastructure is not a large proportion of cost and sharing has little impact
on differentiation. It is ironic, therefore, that the vast majority of literature
on sharing has been on sharing infrastructure—principally ﬁnance and the
utilization of capital. Interrelationships in ﬁnance, particularly, have been
seen as a signiﬁcant beneﬁt the diversiﬁed ﬁrm contributes to its business
units.
There are two basic sources of ﬁnancial interrelationships: joint raising
of capital and shared utilization of capital (primarily working capital).
Economies of scale in raising capital may indeed exist, especially up to a
certain quantity of capital needed. Efﬁcient utilization of working capital is
made possible by countercyclical or counterseasonal needs for funds among
business units, which allows cash freed up by one business unit to be
deployed in another. Financial interrelationships typically involve relatively
few compromise costs that must be offset against any savings. Moreover,
ﬁnancial interrelationships are among the easiest to achieve if they are
present, perhaps a reason why they are so frequently discussed.
TABLE 9–5 Determinants of Net Competitive Advantage from
Technological Interrelationships
FORM OF SHARING
POTENTIAL COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGES
MOST LIKELY SOURCES
OF COMPROMISE COST
Shared technology
development (for
separate products or
where one product
is incorporated into
another)
Lower product or process
design costs (including
shorter design time)
Technologies are the
same, but the
tradeoffs in applying
the technology are
different among
business units
 
Larger critical mass in
R&D, or the ability to
attract better people
 


---PAGE BREAK---

improves the
innovativeness of
product or process
designs
 
Transference of
developments among
product areas enhances
differentiation or allows
early entry into new
technologies
 
Shared interface
design for products
with a technological
interface
Lower interface design
costs
A nonstandard
interface reduces the
available market
 
Differentiation through
superior and proprietary
interface performance
Risks of bundling
(Chapter 12)
 
Bundling opportunities
created through a
nonstandard interface
(see Chapter 12)
 
The major limitation to the competitive advantage of shared ﬁnancing is
the efﬁciency of capital markets. Scale economies in ﬁnancing appear to be
moderate for most ﬁrms and lead to a relatively small difference in
ﬁnancing costs. Firms can also borrow to cover short-term cash needs and
lend excess cash in the highly efﬁcient markets for commercial paper and
other instruments, mitigating the value of sharing working capital. Hence
ﬁnancial interrelationships are rarely the basis for creating a signiﬁcant
competitive advantage, unless the size and credit rating of competitors
differ greatly. Other forms of infrastructure interrelationships can be
important in particular industries. Shared infrastructure for hiring and
training is important in some service industries, while shared government
relations can be signiﬁcant in natural resource ﬁrms.


---PAGE BREAK---

Intangible Interrelationships
Intangible interrelationships lead to competitive advantage through the
transfer of skills among separate value chains. Through operating one
business unit, a ﬁrm gains know-how that allows it to improve the way
another generically similar business unit competes. The transference of
skills can go in either direction—e.g., from existing business units to a new
business unit or from a new business unit back to existing business units.
The transference of generic know-how can occur anywhere in the value
chain. Philip Morris transferred generic know-how in the marketing of
consumer packaged goods from its cigarette business to Miller Beer, while
Emerson Electric transferred plant design and cost reduction skills when it
acquired the chain saw ﬁrm Beaird-Poulan. In both cases, the transference
of skills changed the way that the receiving business unit competed and
enhanced its competitive advantage.
Intangible interrelationships lead to a competitive advantage if the
improvement in cost or differentiation in the business unit receiving the
know-how exceeds the costs of transferring it. Know-how residing in one
business unit has already been paid for, and hence transferring it may
involve little cost compared to its cost of development. The actual
transference of know-how always involves some cost, however, whether it
be the cost of time of skilled personnel or perhaps the greater risk that
proprietary information will leak out. Using the know-how that is
transferred will also typically involve some cost in adapting it to the
circumstances of the receiving business unit. These costs of transferring
know-how must be weighed against the potential beneﬁts to determine
whether an intangible interrelationship will create competitive advantage.
Intangible interrelationships are important to competitive advantage
when the transference of know-how or skills allows the receiving business
unit to lower costs or enhance differentiation. This occurs if the transference
of skills leads to policy changes that lower cost or enhance differentiation,
or because the transference of skills gives the receiving business unit better
insight into its other drivers of cost or uniqueness. The transference of skills
from Philip Morris to Miller Beer, for example, resulted in policy changes
in the way beer was positioned and marketed, as well as an escalation of


---PAGE BREAK---

advertising spending that increased scale economies in the industry and
worked to the advantage of large brands like Miller.
Identifying Intangible Interrelationships. Intangible interrelationships
arise from a variety of generic similarities among business units:15
• same generic strategy
• same type of buyer (though not the same buyer)
• similar conﬁguration of the value chain (e.g., many dispersed sites of
mineral extraction and processing)
• similar important value activities (e.g., relations with government)
Although value activities cannot be shared, these similarities among
business units mean that know-how gained in one business unit is valuable
and transferable to another.16
Because of the myriad possible generic similarities among business
units, it is not possible to be as complete in identifying the important types
as it was with tangible interrelationships. However, the value chain provides
a systematic way of searching for intangible interrelationships. A ﬁrm can
examine the major value activities in its business units to unearth
similarities in activities or the way the chain is conﬁgured that might
provide the basis for transference of know-how or highlight generic skills
that might be applied to new industries.
Intangible Interrelationships and Competitive Advantage. Intangible
interrelationships of one type or another are very widespread. It is always
possible to point to some generic similarity in some value activity between
almost any two business units. An airline is widely dispersed, has multiple
sites, and relies heavily on scheduling, characteristics shared by trucking
companies, international trading companies and industrial gas producers.
Widespread similarities of some kind make the analysis of intangible
interrelationships quite subtle.
The key tests in identifying intangible interrelationships that are
important to competitive advantage are the following:


---PAGE BREAK---

• How similar are the value activities in the business units?
• How important are the value activities involved to competition?
•  How signiﬁcant is the know-how that would be transferred to
competitive advantage in the relevant activities?
These questions must be answered together. The similarity of two
business units is a function of how much know-how can be usefully
transferred. The importance of the transferred know-how is a function of its
contribution to improving competitive advantage in the receiving business
unit. The transference of just one insight can sometimes make an enormous
difference to competitive advantage, so even business units that are not very
similar can have important intangible interrelationships. However, truly
important intangible interrelationships are much less common than an initial
search for them might imply. It is frequently difﬁcult, moreover, to predict
whether the transference of know-how will prove to be valuable.
The most common pitfall in assessing intangible interrelationships is to
identify generic similarities among business units that are not important to
competition. Either the know-how that can be transferred does not affect
value activities that are important to cost or differentiation in the receiving
business unit, or it does not provide insights that competitors do not already
have. Philip Morris’s acquisition of the Seven Up soft drink company
provides a possible example of the latter. While the beer industry had
historically been populated by family ﬁrms with little marketing ﬂair, the
soft drink industry has long been characterized by sophisticated marketing
by the likes of Coke, Pepsi, and Dr Pepper. Philip Morris’s marketing
expertise appears to have offerred much less of an advantage for Seven Up
than it did for Miller.
Many ﬁrms have fallen into the trap of identifying intangible
interrelationships that are illusory or do not matter for competitive
advantage. Often, it seems, intangible interrelationships are forced, and
represent more of an ex poste rationalization of diversiﬁcation moves
undertaken for other reasons. Intangible interrelationships were prominent
in discussions of synergy. The difﬁculty of ﬁnding and implementing
signiﬁcant intangible interrelationships is one of the reasons synergy proved
such a disappointment to many ﬁrms.


---PAGE BREAK---

The effective exploitation of intangible interrelationships thus requires
an acute understanding of the business units involved as well as the
industries 
they 
compete 
in. 
The 
importance 
of 
an 
intangible
interrelationship for competition can only be truly understood by
identifying speciﬁc ways in which know-how can be transferred so as to
make a difference. The mere hope that one business unit might learn
something useful from another is frequently a hope not realized.
Even intangible interrelationships where the beneﬁts of transferring
know-how far exceed the cost of transferring it do not lead to competitive
advantage unless the transference of know-how actually takes place. Know-
how is transferred through interchange between managers or other
personnel in the affected business units. This process does not occur
without active efforts on the part of senior management. Personnel in the
receiving business unit may be wary or unsure of the value of know-how
from a “different” industry. They may even openly resist it. Business units
with know-how may be hesitant to commit the time of important personnel
and may view the know-how as highly proprietary. Finally, transference of
know-how is subjective and the beneﬁts of doing so often are hard for
managers to understand when compared to tangible interrelationships. All
these factors imply that even important intangible interrelationships can be
very difﬁcult to achieve. Doing so requires a sustained commitment and the
existence of formal mechanisms through which the required transference of
skills will take place. A conducive organizational setting can greatly reduce
the cost of transferring know-how.
Competitor Interrelationships
Competitor interrelationships are present when a ﬁrm actually or
potentially competes with diversiﬁed rivals in more than one business unit.
Any action taken against multipoint competitors must consider the entire
range of jointly contested businesses. In addition, a ﬁrm’s competitive
advantage vis-à-vis a multipoint competitor depends in part on the
interrelationships that both have achieved. The competitive position of a
multipoint competitor is often more a function of its overall position in a
group of related industries than its market share in any one industry because


---PAGE BREAK---

of interrelationships. While multipoint competitors and interrelationships do
not necessarily occur together, they often do because both tangible and
intangible interrelationships lead ﬁrms to follow parallel diversiﬁcation
paths.17
Figure 9–4. Corporate Competitor Matrix
Identifying existing multipoint competitors is relatively easy with a
diagram such as that shown in Figure 9–4. For the ﬁrm shown in Figure 9–
4, competitors A, B, C, D, and E are multipoint competitors. The other
competitors are single point, but represent potential multi-points. Analysis
of the ﬁgure suggests that business units 2 and 3 are in strongly related
industries, because four competitors compete in both industries. The
presence of many competitors in two industries is a relatively strong,
though not perfect, indication that they are related. The relatedness of
industries is also a clue to predicting which ﬁrms are the most likely
potential multipoint competitors. Given the apparent relationship of the


---PAGE BREAK---

industries in which business units 2 and 3 compete, competitor H may be
the most likely potential multipoint competitor.
Table 9–6 shows the multipoint competitor matrix for the consumer
paper products sector in 1983, along with each ﬁrm’s year of entry. It is
clear that competitor interrelationships are numerous and that they have
increased signiﬁcantly over time, particularly during the 1960s and 1970s.
We would observe a similar pattern in many other groups of industries. The
pattern of competitor interrelationships in the table will be discussed further
below.
Closely analagous to the analysis of multipoint competitors is the
analysis 
of 
single-point 
competitors 
with 
different 
patterns 
of
interrelationships from the ﬁrm’s. For example, Xerox, Canon, and
Matsushita all compete in convenience copiers. However, Xerox draws on
interrelationships with its high-volume copiers and ofﬁce automation
equipment. Canon’s interrelationships have historically been strongest with
its calculator and camera businesses, while Matsushita draws on
interrelationships involving its broad range of consumer electronic and
other electronic products. Interestingly, both Canon and Matsushita are
diversifying into ofﬁce automation to match Xerox’s interrelationships
there.
Single-point competitors with different patterns of interrelationships are
important because they bring differing sources of competitive advantage to
an industry. These may be difﬁcult for a ﬁrm to match and may shift the
basis of competition. Moreover, as the copier example illustrates, single-
point competitors with different patterns of interrelationships are sometimes
prime candidates to become multipoint competitors.
Multipoint Competitors in Unrelated Industries
Where a ﬁrm faces a multipoint competitor in industries that are not
related, the strategic issues revolve around how actions in one business unit
can lead to reactions in another and how equilibrium with the competitor
can be reached in several contested industries. Because a ﬁrm and a
multipoint competitor meet each other in a number of industries rather than
one, a greater number of variables enter into determining their relative


---PAGE BREAK---

position. This implies that ﬁrms need more information about each other to
avoid mistaken interpretations of moves. It also often means that
destabilizing events in one industry can spread to others. This added
complexity of the game makes peaceful coexistence potentially difﬁcult.
TABLE 9–6 Competitor Interrelationships in Consumer Paper
Products, 1983
On the other hand, competing in a number of industries also opens up
greater possibilities for signaling, making threats, establishing blocking
positions, and taking reciprocal actions. For example, a ﬁrm threatened in
one industry might retaliate in a different industry, sending a signal of
displeasure but creating less risk of escalation than if the response were
direct. The threat that a ﬁrm can retaliate in several industries (and inﬂict a
higher cost on the competitor) may also tend to deter a competitor from
making a threatening move in the ﬁrst place.
Another stabilizing factor in multipoint competition is the fact that focal
points, or natural equilibrium points for competition, may be more
prevalent.18 Where only one industry is contested, the number of focal
points consistent with each competitor’s perception of its relative strength is
likely to be small. With equally balanced competitors, for example, an equal
division of market shares may be the only focal point. It may well be an
unstable one because any temporary shift in market shares is likely to
trigger a strong response to preserve the balance. With two jointly contested
industries, there may be a number of additional focal points that are more
stable, and one of them will tend to be found sooner.


---PAGE BREAK---

Table 9–7 illustrates this. Here focal points 2 and 3 will tend to be more
stable than focal point 1. In each industry, the high-share competitor will
tend to have a clear competitive advantage, and hence a small disturbance
will be less likely to cause either ﬁrm to precipitate a war. Similarly, the
asymmetry of positions reduces the chances that the high-share competitor
in one industry will seek an even greater share, since it remains vulnerable
to retaliation in the industry in which it is weak.
Multipoint competitors must be viewed in their totality for purposes of
offensive and defensive strategy. Most competitor analysis is done at the
business unit level, however, and looks exclusively at competitors’ positions
in a single industry. Some corporate or group-level analysis of multipoint
competitors is essential. Minimally, a broader perspective on multipoint
competitors needs to be applied to test that business unit actions against
them will not have adverse consequences in other business units. Ideally a
more comprehensive analysis of existing and potential multipoint
competitors should be done to uncover opportunities for a coordinated
offensive or defensive strategy across business units.
TABLE 9–7 Focal Points and Multipoint Competitors
 
FOCAL POINT 1
FOCAL POINT 2
FOCAL POINT 3
 
SHARE OF
MARKET
1
SHARE OF
MARKET
2
SHARE OF
MARKET
1
SHARE OF
MARKET
2
SHARE OF
MARKET
1
SHARE OF
MARKET
2
Competitor
A
50
50
60
40
70
30
Competitor
B
50
50
40
60
30
70
Some additional considerations in developing strategy vis-à-vis
multipoint competitors in unrelated businesses are as follows:


---PAGE BREAK---

Forecast possible retaliation in all jointly contested industries. A
multipoint competitor may retaliate against a move in any or all jointly
contested industries. It may well choose to respond in the industry where its
response will be the most cost-effective (see Chapter 14). For example, it
may respond in an industry in which it has a small share because it can
inﬂict a large penalty on the ﬁrm at low cost. Each industry is not a separate
battleﬁeld.
Beware of a small position by a multipoint in a key industry. A small
position held by a multipoint in an industry in which the ﬁrm has a large
share (or high cash ﬂow) can give the multipoint a lever against the ﬁrm.
Such a position may be an effective blocking position (see Chapter 14).
Look for opportunities to exploit overall corporate position vis-à-vis a
multipoint. The overall corporate position vis-à-vis a multipoint may
provide less costly and less risky means of responding to threats. Similarly,
coordinated actions in a number of industries may make it difﬁcult and very
costly for a competitor to respond.
Establish blocking positions for defensive purposes. A small presence in
one of a multipoint competitor’s key industries can provide a way to inﬂict
serious penalties on it at relatively low cost.
Strategy toward a multipoint competitor is affected by whether or not the
competitor perceives the connections among industries. Perceiving the
connection among jointly contested industries cannot be assumed where a
multipoint competitor is managed via highly autonomous business units. In
some cases, a competitor’s ignorance of multi-industry linkages may allow
the ﬁrm to gain in relative position. For example, an attack on one business
unit may divert competitor attention and resources from defending its
position in a more important business unit.
Multipoint Competition in Related Industries


---PAGE BREAK---

When a ﬁrm faces multipoint competitors in related industries, the
strategic problem increases in complexity. The issues discussed in the
previous section still apply and are often even more important because
relatedness increases the likelihood that a competitor will perceive the
linkages among businesses. The presence of tangible interrelationships
among industries, however, complicates the assessment of relative position.
A ﬁrm’s competitive advantage or disadvantage in any business unit that
faces a multipoint competitor is a function of overall position in value
activities involving interrelationships. If a ﬁrm and the competitor employ a
shared sales force or logistical system, for example, the relative cost or
differentiation of the sales force or logistical system as a whole is what
matters. The extent to which interrelationships are actually achieved is what
determines their effect on competitive advantage, not the potential to share.
In addition, the net competitive advantage from an interrelationship for both
a ﬁrm and a competitor will be inﬂuenced by their respective strategies. A
competitor may potentially face higher or lower costs of coordination or
compromise than the ﬁrm does, making an interrelationship more or less
valuable to it.
A competitor’s group of interrelated business units may not exactly
overlap with the ﬁrm’s. For example, Procter & Gamble competes in
disposable diapers, paper towels, feminine hygiene products, and bathroom
tissue, but not in paper napkins and towel wipes. Kimberly Clark, on the
other hand, is in all these businesses. When the related industries that are
jointly contested do not overlap exactly, the comparison between a ﬁrm and
a competitor must center on the ﬁrm’s whole array of interrelationships
relative to the competitor’s. Each shared activity must be analyzed for the
competitor as a whole, and compared to the ﬁrm’s cost or differentiation in
that activity. The volume provided by all ﬁve of Procter & Gamble’s paper-
related business units compared to that of Kimberly’s eight business units
will affect their relative position in shared value activities such as the
logistical system, for example. Relative position in any business unit is built
up by comparing all shared activities as well as value activities that are not
shared.
A weak relative position in one related business unit can be partially or
completely offset by superior positions in other related business units.
Procter & Gamble is in fewer paper products industries than Kimberly-


---PAGE BREAK---

Clark, for example, but it is the market leader in diapers, toilet tissue, and
paper towels. Diapers, particularly, is a very large industry relative to the
others. Procter & Gamble’s total consumer paper products volume is
undoubtedly higher than Kimberly’s. Analyzing a ﬁrm’s relative position
vis-à-vis multipoint competitors thus requires an examination of the
complete portfolios of the two ﬁrms.
The most basic strategic implication of multipoint competition in related
industries is the same as in unrelated industries—competitor analysis must
encompass the competitor’s entire portfolio of business units instead of
examining each business unit in isolation. Competitive advantage in one
business unit can be strongly affected by the extent of potential
interrelationships with other business units in the competitor’s portfolio and
by whether they are achieved.
Balance or superiority in shared value activities relative to a multipoint
competitor can potentially be achieved in many ways. Investing to gain a
stronger position in industries where a ﬁrm is already strong can offset the
advantages a competitor has from being in a broader array of related
industries. If the competitive advantage from shared activities is signiﬁcant
and no compensating advantages can be found, a ﬁrm may be forced to
match a competitor’s portfolio of related business units. Matching can be
important for defensive reasons as well as offensive ones. It may be
necessary to match a competitor’s diversiﬁcation even if the ﬁrm has a
competitive advantage in its existing business units, to prevent the
competitor from gaining the advantages of interrelationships without
opposition. Conversely, if a ﬁrm can discover new related industries that
competitors are not in, it may be able to strengthen position in important
shared value activities.
In consumer paper products, for example, there has been a great deal of
offensive and defensive diversiﬁcation. Table 9–6 shows the dates of entry
of each competitor into the respective industries. Competitors’ portfolios of
businesses have broadened since the late 1950s. Procter & Gamble’s actions
triggered this sequence of moves. P&G began in toilet tissue and then
moved into facial tissue, disposable diapers, and paper towels defensively.
Competitors with Different Patterns of Interrelationships


---PAGE BREAK---

Single-point and multipoint competitors may well pursue different types
of interrelationships, involving different shared activities or activities shared
in a different way. A good example of this situation is again the consumer
paper 
products 
ﬁeld 
(Table 
9–6). 
Competitors 
have 
pursued
interrelationships in paper products in different ways, reﬂecting their overall
portfolios of business units and the strategies employed in them. In
disposable diapers, for example, Procter & Gamble enjoys joint
procurement of common raw materials, shared technology development, a
shared sales force, and a shared logistical system among its paper product
lines. However, Procter & Gamble has separate brand names for each paper
product line. In contrast, Johnson & Johnson (J&J) competes in disposable
diapers as well as a wide line of other baby care products, all sold under the
Johnson & Johnson brand name. Its interrelationships include that shared
brand name, plus a shared sales force and shared market research in the
baby care ﬁeld. J&J enjoys little sharing in production, logistics, and
product or process technology development. Each competitor in Table 9–6
has a somewhat different pattern of interrelationships.
A competitor with a different pattern of interrelationships represents both
an opportunity and a threat. It is a threat because the competitive advantage
gained through interrelationships cannot be readily replicated, since a ﬁrm
may not be in the appropriate group of industries, or have the right strategy
to allow matching the interrelationships. To match J&J’s shared brand
name, for example, Procter & Gamble would have to change its strategy of
using a different brand for each product. This would probably fail, however,
because of the inappropriateness of using the diaper brand name on other
paper products unrelated to babies. Thus to match this particular advantage
of J&J’s, Procter & Gamble would probably have to diversify further into
baby care, where J&J is dominant.
A smart competitor with different interrelationships will attempt to shift
the nature of competition in each industry in the direction that makes its
interrelationships more strategically valuable than the ﬁrm’s. An escalation
in advertising spending in diapers would work to the advantage of J&J
because of its shared brand, for example, holding other things constant. A
competitor with different interrelationships might also attempt to reduce the
ability of a ﬁrm to achieve its interrelationships. For example, a move by
J&J to make diapers from textile-based materials would, if feasible, reduce


---PAGE BREAK---

P&G’s ability to share value activities because of its broad presence in
paper products. Similarly, a competitor might shift its strategy in a way that
raised the cost of compromise for the ﬁrm to achieve its type of
interrelationships, thereby forcing the ﬁrm to damage one business unit in
responding to a threat to another.
Thus the essence of the competitive game between ﬁrms pursuing
different forms of interrelatedness is a tug of war to see which ﬁrm can shift
the basis of competition to compromise the other’s interrelationships, or to
enhance the value of its own. The disposable diaper industry offers a good
illustration of how this game can play itself out. Procter & Gamble has
retained leadership in the diaper industry, while J&J was forced to exit from
the U.S. market after costly losses. Though J&J’s market interrelationships
were strong, advertising is a relatively small proportion of total costs in
disposable diapers. Sales force and logistical costs, where Procter &
Gamble enjoyed comparable if not superior interrelationships to J&J, are
each as high or higher than advertising. J&J could not match Procter &
Gamble’s production, procurement, and technological interrelationships,
and this proved fatal since total manufacturing costs for diapers are a very
large percentage of total cost and the pace of technological change in both
product and process is rapid. Without a markedly superior product,
therefore, J&J was unable to match the combination of Procter & Gamble’s
large market share and its interrelationships.
Forecasting Potential Competitors
Tangible interrelationships, intangible interrelationships, and competitor
interrelationships can be used to forecast likely potential competitors.
Likely potential entrants into an industry will be ﬁrms for which that
industry is:
• a logical way to create or extend an important interrelationship
• a necessary extension to match the interrelationships of competitors
To forecast potential competitors, all possible interrelationships
involving an industry are identiﬁed, including competitor interrelationships.
Each potential interrelationship will typically lead to a number of other


---PAGE BREAK---

industries. The industries in which existing competitors compete besides the
industry may suggest possible interrelationships of other types. By
identifying related industries, a ﬁrm can locate potential competitors for
whom entry into the ﬁrm’s industries would be logical. Analysis must
assess the probability that these potential competitors will actually choose
to enter the industry rather than pursue their other investment opportunities.


---PAGE BREAK---

10
Horizontal Strategy
There are two fundamental issues in corporate strategy for the diversiﬁed
ﬁrm. The ﬁrst is the selection of industries in which the diversiﬁed ﬁrm
should compete. The second issue is how the strategies of the ﬁrm’s
business units should be coordinated. How both issues are addressed should
be driven by competitive advantage—how the corporation can contribute to
the competitive advantage of business units. Business units inevitably incur
costs as part of a diversiﬁed ﬁrm, both in overhead and potentially through
constraints imposed by corporate policies. Unless the corporation can make
a more than offsetting contribution to the competitive advantage of business
units, diversiﬁcation becomes a liability.
Of the two fundamental issues in corporate strategy, diversiﬁed ﬁrms
have devoted much more attention to the ﬁrst issue than to the second.
While much attention is placed on selecting new industries, however, this
selection has too often been based on tenuous forms of relatedness. Many
diversiﬁed ﬁrms have devoted little or no attention to coordinating business
unit strategies. As the previous chapter demonstrated, however, there is a
growing need to do so as well as to enter new industries in which
contributions to competitive advantage within the corporation are clear. The
presence of multipoint competitors and competitors with different patterns
of interrelationships also dictates that a ﬁrm must exploit the available
interrelationships to maintain relative position.
Horizontal strategy coordinates the goals and strategies of related
business units. It encompasses both existing business units and the selection
of new industries to enter based on interrelationships with existing units.


---PAGE BREAK---

Horizontal strategy can and should exist at the group, sector, and corporate
level. Few ﬁrms, however, have anything but the most informal horizontal
strategy, regardless of how thoroughly they formulate strategies for
individual business units. Yet tangible interrelationships constitute a major
potential source of competitive advantage. An explicit horizontal strategy
should be at the core of group, sector, and corporate strategy.
A new pattern of competition is emerging in many industries, driven by
the strong trends described earlier. Competition will be among clusters of
related business units rather than among individual business units.
Coordinated business unit strategies and related diversiﬁcation into new
industries will deepen and extend interrelationships. Strategic choices will
increasingly involve a partnership of the business unit and the ﬁrm as a
whole. Business unit managers will seek new ways to gain competitive
advantage from being part of the diversiﬁed ﬁrm other than capital
availability.
Horizontal strategy cannot be left implicit or allowed to emerge on a
bottom-up basis from business units. Firms without an explicit horizontal
strategy will have difﬁculty resisting the strong pressures that always exist
to undermine corporate performance by optimizing that of individual
business units, particularly those ﬁrms with a tradition of decentralized
decision-making. Moreover, it is a widely held fallacy that business units
should propose and all agree on the desirability of an interrelationship for it
to be strategically sound. This attitude is based on theories of business unit
autonomy that developed in the 1970s. It promotes a hands-off posture by
corporate and group executives and places the burden of identifying and
exploiting interrelationships on business unit managers who lack the
resources and inﬂuence to do so. Bottom-up horizontal strategy rarely ever
happens.
The Need for Explicit Horizontal Strategy
Organizational structure in most ﬁrms works against achieving
interrelationships. However, organizational impediments alone do not
explain why related business units, proceeding independently, will rarely
optimize the competitive position of the ﬁrm as a whole. Without a


---PAGE BREAK---

horizontal strategy, business units may well act in ways that reduce rather
than enhance their ability to exploit interrelationships:
Business units will value interrelationships differently and not agree to
pursue them. Business units will rarely reap equal beneﬁts from an
interrelationship because of differences in size, strategy, or industry. The
costs of compromise required to pursue an interrelationship can differ
among business units, as can the impact of sharing on their cost positions or
differentiation. Some business units may rightly conclude that the costs of
coordination and compromise outweigh the value of the interrelationship to
them, and interrelationships of value to the ﬁrm as a whole will never be
achieved. Large and currently successful business units often prove the most
resistant to pursuing interrelationships, as do business units which are asked
to transfer their know-how to others to gain intangible interrelationships.
Business 
unit 
strategies 
will 
evolve 
in 
ways 
that 
weaken
interrelationships. Left to formulate strategies independently, business units
may well proceed in inconsistent directions that can make interrelationships
more difﬁcult to achieve. For example, when two business units share a
common buyer or channel, one may pursue a differentiation strategy while
another evolves toward striving for a low-cost position. Though these
strategies may well be appropriate for the business units in isolation, the
potential interrelationships between the two units imply that the inconsistent
strategies will confuse buyers or channels, blur the overall brand image of
the ﬁrm in the related industries involved, and diminish opportunities to
share a brand name and sales force. Another example is the case where two
business units specify slightly different components even though they could
use a common one. Independent business unit strategies will always
undervalue beneﬁts that accrue not to them, but to the ﬁrm as a whole.
Pricing and investment decisions taken independently may erode ﬁrm
position. Interrelationships imply that proﬁts should be taken in some
business units and not other related ones. For example, lowering prices in
one business unit to boost volume can lead to lower costs in another
business unit through increasing the overall ﬁrm purchasing power in shared
components or raw material.1 Yet this sort of action would never be


---PAGE BREAK---

contemplated by business units that develop strategies independently and
are evaluated solely by their own results. This problem cannot be solved
through transfer pricing, because it arises even though business units do not
buy or sell from each other.
There is also a risk of suboptimal investment decisions if related
business units proceed independently. For example, one business unit
sharing a component may have buyers which are extremely price-sensitive
while the buyers served by other business unit are not. The second business
unit will attach little value to investments that reduce the cost of the
common component and will allocate its resources elsewhere. The business
unit beneﬁting greatly from cost reduction may not be able to justify the
investment on its own.
Business units will have a tendency to go outside to form alliances to
achieve interrelationships available internally. Business units acting
independently may not fully appreciate the beneﬁts of internal projects in
areas such as shared marketing, production, technology development, and
sourcing 
compared 
to 
alliances 
with 
outside 
ﬁrms. 
Achieving
interrelationships internally implies that all the beneﬁts accrue to the ﬁrm.
Interrelationships achieved through coalitions with outside ﬁrms must share
some of the beneﬁts with coalition partners. Outside alliances can also
strengthen coalition partners that eventually emerge as competitors, and can
lead to the diffusion of the ﬁrm’s proprietary technology. These arguments
imply that in many instances business units should accept greater costs of
compromise to work with sister units on an interrelationship. However,
managers rarely see it this way. In fact, they often take the opposite view;
they undervalue the beneﬁts to the ﬁrm as a whole and prefer to deal with
independent ﬁrms where they have full control over the relationship. Some
of the organizational problems that reinforce these tendencies are described
in Chapter 11.
Business units may ignore key potential competitors or the true
signiﬁcance of existing competitors. As described earlier, competitor
analyses by business units will often fail to uncover potential competitors or
the interrelationships that are vital to their existing competitors’ relative


---PAGE BREAK---

positions. This narrow perspective of competitors also obscures the way in
which competitors view an industry within their broader strategies, an
important determinant of competitor behavior. Business units proceeding
independently will rarely consider the ways in which their actions might
trigger competitive response that affects sister business units.
Transfer of know-how among generically similar business units will not
occur. The transfer of know-how that underpins intangible interrelationships
does not occur naturally. Business units will want to develop their own
strategies, and believe that they know their industries the best. They can
rarely be expected to seek out know-how elsewhere in the ﬁrm. Business
units with the know-how will have little incentive to transfer it, particularly
if it involves the time of some of their best people or involves proprietary
technology that might leak out.
Without an explicit horizontal strategy, there will be no systematic
mechanism to identify, reinforce, and extend interrelationships. Business
units acting independently simply do not have the same incentives to
propose and advocate strategies based on interrelationship as do higher level
managers with a broader perspective.
Formulating Horizontal Strategy
Formulating horizontal strategy involves a number of analytical steps
that ﬂow from the framework described in Chapter 9:
1.  Identify all tangible interrelationships. The starting point in
formulating horizontal strategy is to identify systematically all the tangible
interrelationships that are actually or potentially present among a ﬁrm’s
business units. The ﬁrst step in doing so is to examine value chains of each
business unit for actual and possible opportunities for sharing. Initially, all
interrelationships that seem to be present should be identiﬁed; illusory or
insigniﬁcant interrelationships can be eliminated through further analysis.
In searching for interrelationships, the speciﬁc characteristics of value
activities that would provide a basis for sharing must be identiﬁed. For
example, meaningful production interrelationships must be based on


---PAGE BREAK---

similarities in speciﬁc production equipment or process steps rather than a
generalized view that there are similar processes. Similarly, speciﬁc
technologies 
and 
subtechnologies 
are 
the 
basis 
of 
technology
interrelationships, and common decision makers in buyers or channels are
the basis of key market interrelationships.
Diagrams like Figure 10–1 provide a simple mechanism to use in
identifying interrelationships within a ﬁrm.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 10–1. Tangible Interrelationships in a Diversiﬁed Firm


---PAGE BREAK---

Each cell of the interrelationship matrix displays the interrelationships
between a pair of business units, drawing from the types of
interrelationships expressed in Table 9–1 in the previous chapter. If
interrelationships are extensive, a separate matrix can be prepared for each
type of interrelationship. The linkage diagram is another way to display
interrelationships that may be clearer if there are a manageable number of
business units. It allows the clustering of business units that have strong
interrelationships, and can facilitate the visualization of groupings of units
that could be the basis for groups or sectors. Whatever graphical tool one
uses, interrelationships should be divided into potential interrelationships
and those that are actually being achieved.
There are often many different interrelationships within a diversiﬁed
ﬁrm. Different groups of business units are frequently related in different
ways. One group of business units may be related by their markets, while a
different, but partially overlapping, group of business units is related in
production. The interrelationship matrix in Figure 10–1 illustrates one such
pattern, where business units 1, 3, and 4 have a common component and
common raw material, while business units 1, 2, and 3 have a common
buyer.
In a diversiﬁed ﬁrm with many business units, a complex pattern of
interrelationships often emerges. To simplify the analytical task of
identifying interrelationships, it may be possible to break up a diversiﬁed
ﬁrm into a number of clusters of business units that have many
interrelationships among themselves, but relatively few with other clusters.
The correspondence of such clusters to the groups or sectors that have been
established is a subject to which I will return in Chapter 11. Where the
interrelationships between two business units are pervasive and involve
many signiﬁcant value activities, the business unit deﬁnitions are probably
inappropriate. The issues in drawing business unit boundaries have been
discussed in Chapter 7.
2. Trace tangible interrelationships outside the boundaries of the ﬁrm. A
ﬁrm will rarely compete in all the industries that are related to its current
business units. Thus, it is necessary to identify interrelationships between a
ﬁrm’s existing business units and other industries not currently in its
portfolio. This requires that a ﬁrm examine important value activities to


---PAGE BREAK---

look for related industries where sharing or further sharing might be
feasible. A ﬁrm with an effective sales force serving a particular buyer
group, for example, should identify other products purchased by the same
buyer group or products that ﬁt the sales force’s expertise that might be sold
to other buyer groups. Similarly, each brand name, distribution channel,
logistical system, technological development activity, and other important
value activity should be probed for potential opportunities for sharing with
other industries.
Identifying paths of interrelationship outside a ﬁrm is a creative task, but
one that will yield considerable beneﬁts in diversiﬁcation planning and in
the development of defensive strategies to anticipate and block potential
entrants. The portfolios of diversiﬁed competitors can often provide
important clues to industries with important interrelationships to the ﬁrm’s.
However, detecting new interrelationships not exploited by any competitor
can be even more valuable.
3.  Identify possible intangible interrelationships. After identifying
tangible interrelationships, the next step is to seek out intangible
interrelationships. This involves the isolation of value activities in which a
ﬁrm has valuable know-how that might be useable in other business units or
in new industries. It also requires identifying new industries in which a
presence would lead to know-how that is valuable in the ﬁrm’s existing
business units. Signals of potential intangible interrelationships include
similarities in generic strategy, buyer type, or value chain conﬁguration.
While identifying intangible interrelationships is subtle, it can be important.
Many potential intangible interrelationships are usually present, which
makes screening them to access their importance to competitive advantage
an essential task.
4.  Identify competitor interrelationships. A ﬁrm must identify all its
multipoint competitors, potential multipoint competitors, and competitors
pursuing different patterns of interrelationships. A diagram such as that in
Figure 9–4 above can provide a structure for doing so. The existence of
multipoint competitors often provides clues about the presence of
interrelationships, and can aid in their identiﬁcation. Conversely,
interrelationships often are useful predictors of potential new competitors,


---PAGE BREAK---

as described above. After the array of multipoint competitors has been
identiﬁed from a ﬁrmwide perspective, the interrelationships within each
important competitor’s portfolio must be charted. Often competitors have
different interrelationships that involve different sets of businesses.
5. Assess the importance of interrelationships to competitive advantage.
The net competitive advantage from a tangible interrelationship is a
function of the advantage from sharing, the costs of sharing, and the
difﬁculty of matching the interrelationship. Shared activities must be
measured against the corresponding activities of competitors on all three
dimensions. The tangible interrelationships present in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm are
often numerous. However, experience has shown that the number with
strategic importance is likely to be relatively small. The challenge is to
isolate the important ones, including those that involve industries in which a
ﬁrm has no presence currently. The fact that an interrelationship is not being
achieved is not a reliable sign that it is not important. The interrelationship
may have been overlooked, or the costs of compromise associated with it
may be reduced by making business unit strategies more consistent.
Intangible interrelationships lead to competitive advantage if the beneﬁts
of transferring know-how exceed the cost of transferring it. Transferring
know-how is beneﬁcial if the similarities among value activities are
signiﬁcant, the activities are important to competitive advantage in the
industries involved, and the ﬁrm has know-how that can materially enhance
competitive advantage if it is transferred. Experience suggests that
skepticism is warranted in assessing intangible interrelationships to avoid
pursuing intellectually plausible but practically useless similarities among
businesses.
6. Develop a coordinated horizontal strategy to achieve and enhance the
most important interrelationships. Important interrelationships can be
achieved or enhanced in a variety of ways.
Share Appropriate Value Activities. Value activities of related business
units should be shared if the beneﬁts exceed the costs. This may involve
measures such as combining sales forces, rationalizing manufacturing
facilities, coordinating procurement, and rebranding product lines. Sharing


---PAGE BREAK---

will always require some adjustments to current practices. Business unit
strategies may need to be modiﬁed to gain maximum advantage from
sharing. Similarly, activities may have to be redesigned to reduce the cost of
compromise.
Coordinate Strategic Postures of Related Business Units. The strategies
of related business units should be coordinated to increase the competitive
advantage of interrelationships and reduce the costs of compromise. This
can involve everything from minor adjustments of business unit strategies to
major repositionings, including acquisitions and divestitures. The
coordination of strategies requires that marketing programs and investment
spending plans are consistent, and that business units are aware of each
other’s plans in product development and other important areas.
Coordination also implies that actions toward competitors are part of an
integrated group, sector, or corporate battle plan. Market interrelationships
often create the greatest need for consistent business unit strategies, in order
to gain the maximum impact with common customers or channels.
However, a degree of consistency is required for achieving and exploiting
any form of interrelationship. Coordinating business units can involve
difﬁcult tradeoffs between enhancing interrelationships and the position of
individual business units. These tradeoffs are often difﬁcult. However
without a horizontal strategy they will rarely even be considered regardless
of the beneﬁts to the ﬁrm.
Distinguish the Goals of Business Units. The goals of business units
should be set to reﬂect the role of business units in interrelationships. Some
business units, for example, might be given more ambitious sales targets but
lower proﬁt goals because of the contribution of their volume to the position
of other business units. Asking all business units to meet the same goals
may seem to be the “fairest” solution, but it also threatens to undermine
some important sources of competitive advantage.
Business unit goals that reﬂect interrelationships are broader than those
prescribed in portfolio planning techniques, commonly involving mandates
such as build, hold, or harvest. Portfolio models typically ignore
interrelationships, and set different goals for business units only in the sense
that some business units are expected to generate cash while other are


---PAGE BREAK---

expected to use it. Interrelationships provide a broader perspective of
corporate strategy based on competitive advantage, within which cash ﬂow
considerations are subsumed.
Coordinate Offensive and Defensive Strategies Against Multipoint
Competitors and Competitors with Different Interrelationships. There must
be an overall ﬁrm game plan for dealing with each signiﬁcant multipoint
competitor and each competitor with a different pattern of interrelationships
that could be threatening. Ideally, a ﬁrm should seek to promote industry
evolution in directions that increase the value of its interrelationships and
compromise the value of competitors. More speciﬁc options for offensive
and defensive strategy are discussed in Chapters 14 and 15.
Exploit Important Intangible Interrelationships through Formal
Programs for Exchanging Know-How. A ﬁrm must actively encourage the
transfer of know-how among business units with potentially important
generic similarities. Receiving business units may not be receptive because
of “not invented here” problems, and business units asked to transfer
expertise may resent the commitment of time and people involved.
Achieving intangible interrelationships will require a shared understanding
of their value, and organizational mechanisms to facilitate the transference
of know-how.
Diversify to Strengthen Important Interrelationships or Create New
Ones. Diversiﬁcation strategy should focus on ﬁnding and entering new
businesses that reinforce the most important interrelationships or creating
new interrelationships of high strategic importance. Diversiﬁcation strategy
will be treated in the next section.
Sell Business Units That Do Not Have Signiﬁcant Interrelationships with
Others or That Make the Achievement of Important Interrelationships More
Difﬁcult. Business units that have no important interrelationships to others
in a ﬁrm or are not likely bases of further diversiﬁcation are candidates for
sale in the long term. Even if they are attractive and proﬁtable, such
business units will be worth as much or even more to other owners, since
being part of the ﬁrm does not enhance their competitive advantage and


---PAGE BREAK---

being part of another ﬁrm might. A ﬁrm can thus be in a position to recover
the full value to it or more of such business units by selling them. The
proceeds can then be invested in business units where interrelationships can
enhance competitive advantage. Practical considerations mean that such a
strategy may have to be implemented over the long-term, however. Buyers
that recognize the value of a business unit may not be easy to ﬁnd, and it
may be hard to replace a highly proﬁtable, albeit unrelated business unit
with an equally attractive one, no matter how great the potential
interrelationships might be.
The presence of some marginally related business units may make it
more difﬁcult to achieve other, more important interrelationships. They, too,
are candidates for sale. A ﬁrm may be less able to build a shared
distribution channel, for example, if it has another business unit that uses a
different and competing channel to reach the same buyer group. Similarly, a
ﬁrm may be less able to exploit opportunities for sharing a sales force and
marketing to reach a particular buyer group if it has a business unit in the
buyer group’s industry that competes with it. Interrelationships may create
conﬂicts with buyers, suppliers, or channels. American Express has
experienced this as it increasingly competes with banks which are also a
key outlet for its travelers checks. Unlocking some interrelationships, then,
may require a ﬁrm to get out of some industries.
When there are several patterns of interrelationships within a ﬁrm
involving different groups of business units, taking some of the steps noted
above may involve tradeoffs. Coordinating strategic postures to facilitate
one type of interrelationship can reduce the ability to achieve another.
Distinguishing business unit goals can lead to the same sort of tradeoff.
Where such tradeoffs exist, the principle must be to reinforce those
interrelationships that have the greatest impact on competitive advantage,
even at the expense of others. However, organizational mechanisms
described in the next chapter can often allow interrelationships among
different groups of business units to be achieved simultaneously.
7. 
Create 
horizontal 
organizational 
mechanisms 
to 
assure
implementation. Firms cannot successfully exploit interrelationships


---PAGE BREAK---

without a horizontal organizational structure that encourages coordination
and transfers skills across business unit lines. Such tasks as deﬁning the
right business units, clustering them into the proper groups and sectors, and
establishing incentives for business unit managers to work together are vital
to success. The principles of horizontal organization are the subject of
Chapter 11.
Interrelationships and Diversiﬁcation Strategy
Diversiﬁcation based on interrelationships is the form of diversiﬁcation
with the greatest likelihood of increasing competitive advantage in existing
industries or leading to sustainable competitive advantage in new industries.
Both tangible and intangible interrelationships have an important role in
diversiﬁcation strategy. Tangible interrelationships should be the starting
point for formulating diversiﬁcation strategy. Intangible interrelationships
have a less certain effect on competitive advantage and are more difﬁcult to
achieve in practice than tangible interrelationships.
Interrelationships can allow a ﬁrm diversifying through internal
development to overcome entry barriers into a new industry more cheaply
than other potential entrants that lack them.2 The presence of
interrelationships also facilitates entry through acquisition because an
acquisition candidate will have greater value to the ﬁrm than it does to its
present owners or to other bidders without similar interrelationships. Hence
proﬁts associated with the acquisition are less likely to be bid away in
setting the purchase price. The presence of interrelationships also means
that diversiﬁcation through either an acquisition or internal development
will beneﬁt existing business units that have interrelationships with the new
business unit.
Any diversiﬁcation move must also pass the test of structural
attractiveness (Chapter 1). Industries that are related to a ﬁrm’s existing
business units are not more structurally attractive simply because of their
relatedness. A new business unit must be in an industry that is actually or
potentially structurally attractive. The presence of interrelationships per se
is not sufﬁcient justiﬁcation for entering an industry unless they allow a
ﬁrm to transform an unattractive industry into an attractive one. Thus
seeking industries with both an attractive structure and interrelationships


---PAGE BREAK---

that will yield the ﬁrm a competitive advantage in competing in those
industries are the dual guides to diversiﬁcation strategy.
Diversiﬁcation Based on Tangible Interrelationships
Diversiﬁcation strategy can seek to extend any of the types of tangible
interrelationships described in Table 9–1. The most desirable directions for
diversiﬁcation are those that lead to interrelationships offering the greatest
impact on competitive advantage, using the criteria described earlier. In
some cases, diversiﬁcation will strengthen a ﬁrm’s position against key
competitors, while in others it will be dictated by the need to match
competitors’ diversiﬁcation defensively. A ﬁrm may also enter industries
where it can use interrelationships to overwhelm single-business
competitors or competitors with poorly conceived arrays of business units.
The beneﬁts of tangible interrelationships can ﬂow in two directions. It is
just as valuable to pursue interrelationships that enhance the position of
existing units as it is to use existing unit positions to improve new business
units.
Three of the broad types of tangible interrelationships shown in Table 9–
1—market, 
production, 
and 
technological—represent 
three 
broad
diversiﬁcation avenues. A market-oriented diversiﬁcation strategy aims to
sell new products to common buyers, channels, or geographic markets in
order to reap the beneﬁts of market interrelationships. A production-
oriented diversiﬁcation strategy aims to produce similar products with
shared production value activities. Procurement interrelationships often
stem 
from 
production 
interrelationships. 
A 
technology-oriented
diversiﬁcation strategy aims to develop or enter new industries based on
similar core technologies, that involve products sold to either existing or
new markets. The successful Japanese typewriter ﬁrm Brother, for example,
uses its “technology tree” in driving diversiﬁcation. Brother has built on
technologies developed in one business to enter another. Small motor
technology from the original sewing machine business led to entering small
appliances and electric typewriters, while electronics expertise gained in
typewriters has led to entering electronic printers.


---PAGE BREAK---

These three broad diversiﬁcation paths often lead a ﬁrm in different
directions. Broadening the range of products sold to common buyers,
channels or geographic areas often involves different technologies and
production processes, while broadening the range of products with similar
technologies or production processes implies getting into new markets. This
is not always true, however. In consumer electronics, for example, ﬁrms
such as Sony and Matsushita have diversiﬁed into new products with
technology shared with their existing products. Opportunities also existed at
the same time for market and production interrelationships. Sony and
Matsushita (Panasonic) have each developed shared value activities such as
brand names, service organizations, plants, and procurement across wide
product lines. Interrelationships, in fact, are one of their primary sources of
competitive advantage. Another example is Black and Decker’s entry into
small appliances, which exploits technological interrelationships and
production interrelationships involving small electric motors used in its core
business, power tools.
Diversiﬁcation will offer the greatest potential for enhancing overall ﬁrm
position when several important value activities can be shared. The most
successful diversiﬁers do not view market-, production-, and technology-
oriented diversiﬁcation as mutually exclusive, but seek ways to combine
them. In my study of interrelationships in 75 Fortune 500 companies in
1971 and 1981 described in Chapter 9, high-technology companies showed
the greatest ability to increase interrelationships in markets, production, and
technology simultaneously. This ﬁnding is consistent with the role of
electronics/information processing technology in linking industries together.
As technology develops, ﬁrms should be able to ﬁnd more avenues for
diversiﬁcation where multiple forms of interrelationships can be exploited.
Diversiﬁcation Through Beachheads
Firms will differ in their ability to achieve important interrelationships
through diversiﬁcation. The opportunities a ﬁrm has may be limited by a
number of factors:


---PAGE BREAK---

•  The existing mix of business units in the ﬁrm may enjoy few
meaningful interrelationships with other industries.
• The signiﬁcant interrelationships may have already been exploited.
•  The industries that are related to a ﬁrm’s existing industries may be
structurally unattractive.
• No feasible strategy may exist for entering related industries because
competitors have preempted.
• Antitrust considerations preclude entry into some related industries.
When opportunities to diversify along tangible interrelationships are few
or exhausted, a ﬁrm should consider diversiﬁcation based on intangible
interrelationships. 
Since 
intangible 
interrelationships 
involve 
the
transference of generic skills and not actual sharing of activities, there will
usually be more industries with potential intangible interrelationships to
existing business units than industries with tangible interrelationships.
Finding opportunities in which intangible interrelationships will lead to
competitive advantage is a subtle process, though, because it requires that a
ﬁrm understand a new industry well enough to see how transference of
skills will really make a difference.
Generic similarity of a new industry to an existing industry does not
itself imply that transference of skills will create competitive advantage.
Competitors in the new industry can have equal or superior skills
themselves. The relevance of a ﬁrm’s skills in a new industry must also be
questioned, and superﬁcial analyses of generic similarities can be very
misleading. Basing diversiﬁcation on imagined or irrelevant generic
similarities among industries led to the failure of diversiﬁcation strategies in
the 1960s and 1970s. All these caveats aside, however, careful industry
analyses can uncover new industries in which intangible interrelationships
are a sound basis for diversiﬁcation.
Diversiﬁcation based on intangible interrelationships should be viewed
not only as a stand-alone opportunity, however, but also as a potential
beachhead. Once a ﬁrm enters a new industry based on intangible
interrelationships, it can then use this beachhead to spawn new
opportunities for diversiﬁcation based on tangible interrelationships. A
good example is Procter & Gamble’s initial acquisition of Charmin Paper
Company, a beachhead which allowed Procter & Gamble to build the highly


---PAGE BREAK---

interrelated cluster of paper products business units described earlier. Figure
10–2 illustrates schematically the process of diversifying through
beachheads. An intangible interrelationship with the original cluster of
tangibly related business units becomes the foundation for a new cluster.
The diversiﬁed ﬁrm emerges as a number of clusters of business units
related by tangible interrelationships, with the clusters related by intangible
interrelationships. A key test of diversiﬁcation opportunities based on
intangible interrelationships, therefore, is their potential as a beachhead.
Figure 10–2. Interrelationships and the Pattern of Diversiﬁcation
Diversiﬁcation and Corporate Resources
The unique corporate assets of a diversiﬁed ﬁrm are the existing and
potential interrelationships that reside in the value chains of its business
units. These interrelationships represent the major contribution of a
diversiﬁed ﬁrm to its business units, and to the new industries it might enter.
The central role of the diversiﬁed ﬁrm is to nurture and expand these
interrelationships.


---PAGE BREAK---

Diversiﬁcation is a means to widen a ﬁrm’s stock of assets and skills by
expanding the perimeter of the value activities in which it participates. Each
new industry not only may be related to existing ones, but also may bring
value activities to the ﬁrm that are the sources of new interrelationships. The
best diversiﬁcation is that which does both—it reinforces the ﬁrm’s existing
strengths and creates the basis for new ones.
Pitfalls in Horizontal Strategy
Although substantial competitive advantages can be gained from
harnessing interrelationships, pitfalls exist in implementing horizontal
strategy. The most serious pitfall is to ignore interrelationships altogether.
Strategic planning solely done by business units is not enough. At the same
time, however, it can be an equally big mistake to assume that every
relationship should be pursued.
Pitfalls in Ignoring Interrelationships
This chapter and Chapter 9 have raised numerous pitfalls that result from
ignoring interrelationships. A few notable ones are mentioned here:
Misreading the Strategic Contributions of Business Units. A ﬁrm that
fails to understand interrelationships will measure business unit
performance on a stand-alone basis. It may, in the process, encourage units
to take actions that will undermine interrelationships and erode overall ﬁrm
position.
Misreading Position Vis-à-vis Key Competitors. A ﬁrm that plans only at
the business unit level will fail to diagnose its position vis-à-vis key
diversiﬁed competitors. It will also fail to formulate moves against them
that enhance overall ﬁrm position.
Portfolio Management. The presence of interrelationships, particularly
tangible interrelationships, limits the usefulness of portfolio planning
models as they are usually applied. Portfolio planning models are narrowly
conceived tools designed to aid a diversiﬁed corporation in achieving a


---PAGE BREAK---

ﬁnancially balanced portfolio. In doing so, they may obscure the most
essential strategic issue in constructing a ﬁrm’s portfolio of businesses—the
creation and enhancement of interrelationships. When interrelationships
exist, decisions to build or harvest business units cannot be made
independently. The use of portfolio tools is particularly dangerous at the
group or sector level, because business units within a group or sector tend to
have tangible interrelationships and need to be managed accordingly.
Corporate, sector, and group executives must not mistake portfolio
planning for horizontal strategy. Horizontal strategy is more difﬁcult to
formulate than portfolio strategy, but is the way a diversiﬁed ﬁrm creates
true economic beneﬁts for its business units.
Pitfalls in Pursuing Interrelationships
It can be equally risky to pursue interrelationships indiscriminately:
Negative Leverage from Sharing or Transfering Know-how. Tangible
interrelationships usually involve some compromise in the strategies of the
business 
units 
involved. 
Because 
of 
this, 
pursuing 
ill-chosen
interrelationships can harm all the involved business units for little net
strategic gain. Transferring know-how also involves costs, and transferring
know-how that is in fact inappropriate to competition in another business
unit in the name of supposed intangible interrelationships can also do great
harm. There must be clear potential net beneﬁts of sharing or transfer of
know-how for the related business units in order for an interrelationship to
be strategically desirable.
Pursuing Interrelationships Involving Value Activities That Are Small,
Have Few Scale or Learning Economies, or Have Little Effect on
Differentiation. In their zeal to build a related diversiﬁcation strategy, ﬁrms
can fall into the trap of making too much of an interrelationship that, while
indeed present, has little competitive signiﬁcance. The presence of an
interrelationship does not imply that a horizontal strategy should be built
around it, even if it is the only one available.


---PAGE BREAK---

Illusory Interrelatedness. Often superﬁcial similarities in technologies,
logistical systems, fabrication processes, and buyer groups are not, in fact, a
basis for shared activities. A technology that appears similar in two business
units may, upon closer scrutiny, be sold to buyers with very different needs
that compromise the ability to employ a shared R&D organization. Despite
the apparent similarity to outsiders between offshore drilling for oil and
onshore drilling, for example, few activities in fact can be shared by drilling
contractors. Intangible interrelationships can also be illusory. There are
many generic similarities among business units that are not important for
competition. Potential interrelationships should be scrutinized carefully
before being translated into shared activities or altered strategies, to prevent
discovering the lack of compatibility through a failure.


---PAGE BREAK---

11
Achieving Interrelationships
Achieving interrelationships in practice has proven to be extraordinarily
difﬁcult for many ﬁrms. Part of the reason is that the costs of sharing mean
that some interrelationships do not enhance competitive advantage and
should not be implemented. Even for interrelationships that clearly create
competitive advantage, however, a formidable array of organizational
impediments work against achieving them in practice, ranging from
organizational structure to cultural and managerial factors. In fact,
achieving interrelationships among business units contradicts the
philosophy prevailing in many diversiﬁed ﬁrms.1
Most major diversiﬁed ﬁrms have decentralized into business units with
proﬁt responsibility, embracing the principle of autonomy. Some ﬁrms
practice decentralization with near-religious devotion. Uncontrolled
decentralization, however, undermines the pursuit of interrelationships by
encouraging business unit managers to pursue strategies that maximize unit
performance and not the corporations. Moreover, portfolio planning
techniques have reinforced the view of business units as unconnected cash
generators or users. Many other organizational practices typical of large
diversiﬁed ﬁrms also work against interrelationships, such as incentive
plans and transfer pricing policies. The organizational difﬁculties of
achieving even clearly beneﬁcial interrelationships is perhaps the single
biggest reason many managers have rejected the concept of synergy.
Any treatment of strategic interrelationships among business units must
confront the difﬁculties of actually achieving them or horizontal strategies
will fail.2 Throughout this chapter, I will make the assumption that a ﬁrm


---PAGE BREAK---

has identiﬁed interrelationships that meet the tests of strategic signiﬁcance
described in Chapter 9. The focus here is on mechanisms for exploiting
them.
I will ﬁrst identify the organizational impediments to achieving
interrelationships that are present in many ﬁrms and their causes. Having
done so, I will describe the ways in which ﬁrms can overcome these
impediments through what I term horizontal organization. The predominant
form of corporate organization in diversiﬁed ﬁrms is a vertical organization,
through which top management directs the activities of the various business
units. Information, decisions, and resources ﬂow vertically, from business
units to top management and vice versa. Organizational subunits in
between, often referred to as groups and sectors, are designed primarily to
oversee this vertical process and reduce the span of control of top
management. Firmwide strategic planning and incentive systems further
reinforce the vertical nature of decision making and control.
In contrast, horizontal organization in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm overlays the
business unit structure and facilitates collaboration among business units.
Horizontal organizational mechanisms include the grouping of business
units, standing committees, management systems, human resources
policies, and a variety of other formal and informal devices designed to
coordinate 
business 
unit 
activities. 
Any 
ﬁrm 
with 
signiﬁcant
interrelationships needs a horizontal corporate organization to supplement
its vertical organization. The pervasiveness of interrelationships suggests
that a new organizational form for managing the diversiﬁed ﬁrm will
become increasingly necessary—one that involves a much closer balance
between the horizontal and vertical dimensions of organization.
Horizontal organization does not seek to eliminate or replace
decentralization. The logic of decentralization is sound and some diversiﬁed
ﬁrms, in fact, have failed to decentralize enough. Horizontal organization
overlays a set of mechanisms on the vertical organization to ensure that
interrelationships yielding a competitive advantage are exploited.3 The
result is not a matrix organization, but independent business units that are
connected by organizational devices and a set of shared values. While
business unit autonomy may be reduced in the process, the real purpose of
horizontal organization is to redeﬁne business unit autonomy in terms more
conducive to the ﬁrm’s overall success.


---PAGE BREAK---

Impediments to Achieving Interrelationships
Achieving tangible interrelationships requires a business unit to share
activities in its value chain with other units while remaining a separate
entity that acts independently in other value activities and maintains proﬁt
responsibility. Similarly, achieving intangible interrelationships requires the
transfer 
of 
know-how 
among 
business 
units. 
The 
pursuit 
of
interrelationships may well lead to joint activity with more than one sister
unit in different parts of the value chain. A business unit may share a sales
force with one division, for example, and a plant with another.
Implementing any interrelationship inevitably requires costs of
coordination no matter how a ﬁrm is organized. However, a variety of
organizational impediments can raise these costs unnecessarily for many
ﬁrms. These impediments bear some relationship to the factors that make
functional coordination difﬁcult within a single business unit. However, the
organizational impediments to interrelationships are usually much stronger
than impediments to functional coordination. Nothing compels coordination
among business units, while the functions within a business unit must
coordinate in order to do business. In fact, business units often view each
other as rivals competing for limited resources and senior management
attention on the basis of performance.
Sources of Impediments
Impediments to business unit coordination grow out of the differences
between the perspective of business unit and corporate managers. Some of
the most important impediments are as follows:
ASYMMETRIC BENEFITS
Interrelationships are often resisted by some business units because the
beneﬁts are or appear to be asymmetric. As I discussed in previous chapters,
differences in the size and strategy of business units often mean that the
competitive advantage arising from an interrelationship accrues more to one
business unit than another. In some cases, an interrelationship can have a
net negative impact on one business unit while being clearly beneﬁcial to


---PAGE BREAK---

the ﬁrm as a whole. Unless the motivation system reﬂects these differences,
it will be extremely difﬁcult to get business units to agree to pursue an
interrelationship and to work together to implement it successfully. Instead,
they become embroiled in fruitless negotiations over the allocation of
shared costs or over procedures for sharing revenue. The result is that
interrelationships that clearly beneﬁt all the involved business units are
quickly adopted when recognized, but those with asymmetric beneﬁts
frequently remain untapped.
LOSS OF AUTONOMY AND CONTROL
In addition to resistance on economic grounds, managers often
vigorously resist interrelationships to avoid a perceived or actual loss of
autonomy. Some of the common sources of resistance include:
Protection of Turf. Business unit managers may jealously guard their
“turf.” They exercise full control over their operations and draw personal
satisfaction from it as well as perceived inﬂuence within the corporation.
Autonomy has become associated in many ﬁrms with full control over all
functions, which makes managers loath to give up any of them.
Perceived Dilution of Buyer Relationships. Business units often resist
market interrelationships because of fears that they will lose control of their
buyers, or that relations with buyers will be damaged. Business units are
concerned that sister units will steal “their” buyers, damage their image, or
create confusion in buyers’ minds over the appropriate point of contact with
the ﬁrm. Stockbrokers, for example, have been reluctant to share client lists
with sister units in their parent companies despite the existence of
interrelationships in ﬁnancial services.
Inability to “Fire” a Sister Division. Business units often feel in more
control when dealing with an outside company, rather than being saddled
with a sister unit’s service, delivery, or product problems. Working with a
sister unit is perceived as locking the business unit into an adverse
bargaining situation, because corporate management will be prone to
intervene in disputes and not allow an interrelationship to be severed in the


---PAGE BREAK---

event of poor sister unit performance. Managers perceive fewer constraints
in dealing with an outside ﬁrm, because an outside ﬁrm can be “ﬁred” if the
interrelationship fails.4
Conﬂicts Over Priorities in Shared Activities. Business units are often
quick to recognize the risk of conﬂicting priorities in shared value activities
such as a shared sales force, shared logistical network, or shared
development center. In a shared development center, for example,
engineering time may be allocated in favor of the business unit with the
most pressing need; a shared sales force will inevitably concentrate more on
some products than others. While setting such priorities is rational from a
corporate viewpoint, business unit managers do not welcome the prospect
of compromising their plans. Thus business units resist sharing in the ﬁrst
place, or press to create their own autonomous unit once the shared activity
has been established.
Unfair Blame for Poor Performance. Business unit managers often fear
that they will be unfairly blamed for the failure of an interrelationship.
Managers see the possibility that they will be evaluated for results over
which they lack full control. This can encourage them to forgo the beneﬁt of
an interrelationship to ensure control over their own destiny.
A ﬁrm’s history and organizational conﬁguration have an important
inﬂuence on the strength of managers’ desire for complete autonomy. In
many diversiﬁed ﬁrms, business unit autonomy is a longstanding policy that
has been carefully nurtured and emphasized. In companies such as
Consolidated Foods, Beatrice Foods, Johnson & Johnson, Emerson Electric,
and Hewlett-Packard, for example, the belief in business unit autonomy is
strongly held and has been emphasized as a key to the ﬁrm’s success. While
autonomy does indeed play an important positive role, there is a strong
tendency to carry it too far and ignore changing competitive circumstances.
Business units in ﬁrms with a long history of autonomy may resist even the
most worthwhile joint projects. Emerson Electric, for example, has had to
struggle to get divisions to cooperate on such relatively non-threatening
interrelationships as joint R&D centers on selected technologies.
Firms with a long commitment to business unit autonomy have trained
and promoted those managers who have performed well in an environment


---PAGE BREAK---

stressing independence. Self selection has also attracted managers who
value independence to join the ﬁrm. Moreover, acquisitions are also often
consummated by a promise of autonomy. With such a legacy, managers are
likely to resist any intrusion on their autonomy or any corporate move
toward centralization on principle.
Firms that have pushed the principle of decentralization down to the
smallest viable business units often face the most difﬁculty in achieving
interrelationships, despite the fact that they frequently have the greatest
need to achieve the scale economies that result from them. Autonomy can
be most jealously guarded when business units are small. For example,
American Hospital Supply has many small divisions selling various kinds
of medical products to the same buyers, via many separate yet overlapping
sales forces. It seems to have experienced difﬁculties in achieving
coordination among its many units, due to the ﬁerce independence of many
of its managers.
BIASED INCENTIVE SYSTEMS
Corporate incentive plans often exacerbate the difﬁculties of
implementing interrelationships by indirectly penalizing managers for
pursuing them. Business units often lack any positive incentive to
participate in interrelationships. They see little gain in changing the way
they perform activities to facilitate sharing or transferring know-how, both
essential to a successful interrelationship. Worse yet, some incentive
systems actually encourage the formation of outside coalitions in preference
to interrelationships with sister units.
Some of the ways in which incentive systems work against
interrelationships include:
Lack of Credit for Contributions to Other Units. Incentive systems
typically measure only a business unit’s performance and fail to value its
contribution to sister units. A business unit’s contribution to an
interrelationship, and hence to overall corporate performance, is often
difﬁcult to measure. Uniform ﬁnancial objectives across business units and
mechanical transfer pricing and allocation formulas are easy to administer


---PAGE BREAK---

and convey the impression of precision. However, they can fail to measure a
business unit’s total contribution to ﬁrm performance.
Managers are reluctant to spend time and resources on interrelationship
projects if they are uncertain to receive credit for them. They see no point in
participating in interrelationships in which they must bear compromise
costs or, worse yet, get less beneﬁt from the interrelationship than a sister
unit. In Matsushita, for example, cross-divisional product development
teams have encountered some problems of this type. Participants do not
know if the new products will contribute to their division’s proﬁts and
therefore are reluctant to contribute to their development.
Measurement Biases. In some ﬁrms, there are biases in the way
revenues, costs, or assets are measured and allocated that prompt business
units to ignore or resist interrelationships. For example, investing in assets
or making acquisitions is capitalized, while the cost of pursuing an
interrelationship must be expensed. Business units that are measured on
return on sales will tend to invest in assets rather than diminish their
proﬁtability, while business units with narrowly conceived revenue growth
objectives will be loath to split revenues with other units on an
interrelationship project. They will prefer instead to incur the cost of
contracting with an outside ﬁrm.
DIFFERING BUSINESS UNIT CIRCUMSTANCES
Interrelationships are difﬁcult to achieve where business units have
different organizational circumstances. Such differences raise problems of
communication, and cause business units to perceive sister units as “other
companies.” Some of the most common organizational differences among
business units that impede interrelationships include:
Strong Business Unit Identities. Pursuing interrelationships is difﬁcult
where business units have distinct histories and identities apart from the
parent ﬁrm’s. For example, business units may have originally been separate
companies that were acquired, or have long been freestanding units with
their own names. In such cases, managers and staff often identify more with
the business unit than with the parent. The problem is exacerbated by past


---PAGE BREAK---

success. If business units have been industry leaders or pioneers, for
example, they often resist any move toward joint efforts with sister units.
Differing Cultures. Cooperation can prove very difﬁcult to achieve if
business units have differing cultures. Relevant cultural differences include
such things as norms of interpersonal behavior, terminology and basic
business philosophy. Such differences can inhibit communication and make
working relationships hard to negotiate and maintain. American Express’s
banking subsidiary has struggled to integrate with the Swiss based Trade
Development Bank it acquired, for example, because of different styles and
language barriers, among other reasons.
Corporate and business unit managers are also sometimes uneasy about
interrelationships between culturally distinct units on the grounds that they
will blur the differences among them. They see interrelationships as threats
to the distinct cultures that made the business units successful in the ﬁrst
place. This issue is particularly likely to arise in business units that were
acquired, or in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm with a strong tradition of autonomy. For
example, the senior management of Brunswick has expressed such fears.5
Brunswick operates in a variety of leisure-oriented industries and has
acquired a number of well-known companies. It is hesitant to integrate them
for fear of disrupting their cultures.
Management Differences. If the proﬁle, skills and style of managers
differ among business units, forging interrelationships may prove difﬁcult.
Contacts may be uncomfortable or strained, making agreements harder to
reach. Management differences that may inhibit interrelationships include
differences in age, titles, educational background, technical skills, and
tenure in ofﬁce.
Differing Procedures. Business units may have different operating
procedures that make interrelationships difﬁcult to achieve, including
different accounting and information systems, approval limits, and union
agreements. Procedural differences create friction and confusion when units
attempt to work together, and add extra costs of coordination.


---PAGE BREAK---

Geographic Separation. Business units separated geographically can
have difﬁculty achieving the ongoing coordination required to make
interrelationships a success. Distance reduces the ongoing interchange so
necessary to work out problems.
FEAR OF TAMPERING WITH DECENTRALIZATION
The impediments to achieving interrelationships discussed so far stem
largely from the orientation and motivation of business unit managers.
Corporate management may be equally hesitant to tamper with
decentralization. A number of common reasons for this include:
Dampening Entrepreneurship. Corporate management may fear that
anything that tampers with decentralization will undermine the
entrepreneurial spirit in business units.6 No fundamental contradiction
exists between entrepreneurship and interrelationships, however, unless one
equates entrepreneurship narrowly with independence. While there is some
justiﬁcation for extreme decentralization in startup ventures, business unit
managers can often create the greatest competitive advantage through
entrepreneurship 
that 
identiﬁes 
and 
exploits 
interrelationships.
Nevertheless, the view that pure decentralization provides the greatest
entrepreneurial incentives remains deeply ingrained in many ﬁrms. Business
unit managers often raise reduced incentives as an argument for resisting
interrelationships as well.
Desire for a Consistent Organization. Many diversiﬁed ﬁrms have
tended to organize all business units identically. This may simplify
management’s task in some ways, but it is inconsistent with
interrelationships. Interrelationships imply that different business units (and
groups of business units) should have varying degrees of autonomy and
control over different activities, as well as different measures of
performance and objectives.
Difﬁculty of Measuring Performance. Many ﬁrms base incentives solely
on objective, quantiﬁable criteria such as growth and proﬁtability.
Interrelationships almost inevitably introduce some subjectivity into


---PAGE BREAK---

performance measurement, however, because business unit contributions to
the ﬁrm as a whole are often hard to quantify precisely. In some ﬁrms,
however, subjectivity is considered undesirable.
Fear of Providing “Excuses.” Interrelationships almost inevitably cloud
the clean lines of authority and responsibility in business units. Hence top
management 
may 
fear 
that 
business 
unit 
managers 
will 
use
interrelationships as excuses to justify poor performance.
Interrelationships and Equity
Many 
of 
these 
organizational 
impediments 
to 
achieving
interrelationships 
are 
based 
on 
the 
perceived 
conﬂict 
between
interrelationships and equity. Equity, or fairness, is a principle embraced by
virtually all ﬁrms. It is part of the fabric of an organization that allows
conﬂicts to be reconciled and underpins the motivation of managers. Yet
interrelationships can conﬂict with equity in the minds of some managers.
Interrelationships can yield differing beneﬁts to the business units involved.
Interrelationships also imply that managers should have different degrees of
autonomy, differing objectives, and differing bases for incentives. Managers
may complain that they are “carrying” other business units, and that rewards
are given to other managers whose performance is not as good.
Many diversiﬁed ﬁrms have explicitly or implicitly adopted a narrow
view of equity that stems from their decentralized organizational structures.
Equity is deﬁned to mean treating every business unit the same and
avoiding any subjectivity in decision making—particularly in such sensitive
areas as incentives or transfer prices. Equity is further deﬁned as meaning
that all business units must agree on interrelationships.
A narrow view of equity is not only logically incorrect but makes
interrelationships achievable only in those rare cases where all business
units beneﬁt equally or the interrelationship can be achieved through arm’s-
length dealings with little loss of autonomy. A more constructive view of
equity, which emphasizes fairness rather than sameness in the ways in
which top management treat business units, is a prerequisite to successfully
achieving interrelationships. Creating such a view of equity, as well as


---PAGE BREAK---

building allegiance to a higher corporate purpose, is an essential task of
horizontal organization.
Differences in Impediments among Firms
The extent of impediments to achieving interrelationships differs widely
among ﬁrms, as a result of their histories, mix of businesses, organizational
structures, 
and 
policies. 
The 
greatest 
difﬁculties 
in 
achieving
interrelationships tend to occur under the following conditions:
• Highly decentralized ﬁrms with many small business units
• Firms with a strong tradition of autonomy
• Firms built through the acquisition of independent companies
• Firms that have made little or no effort to create a corporate identity
• Firms with little or no history of interrelationships, or who have had a
bad experience in attempting to pursue an interrelationship
Organizational Mechanisms for Achieving Interrelationships
A purely vertical corporate organizational structure is insufﬁcient to
assure that beneﬁcial interrelationships will be recognized and achieved.
The impediments to achieving interrelationships not only get in the way of
interrelationships at the working level, but also provide business unit
managers with a set of arguments with which to counter efforts by group or
corporate management to champion important interrelationships. Business
unit managers will also clearly see the compromises required to achieve
interrelationships, and may be suspicious of the beneﬁts. Senior
management may be ill equipped to counter the resistance without an in-
depth knowledge of the industries involved.
Companies tend to react in one of two broad ways to these
organizational 
impediments 
to 
achieving 
interrelationships. 
Some
companies conclude that, despite their strategic logic, interrelationships can
never work. After encountering such problems, business unit managers give
up on working with sister units and resolve instead to proceed
independently. Corporate management becomes frustrated with resolving
disputes and dealing with unclear accountability, and opts for extreme


---PAGE BREAK---

decentralization. In other companies, however, there is recognition that the
beneﬁts of interrelationships are so important that the traditional ways of
managing diversity must change to accomodate them.
Interrelationships will not occur by accident or by ﬁat. Positive
organizational mechanisms must be put in place to encourage business unit
managers to pursue interrelationships and to ease the inherent coordination
and communication difﬁculties in making them work. I term organizational
practices 
that 
facilitate 
interrelationships 
horizontal 
organization.
Horizontal corporate organization links business units together within a
vertical structure. A balance must be struck between the vertical and
horizontal elements in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm if the potential of interrelationships
is to be unleashed.
Horizontal organization can be divided into four broad categories:
•  Horizontal structure. Organizational devices that cut across business
unit lines, such as grouping of business units, partial centralization,
interdivisional task forces, and market or channel focus committees.
•  Horizontal systems. Management systems with a cross business unit
dimension, in areas such as planning, control, incentives and capital
budgeting.
•  Horizontal human resource practices. Human resource practices that
facilitate business unit cooperation, such as cross-business unit job
rotation, management forums and training.
•  Horizontal conﬂict resolution processes. Management processes that
resolve conﬂicts among business units. Such processes can be usefully
distinguished from horizontal structure and systems, and relate more to
the style of managing a ﬁrm.
Organizational structure and systems frequently have both a horizontal
and vertical dimension. Grouping business units, for example, can be a
purely vertical device to reduce the span of control of top management or
can play a major role in horizontal strategy, depending on how groups are
managed. Similarly, corporate incentives systems can be entirely vertical or
contain provisions that encourage cross-business unit cooperation. I will
concentrate on the horizontal aspects of organizational practices,
recognizing that the horizontal and vertical aspects will interact. The issues


---PAGE BREAK---

raised by vertical aspects of organizational structure and systems in
diversiﬁed ﬁrms have been the subject of considerable study.7
No single device for encouraging and facilitating cooperation among
business units is sufﬁcient to ensure that all strategically beneﬁcial
interrelationships are achieved. Instead, a variety of practices that reinforce
each other are required. Firms with successful horizontal strategies tend to
employ an array of practices simultaneously to gain the maximum beneﬁts
from interrelationships. The array of appropriate practices can differ for
each business unit, because each will have its own pattern of
interrelationships with other units with a different balance of beneﬁts and
costs.
Corporate management also has a powerful role in reinforcing horizontal
organization through its behavior, the way in which it articulates corporate
purpose, and its choice of modes of entry into new businesses. After
describing the use of horizontal organization in achieving interrelationships,
I will return to the role of top management.
Horizontal Structure
Horizontal structure refers to temporary or permanent organizational
entities that cut across business unit boundaries, supplementing the business
unit structure. A variety of such entities, which are not mutually exclusive,
may be employed to facilitate interrelationships.
GROUPING BUSINESS UNITS
Perhaps the most common form of horizontal structure is the group or
sector, in which a number of business units report to a single executive.
Most group and sector structures were originally created to reduce the
CEO’s span of control, or to train and evaluate managers in managing
diversity as a stepping stone to corporate management. Groups and sectors
have long played an important role in the vertical organization.
Group and sector executives have tended to play a relatively passive role
in strategy formulation, however. They review and approve business unit
strategies and coach business unit managers, rather than initiate strategy.
Yet the group or sector executive should have a vital role in identifying,


---PAGE BREAK---

pursuing, and managing interrelationships, provided the boundaries of the
group or sector are properly drawn and the role of the group or sector
executive is properly constituted.
The grouping of business units into groups and sectors should reﬂect
strategically important interrelationships. The boundaries of groups and
sectors are often difﬁcult to draw, however, because there are multiple
patterns of interrelationships among business units. In General Foods, for
example, some business units have common buyers and channels while
different but overlapping groups of business units are related by product
form and production technology (e.g., frozen food). Where there are several
possible bases for grouping business units reﬂecting different types of
interrelationships, a ﬁrm must choose one. Interrelationships are frequently
not equally signiﬁcant for all the business units involved, making the
selection of a basis for grouping all the more difﬁcult.
While grouping business units is never an exact science, the principle is
clear. Groups (and sectors) should be constructed around the
interrelationships that are most signiﬁcant for competitive advantage,
growing out of a systematic look at all the interrelationships within the ﬁrm.
For example, if a large percentage of cost or the most signiﬁcant sources of
differentiation reside in product positioning, advertising, and distribution,
groups should be formed around market interrelationships. In a consumer
package goods company, for example, it may be more appropriate to group
businesses by buyer or channel than to organize around manufacturing
technology. In a high-technology company with a differentiation strategy,
conversely, it may make more sense to group business units around
technologies, since exploiting technological interrelationships will be a key
to competitive advantage. Tangible interrelationships should generally be
the primary basis for grouping, with intangible interrelationships serving as
the basis if tangible interrelationships are minor or are exhausted. For
example, groups may link business units with strong tangible
interrelationships, while sectors may be based on weaker tangible
interrelationships and/or intangible interrelationships.
Business units should be grouped around the most strategically
important interrelationships because grouping is perhaps the single most
powerful device for focusing attention on and reinforcing interrelationships,
if groups are managed accordingly. Where all business units report to a


---PAGE BREAK---

single group (or sector) executive, coordination, the management of shared
activities, conﬂict resolution, transfer or know-how, and setting of the
appropriate objectives and incentives are all facilitated.
The principle that business units should be grouped around the most
important interrelationship does not imply that all groups in a diversiﬁed
ﬁrm should be based on the same type of interrelationship. All groups need
not and should not be market-based, production-based, or technology-
based, though ﬁrms sometimes have a tendency to use the same basis for
grouping all their business units. Unless one form of interrelationship is
dominant throughout an entire ﬁrm, different groups should be based on
different types of interrelationships.
The strength of interrelationships among the business units in a group
may well vary from group to group, depending on a ﬁrm’s particular mix of
businesses. Some groups may have strongly interrelated business units,
while others may be characterized by few if any interrelationships and exist
largely to reduce span-of-control. The way groups are managed should
reﬂect these differences. Within a group, moreover, the interrelationship
present will vary in strategic importance for the different business units.
Business units that perceive few beneﬁts of being in the group will have to
be managed differently from others since they will have the greatest
tendency to choose strategies that are inconsistent with strengthening
interrelationships in the group. The way their performance is measured and
their incentives may well have to be modiﬁed. It is important, however, that
such business units are not forced to compromise their strategies so greatly
as to undermine their relative competitive position. Managing any
interrelationship is always a process of balancing the overall competitive
advantage gained against the cost, using the tools described in Chapter 9.
ROLE OF THE GROUP EXECUTIVE8
Historically, the role of many group executives has sometimes been
ambiguous and uncomfortable.9 Business unit managers frequently are the
strategists in diversiﬁed ﬁrms, while group executives act as reviewers.
Many group executives feel, as a result, that they receive much blame but
little credit for the group’s performance.


---PAGE BREAK---

Identifying and achieving interrelationships both within and outside the
group may well be the single most important task of a group executive. In a
group with signiﬁcant interrelationships, the group executive must become
the chief strategic ofﬁcer of the group. What a “group strategy” is is
ambiguous in many diversiﬁed ﬁrms. Group executives have had the
tendency to behave as if they were mini-portfolio managers, balancing the
capital needs of different business units in the group. Where there are
interrelationships, this conception of the group executive’s role is
fundamentally ﬂawed. Group strategy must be more than the summation of
independently proposed business unit strategies. It must include a horizontal
strategy that encompasses all the business units. A group strategy does not
replace the need for business unit strategies, but integrates them.
In order to achieve interrelationships, the group executive must have
ultimate authority to modify business units’ strategies. Furthermore, the
group executive must be willing to initiate horizontal strategy as well as
respond to business unit proposals. For all the reasons described earlier,
business units acting independently will rarely propose the strategies
necessary to reap the beneﬁts of interrelationships, or risk compromising
their objectives for the beneﬁt of the group. To play the role of chief
strategist, a group executive will typically require the capacity to identify
and analyze interrelationships within and outside the group and to analyze
multipoint competitors. An in-depth knowledge of the businesses in the
group will be necessary. The role of the group executive as a horizontal
strategist must also be reinforced by other horizontal devices that orient
business unit managers toward the goal of achieving interrelationships.
Partial centralization of key value activities, control over part of incentives,
and a role in recruiting will all reinforce the ability of the group executive to
build a true horizontal strategy.10
PARTIAL CENTRALIZATION
Another type of horizontal structure is partial centralization. It may be
appropriate 
to 
centralize 
value 
activities 
because 
of 
important
interrelationships, while still maintaining the proﬁt responsibility of
business units. Centralized value activities may also sometimes serve more
than one group.


---PAGE BREAK---

Partial centralization is relatively common in activities such as
procurement, sales, and logistical systems. In General Foods, for example,
manufacturing, procurement, and logistics are quite centralized across a
range of divisions that span groups, while product development and
marketing functions all report directly to division managers. McGraw-Hill
has a shared order fulﬁllment system that serves many book, magazine, and
other business units, while Castle and Cooke has a shared marketing and
distribution system for many types of fresh foods.
Shared activities can have a variety of reporting relationships. One
business unit can have formal control while others have a dotted-line
relationship. Alternatively, shared activities can report to several business
units, or shared activities can report directly to a group or corporate
executive. It is desirable that centralized activities report to a line executive
in order to maintain a marketplace orientation. The responsible executive
must take an active role in managing the coordination between the
centralized value activity and the business units, mindful of the issues raised
in this and the previous chapter. Such a management provides a contrast to
the passive, arm’s-length approach sometimes employed in guiding
relations between business units and shared activities.
Success in partial centralization requires creating the proper structure
and incentives for business units to manage an activity themselves, or
assigning the activity to a line executive with authority over the involved
business units. Success also requires an awareness on the part of all
concerned that the interrelationship is valuable to the ﬁrm, as well as the
creation of formal and informal coordinating mechanisms between
centralized activities and involved business units. Joint planning for
centralized activities that involve the affected business units is beneﬁcial, as
is regular formal contact between activity managers and business units.
OTHER CROSS-BUSINESS UNIT ORGANIZATIONAL MECHANISMS
Grouping of business units and partial centralization of value activities
are 
the 
strongest 
forms 
of 
organizational 
impetus 
to 
achieve
interrelationships. Group structure should be designed to capture the most
important interrelationship. It may not encompass all interrelationships,
however, because secondary interrelationships may be present that go


---PAGE BREAK---

outside the group but that also enhance competitive advantage. Thus
temporary and permanent cross-business unit mechanisms that provide a
means of achieving interrelationships not captured in the primary
organizational structure are an important part of horizontal structure. Such
mechanisms can serve not only as ways of initiating and implementing
interrelationship projects, but also as mechanisms for educating managers
about the importance of interrelationships.11 They should not be
misconstrued as a “matrix” organization, but rather as devices to facilitate
cross business unit cooperation.
Some of the most important organizational devices to serve this purpose
are as follows:
1. Market focus committees. Where a ﬁrm is organized around products
or 
technologies, 
there 
are 
often 
important 
though 
secondary
interrelationships around markets. McGraw-Hill, for example, has
established its primary organization around product forms such as books,
magazines, and data bases. However, there are a number of markets, such as
construction and ﬁnancial services, into which many of the business units
sell. McGraw-Hill can harness these interrelationships if it can attack the
markets in a coordinated way, while exploiting the interrelationships around
products through the primary organizational structure.
A ﬁrm can gain market interrelationships through what might be termed
market focus committees. To form such committees, a ﬁrm identiﬁes the
critical markets where potential interrelationships exist and designates an
executive to be responsible for overseeing the ﬁrm’s efforts in each such
market. A standing committee is constituted consisting of senior managers
of business units serving or potentially serving the market, which meets
regularly to supervise market research, identify and plan for the
achievement of interrelationships in existing product areas, and identify
gaps that need to be ﬁlled to strengthen the ﬁrm’s overall position in the
market. Staff resources are drawn in to perform the necessary analysis.
Speciﬁc interrelationship projects are then assigned to line executives
within the affected business units. While such committees can be time
consuming, competitive advantage will be lost without them to competitors
who can organize to achieve interrelationships.


---PAGE BREAK---

Market focus committees can also serve as an interim step in shifting
from a product- or technology-based organization to a market-based
organization in a diversiﬁed ﬁrm, if market interrelationships become the
most strategically important. If a ﬁrm shifts to a market-based primary
organization, however, it should probably establish some organizational
mechanisms to reinforce the production or technological interrelationships
present.
2. Technology, channel and other interrelationship committees. Standing
committees or working groups involving a number of business units can
also be created around other important interrelationships, in products (e.g.
ofﬁce 
automation), 
production, 
procurement, 
technologies, 
shared
distribution channels, logistical systems, or order processing systems. Their
function is analogous to market focus committees, and the principles for
organizing them are similar. A senior line executive must accept overall
responsibility for the effort, and regular progress reviews are required so
that the effort will be taken seriously.
3. Temporary Task Forces. While important interrelationships that cut
across the primary organization structure may well require standing
committees 
to 
manage 
their 
ongoing 
implementation, 
some
interrelationships may be best exploited through temporary cross-business
unit task forces. Temporary task forces are a very common mechanism to
achieve the transfer of know-how involved in intangible interrelationships
and some tangible interrelationships can be implemented this way. In
addition, temporary task forces can be a device for studying
interrelationships and recommending permanent ways to achieve them,
whether through partial centralization, a standing committee, or a one-time
change in the way business units operate.
Temporary cross-business unit task forces may address numerous types
of interrelationships. General Motors, for example, forms project centers to
manage critical projects that cut across business unit lines. Staff members
are completely detached from existing organizational units to participate for
periods of up to several years. An example of a less formal temporary
organization is McGraw-Hill’s Information Resources Task Force, which
studied the management of computing capacity across the corporation. This


---PAGE BREAK---

temporary organization used part-time staff drawn from divisions,
supported by staff from the corporate planning department. Another
example is Sears, that is now using study groups to search for
interrelationships among its businesses and to pursue interrelationships in
ﬁnancial services.
GROUP OR CORPORATE INTERRELATIONSHIP CHAMPIONS
A ﬁnal structural device to facilitate interrelationships is the appointment
of executives at the group, sector, or corporate level to act as champions for
interrelationship. While staff roles such as this have fallen out of favor in
some ﬁrms, they can contribute signiﬁcantly to managing interrelationships.
Staff executives can take responsibility for identifying key interrelationships
in their areas, and then work with the affected business units to assist in
achieving them. For example, a marketing staff executive can coordinate the
procurement of advertising space to maximize bargaining leverage, or
coordinate plans vis-à-vis a shared distribution channel. Staff executives can
also assist in the management of other mechanisms to harness
interrelationships such as committees and task forces of business unit
managers.
MANAGING CROSS-BUSINESS UNIT ORGANIZATIONS
Cross-business unit organizations are difﬁcult to manage, particularly in
U.S. ﬁrms. Because the principle of autonomy is so ingrained and because
committees are often viewed as a “waste of time” rather than an integral
part of the management function, careful design of cross-business unit
organizations is necessary if they are to be accepted.
A cross-business unit organization must report to a senior line executive,
in order to provide it with the necessary inﬂuence within the ﬁrm and to
ensure that its efforts remain focused on important issues. The cross-
business unit organization must also be headed by a credible executive who
is not too closely identiﬁed with a particular point of view, and who is held
responsible for results. The organization must result in tangible action, or it
will not be taken seriously. Top management should assign line executives
from each affected business unit to the cross-business unit organization to


---PAGE BREAK---

help ensure that plans for achieving interrelationships will be implemented
once developed. The representatives assigned should be senior enough to be
able to inﬂuence their units to action. Some staff capability must be made
available to cross-business unit organizations, or members may be called on
to contribute personnel to allow meaningful analysis and thoughtful
recommendations. Finally, cross-business unit organizations must be
supplemented by other types of horizontal organization to help overcome
the other impediments to interrelationships. In a ﬁrm with signiﬁcant
interrelationships, simply overcoming the cynicism toward cross-business
committees will yield a major competitive advantage.
Horizontal Systems
A second aspect of horizontal organization is horizontal systems—
management systems that reinforce coordination and linkages among
business units. While most management systems have a strong vertical
element, they can also be designed to support the achievement of
interrelationships. A number of systems have particular signiﬁcance for
achieving interrelationships.
Horizontal Strategic Planning. Most diversiﬁed ﬁrms employ vertical
strategic planning systems. Business units prepare strategic plans and
submit them to senior management for approval. When there are important
interrelationships, however, a horizontal component must be overlaid on the
vertical strategic planning process to make planning truly meaningful.
There are a number of possible approaches for introducing a horizontal
dimension into strategic planning. First, the corporate planning department
can accept responsibility for identifying interrelationships and initiating
steps to exploit them. Second, group and sector executives can be given
responsibility for horizontal strategy and the content of the group plan
should concentrate on interrelationships. A third approach is to add an
interrelationships section to business unit plans. Each business unit is asked
to identify important interrelationships it has with other units inside and
outside its group, and to develop action plans to exploit important ones. A


---PAGE BREAK---

ﬁnal approach is to require separate, joint strategic plans from business
units involved in important interrelationships.
NEC Corporation has opted for the ﬁnal approach, and has adopted two
planning systems. In addition to a normal business unit planning system, it
has established the CBP (Corporate Business Plan) system in which
separate strategic plans are prepared for critical investments or programs
that cut across business unit lines. The system forces business unit
managers involved in an interrelationship to meet and agree on a strategic
plan for dealing with it over the long term. In effect, this system requires a
special plan for important horizontal issues.
The various approaches to adding a horizontal component to planning
are not mutually exclusive. Usually, several should be pursued
simultaneously. At the very least, mechanisms for horizontal planning must
exist at both the group and corporate levels, since the horizontal strategy
issues at these levels differ. No business unit will have the perspective to
identify all interrelationships or develop plans to achieve them.
Horizontal Procedures. Interrelationships are facilitated by the presence
of procedures governing cross-business unit activities. Many ﬁrms have
transfer pricing policies, and some ﬁrms have policies governing in-house
versus external purchasing. Relatively few ﬁrms, however, have guidelines
for issues such as revenue or cost sharing on joint projects, or capital
budgeting procedures for joint projects. Without such guidelines, pursuing
interrelationship will involve a great deal of administrative turmoil and
protracted 
negotiations. 
General 
guidelines 
can 
greatly 
facilitate
interrelationships, limiting incentives for business units to seek outside
coalitions or avoid internal interrelationships.
Transfer pricing and purchasing rules often reﬂect a misunderstanding of
interrelationships. Simple transfer pricing rules, based on market prices,
treat business units as stand-alone entities in arm’s-length relationships with
each other. This negates the logic underlying interrelationships, no matter
how administratively appealing it may be. Interrelationships imply that
transfer pricing and other decisions should be designed to improve the
ﬁrm’s overall position and not the ﬁnancial results of individual business
units.12 For example, Perkin-Elmer has a system in which the selling
division sells at market price, while the buying division buys at cost. Both


---PAGE BREAK---

have the incentive to do business, while the buying division sets prices
based on the true cost to the corporation.13 Business unit goals also may
need to be adjusted in order to make them consistent with transfer pricing
rules. Business units that transfer at cost, for example, should not be held to
ﬁrmwide proﬁtability targets.
Purchasing rules are another area where administrative simplicity often
outweighs strategic logic. Firms defeat the purpose if they adopt the hands-
off view that units can buy from the “best” source, external or internal.
Most ﬁrms that are successful at achieving interrelationships treat in-house
purchasing as the assumption, and business units that supply sister units
view them as their most important buyers. Senior management should
clearly communicate this expectation throughout the ﬁrm, and ensure that
business units who treat their sister units as unimportant buyers or suppliers
are not rewarded.
Horizontal Incentives. The incentive system must recognize that the ﬁrm
can gain from interrelationships, and should reward business unit and group
managers for achieving them instead of encouraging them to concentrate on
their individual results. It is also necessary to remove any biases in
measurement that favor external or go-it-alone investments instead of joint
efforts with other business units. In ﬁrms with important interrelationships,
the incentive system should reward business units and their managers to
some extent on group and corporate results as well as on business unit
results. In nearly every ﬁrm I have observed that is successful at achieving
interrelationships, compensation plans emphasize group or corporate
performance. These ﬁrms have proven that business unit managers do not
need to have all their compensation based on business unit results in order
to be highly motivated. Tying compensation solely to business unit results
reﬂects a simplistic view of motivation. Instead, business unit managements
can and should be made part of the ﬁrm’s general management team
through a broader basis of compensation.14 Performance measurement
should differ for each unit. Performance targets should reﬂect the differing
balance between individual business units’ results and their broader
contribution to the ﬁrm through interrelationships. Senior management must
accept the responsibility to convince all its business unit managers that this
is fair and reﬂects a higher corporate purpose.


---PAGE BREAK---

Incentives should contain a subjective component in ﬁrms with important
interrelationships. A business unit’s contribution to the ﬁrm cannot usually
be measured quantitatively. Any one quantitative standard will not be able
to weigh all factors and may indirectly bias behavior against a ﬁrm’s
interests. Instead, group and corporate management must be prepared to
judge a business unit’s contribution to group or corporate strategy. While
ﬁrms have traditionally avoided subjective incentives, top management
must communicate to groups and business units a need for them and a sense
of fairness in rewarding contributions to the ﬁrm as a whole.15
Horizontal Human Resource Practices
A third aspect of horizontal organization is human resource policies.
These are policies for hiring, training, and managing human resources that
facilitate cross-business unit collaboration, as well as successful
relationships between business units and centralized functions. As with
horizontal systems, horizontal human resource policies should apply to an
entire ﬁrm or to those parts with signiﬁcant interrelationships.
Personnel Rotation among Business Units. The rotation of personnel
among business units facilitates the achievement of interrelationships in a
number of ways. It helps to reduce cultural and procedural differences
among business units, creates personal relationships that facilitate joint
projects, 
educates 
managers 
about 
areas 
of 
opportunity 
for
interrelationships with other units, and promotes a corporate (or group)
identity in addition to the business unit identity.16 Though there may be
some cost in terms of training time and continuity when rotating personnel,
the long-term beneﬁts can be signiﬁcant not only for interrelationships but
also in retarding the onset of conventional wisdom in business units. Firms
such as DuPont, General Electric, and Citicorp have active rotation
programs that seem to have facilitated interrelationships.
Some Firmwide Role in Hiring and Training. A ﬁrmwide (or group) role
in hiring and training can help build a corporate identity and an awareness
of the overall interests of the ﬁrm. Corporate orientation and training
programs can educate managers about other business units, and encourage


---PAGE BREAK---

personal relationships among incoming managers who will eventually be
dispersed to different units. Ongoing management development programs
can also facilitate interrelationships. Programs that bring managers from
different units together not only can have an educational function, but also
develop understanding and encourage personal relationships. Such a
corporate role in orientation and training need not reduce the ability of
business units to hire personnel that ﬁt their needs.
Promotion from Within. Promotion from within tends to reinforce a
corporate perspective, and can lead to managers adopting a longer time
horizon. Both of these effects can facilitate interrelationships. Home-grown
managers not only tend to identify more strongly with a ﬁrm, but are also
more likely to develop a network of personal relationships within the ﬁrm
that facilitates horizontal collaboration. While there are risks of reinforcing
conventional wisdom, a general preference to promote from within (though
not necessarily from within the same business unit) can be important to
ﬁrms with strong interrelationships.
Cross-business Unit Forums and Meetings. Carefully designed meetings
that bring managers from different business units together can facilitate the
discovery and achievement of interrelationships. It is particularly effective
in such meetings to ask managers to brief their peers about their respective
businesses, and to encourage group discussions of issues that cut across unit
lines.
Education on Interrelationship Concepts. It is vital that key managers
understand the strategic logic of interrelationships and have a language
system for discussing and an analytical framework for identifying them in
their own businesses. This education can be part of management
development programs, companywide meetings, and other forums. While
top management often understand the concept of interrelationships, middle
managers frequently do not and changes in their behavior will make or
break the achievement of interrelationships in practice.
Horizontal Conﬂict Resolution Processes


---PAGE BREAK---

The fourth aspect of horizontal organization is management processes
for resolving conﬂict among business units. Any successful organizational
structure combines formal structures and systems with ongoing processes
through which managers interact. While less tangible than structure and
systems, these processes can be just as important to success, particularly
where responsibilities are not clear and frequent interaction among
organizational units is necessary.
Achieving interrelationships nearly always involves the sharing of
authority, the need for frequent coordination, and subjective performance
evaluation. Hence processes for resolving conﬂict among business units are
vitally important to achieving interrelationships. The processes themselves
vary greatly from ﬁrm to ﬁrm, though senior management always plays an
important role by setting the tone for how business units should interact and
by acting as ﬁnal arbiters of any disputes. What is important is not the exact
form of the process in a ﬁrm, but the existence of some process that is
managed by group, sector, and corporate management which is perceived as
fair.
The Corporate Role in Facilitating Interrelationships
A purely bottom-up approach to interrelationships rarely succeeds. Chief
executive ofﬁcers can have a major impact on the achievement of
interrelationships through their behavior, as can other line executives above
the business unit level. There are many opportunities available to senior
management to deﬁne a larger corporate purpose, to stress the importance
of interrelationships, and to discourage parochial behavior by business unit,
group, and sector managers. A strong set of ﬁrmwide values and a strong
corporate identity are vital links in reducing cynicism toward committees,
resolving conﬂicts, and so on.
One important way to reinforce interrelationships is through articulating
a unifying theme. A unifying theme at the corporate, sector, and group
levels that stresses interrelationships can be a powerful tool for motivating
managers to ﬁnd and implement them. It should be prominently and
repeatedly stressed by senior management both externally and internally,
and at all levels of the company. NEC Corporation, for example, has the


---PAGE BREAK---

theme of “C&C” (computers and communications), which symbolizes the
converging of electronics and communications technology into integrated
C&C systems. Going hand in hand with the theme is a diagram that vividly
displays the merging of the technologies. This theme is a constant one in
top management speeches, annual report copy, and internal discussions.
NEC’s managers at all levels understand the theme, and it has reinforced the
search for interrelationships by business units.
Interrelationships are also facilitated if the corporate identity is displayed
prominently in each business unit on logos, signs, and stationery. This does
not imply the abandonment of valuable business unit trade names. Instead,
it suggests that a ﬁrm should develop both its corporate identity as well as
those of business units, within the ﬁrm and outside. This not only affects
management’s view of themselves, but can directly facilitate the
achievement of market interrelationships by making buyers more aware of
the connection among business units.
Interrelationships and the Mode of Diversiﬁcation
The achievement of interrelationships is facilitated by developing new
businesses internally rather than acquiring them. Internal development is
typically based on interrelationships, and organically grown units are likely
to have strategies consistent with other parts of the ﬁrm. Shared value
activities are more likely to be designed for sharing. Acquisitions, on the
other hand, require that interrelationships be forged with a heretofore
separate organization, with all the associated impediments. Acquisitions
also raise the odds that compromises in strategy will be necessary to pursue
interrelationship opportunities.17 Firms such as IBM, Kodak, GE, DuPont
and 
Procter 
& 
Gamble, 
which 
have 
successfully 
exploited
interrelationships, have traditions of creating many businesses internally.
The difﬁculties posed by acquisitions for achieving interrelationships do
not imply that ﬁrms should never make acquisitions. Rather, they suggest
that ﬁrms apply a rigorous test in choosing between acquisitions and
internal entry, and that horizontal strategy issues be prominent in the search
for acquisitions. The choice of acquisition should reﬂect the added difﬁculty
of achieving interrelationships with acquired ﬁrms. Many ﬁrms have chosen


---PAGE BREAK---

to acquire to minimize start-up losses and to have a quicker impact on
revenues, sacriﬁcing interrelationships in the process that were important to
the ﬁrm’s long term strategy.
If acquisition emerges as the best way to enter a new business, horizontal
strategy issues should not be ignored. Unless an acquisition is in an
unrelated ﬁeld, the ability to integrate the acquired ﬁrm in a way that
achieves interrelationships must be weighed. Many acquirers almost
guarantee that interrelationships will not occur by promising complete
autonomy to the management of prospective acquisitions. For example, in
Transamerica’s purchase of Fred S. James Company, an insurance broker,
Transamerica pledged that the James Company would be independent and
report directly to the CEO instead of through Transamerica’s insurance
group. Despite the fact that the James acquisition offered great possibilities
for achieving interrelationships, achieving them has been made substantially
more difﬁcult, at least for a time.
Managing Horizontal Organization
Achieving interrelationships is a function of instituting an array of
horizontal practices. As many companies have discovered, organizational
structure alone is not sufﬁcient. Merely grouping related businesses together
will not guarantee the exploitation of interrelationships. Structure must be
reinforced by group and sector executives who understand their roles as
horizontal strategists, as well as appropriate management systems and
human resource policies. The array of horizontal practices must not be
uniform across the ﬁrm, but tailored to reﬂect the patterns of
interrelationships that are present. Some business units are more connected
than others, and hence the balance between vertical and horizontal
organization should vary. Top management must also reinforce
interrelationships by sending clear signals about their importance, and
promoting a culture where the corporation has an identity that transcends
and reinforces that of business units.
Achieving interrelationships usually requires the creation of some shared
values within a ﬁrm. Managers must perceive that collaboration with other
business units is important and will be rewarded, and that senior


---PAGE BREAK---

management will act fairly in measuring the performance of the individual
units involved. While interrelationships can sometimes be imposed,
interrelationships that are imposed on business units will rarely be so strong
or durable as those based on common understanding and consensus.
Instituting horizontal organizational mechanisms throughout the ﬁrm is
usually necessary for this attitude to occur. The process takes time, and
cannot be expected to occur just because the potential for interrelationships
is discovered.
Promising Examples
American Express provides an example of a ﬁrm with a corporate
strategy built on interrelationships. It has set out to be a broadly based
ﬁnancial services company for upwardly mobile afﬂuent consumers, as well
as providing specialized services for ﬁnancial institutions and corporations.
The acquisition of Shearson Loeb Rhoades was a major step in this strategy,
as was the earlier acquisition of Fireman’s Fund. There are many
interrelationships among the businesses of American Express, Shearson,
and Fireman’s Fund, as well as many potential new businesses that could
add to American Express’s overall competitive position in ﬁnancial services
via interrelationships. American Express and Shearson had different
cultures, however, exacerbating the problems inherent in achieving
interrelationships. Moreover, American Express had traditionally been run
with quite autonomous units.
To achieve interrelationships, American Express has employed a wide
range of horizontal devices. A coordinated ﬁnancial services strategy has
become the overall theme for American Express, and top management has
frequently stated and reinforced this theme. A quotation from American
Express’s Annual Report is illustrative:
Key to the Company’s future is our ability to work as “one enterprise,” with staff ofﬁces at each
of our major business segments interacting with one another to blend products, services,
distribution and expertise to meet the demands of sophisticated customers and add to their
convenience and satisfaction. Last year’s Annual Report cover graphically depicts the one
enterprise concept: our American Express logo at the center of four distinct but interrelated
business lines.18 (See Figure 11–1.)


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 11–1. The American Express Logo
A ﬁnancial services committee composed of executives from American
Express and Shearson was constituted, with responsibility for developing an
overall scheme for approaching the ﬁnancial marketplace. Shearson’s name
was changed to Shearson/American Express, reinforcing a ﬁrmwide
identity. Executives, including many at senior levels, have been cross-
posted. A coordinating group has been established to manage the ﬁnancing
of the various units. Unity across the company is stressed at management
meetings. American Express has also recognized that although cultures are
different in acquired units and homogenization of cultures should not be the
goal, some parts of each business unit’s culture can usefully be transplanted.
It remains to be seen to what extent American Express will actually be
successful in exploiting all its potential interrelationships. Managers
occasionally complain of endless meetings, and cultural and style
differences are still strong among units. However, there are many examples
of interrelationships that the company has achieved. Cross selling of buyers
is now well under way, and units are providing products to each other. New


---PAGE BREAK---

acquisitions such as Investors Diversiﬁed Services (IDS) and Ayco
Corporation 
(personal 
ﬁnancial 
counseling) 
are 
extending 
old
interrelationships and creating new ones. Moreover, interrelationships
appear to be driving the search for new acquisitions, and the ability to
integrate acquired companies into the overall strategy has become a key test
of further acquisitions. The acquisition of IDS was postponed after a close
look uncovered problems of sharing computer systems. The acquisition
occurred only after the purchase price had been reduced to reﬂect the added
coordination and compromise costs. If American Express continues to be
able to identify and achieve interrelationships, it seems on its way to
becoming a leading ﬁnancial services ﬁrm.
NEC Corporation is another ﬁrm in interrelated businesses that has made
considerable progress in achieving interrelationships. NEC competes in
semiconductors, telecommunications, computers, and home electronics.
These four broad business areas are linked by numerous interrelationships
in buyers, channels, technology, procurement, and production processes.
NEC has been remarkably effective in exploiting these interrelationships
without internal conﬂict. Business units share many activities, including
R&D labs, sales forces, plants, and channels. A great deal of internal
coordination takes place across divisions in joint selling, transfers of
technology, buyer/supplier relationships, and many other areas. Given
NEC’s moderate size relative to its competitors in each of its four main
business areas, an important reason for its success is its ability to exploit
interrelationships while its larger competitors were largely focusing on only
one or two business areas.
How has NEC been able to achieve these interrelationships? The answer
lies in the extensive horizontal organization NEC has put in place to
facilitate interrelationships. This overlays an equally well-developed
vertical organization, in which decentralized business units are managed
through planning, control, resource allocation, and incentive systems.
Structurally, NEC has organized itself into four broad groups—electron
devices, telecommunications, computers, and home electronics—that each
reﬂect strong interrelationships in products, markets, and technology. Note
that the computer, telecommunications, and electron devices groups are
organized around technology while home electronics is a market-oriented
grouping. Within these broad groups, related products such as switching


---PAGE BREAK---

equipment and transmission equipment have been grouped together,
reﬂecting even stronger interrelationships.
To promote interrelationships across groups there are forty-four ongoing
corporatewide committees, many involving important interrelationships.
Perhaps the most powerful of these is the “C&C Committee,” charged with
identifying and exploiting the potential interrelationships created by the
convergence of computers and communications. Partial centralization of
activities is also prevalent at NEC in sales, distribution, manufacturing, and
technology development. Corporate units in areas such as production
technology and software development share the development of widely
used technologies. Finally, many temporary committees are employed to get
managers in different business units together.
NEC’s C&C theme has constantly reinforced the need to exploit
interrelationships. Every division also identiﬁes itself with the NEC brand.
The vast majority of businesses have been developed internally. Managers
rotate among divisions and undergo extensive training upon joining the
corporation (all personnel are hired centrally) and throughout their careers.
Frequent forums allow managers to meet with counterparts in related
business units.
The strategic planning process at NEC includes the CBP system
described earlier, which allows uniﬁed planning for businesses with
interrelationships. Incentives are not solely linked to ﬁnancial results, but
reﬂect the business unit’s overall contribution to the company. Internal
customers are viewed as the most important, and external sourcing is
practiced only if superior quality and price are available from outside. The
net result is a clear culture at NEC which reinforces ﬁnding and exploiting
interrelationships.
Japanese Firms and Interrelationships
While there are many non-Japanese ﬁrms that have achieved
interrelationships, a number of characteristics of many, though not all,
Japanese ﬁrms make them well positioned for exploiting interrelationships:
• strong belief in overarching corporate themes


---PAGE BREAK---

• internal development of new businesses
• a less rigid tradition of autonomy
• more ﬂexible incentives, less based on business unit results
• willingness to centralize activities
•  greater tradition of committees and frequent personal contact among
executives
• intensive and continuing in-house training
• corporatewide hiring and training
Given their history, Japanese ﬁrms may be in a position to strike a better
balance between horizontal and vertical organization in the diversiﬁed ﬁrm
than U.S. and European ﬁrms, which tend to have either a strong tradition
of autonomy or a high degree of centralized control. In many ways, the
ability of Japanese ﬁrms to achieve interrelationships can be viewed as a
major 
future 
challenge 
in 
competing 
with 
Western 
ﬁrms 
as
interrelationships grow in importance. The ﬁrst Japanese challenge, low
labor costs, has been replaced by the second Japanese challenge of quality
and productivity. Perhaps interrelationships will emerge as the next
Japanese source of competitive advantage, coupled with an increasing
ability to innovate.
It is also intriguing to note that the U.S. companies that have achieved
interrelationships, such as GE, DuPont, IBM, and Procter & Gamble, have
many of the same characteristics. As interrelationships become increasingly
critical to competitive advantage, these ﬁrms may serve as role models for
ﬁrms steeped in the tradition of extreme autonomy and diversiﬁcation
through acquisition so characteristic of U.S. industry.
A New Organizational Form
The principles underlying horizontal organization imply a new
organizational form for diversiﬁed ﬁrms. The concept of decentralization
has revolutionized the way diversiﬁed ﬁrms are managed, bringing with it a
wide range of practices and management expectations. Many leading
companies have successfully made the transition to decentralization.


---PAGE BREAK---

Diversiﬁed ﬁrms must undergo further organizational evolution if they
are to respond to today’s competition. Because of the importance of
interrelationships, there is a growing need for a new corporate
organizational form that recognizes both vertical and horizontal dimensions.
Decentralization in diversiﬁed ﬁrms is still a necessity, but must be overlaid
with mechanisms to achieve the important interrelationships. The balance
between the vertical (decentralization) and horizontal dimensions in the
organization of the diversiﬁed ﬁrm is an ever changing one, and the ideal is
perhaps a constant shifting of the balance as the need to emphasize different
activities changes. However, a balance that combines signiﬁcant elements of
both vertical and horizontal will be increasingly necessary.19 The balance
must also reﬂect differing interrelationships from business unit to business
unit.
Increasingly, diversity does not imply the absence of interrelationships.
Business units can be distinct and beneﬁt from decentralization, while being
linked by interrelationships. Hewlett-Packard, a ﬁrm noted for its strong
tradition of decentralization, is just one example of the growing need to
balance vertical with horizontal. Recently, HP has recombined a number of
divisions involved in the design and manufacture of personal computers and
related products. These divisions were proceeding independently, but lacked
the scale economies and cross-product coordination to mount a concerted
attack on IBM and Apple.
This new organizational form requires a modiﬁcation of rigid or narrow
views of autonomy, as well as changing attitudes toward incentives systems
and toward the role of group and sector executives. Instead of seeking
autonomy and viewing committees and other joint efforts as a waste of
time, business unit managers will have to modify their conception of what
“managing their own business” means. The new requirements of the
diversiﬁed ﬁrm will involve a price in terms of less simplicity, greater
ambiguity, more subjectivity, and potentially more conﬂict. However,
diversiﬁed ﬁrms that can successfully negotiate this transition will reap
rewards in terms of competitive advantage. If they can make this new
transition, there will be little debate over whether diversiﬁed ﬁrms add
value.


---PAGE BREAK---

12
Complementary Products and
Competitive Advantage
Most industries are affected in some way by complementary products—that
is, products that are used jointly with their product by the buyer. Computer
software and computer hardware, for example, are complements.
Complements are the opposite of substitutes, because the sale of one
promotes the sale of another. Sometimes a number of complements are part
of a ﬁrm’s product line, while in other cases complements are supplied by
other industries.
Complementary products represent one type of interrelatedness among
industries, and raise important issues for a ﬁrm’s competitive scope. Though
interrelationships among industries in general terms have been the subject
of the previous chapters, complementary products are singled out for
attention here because they involve not only questions of the breadth of a
ﬁrm’s competitive scope but also of how it should compete within particular
industries.
This chapter examines the three important strategic practices in
industries that have important complementary products:
•  Control over complementary products. Offering a full range of
complementary products rather than leaving some of them to be
supplied by others (“we sell both”).
•  Bundling. Selling a group of distinct but complementary products
together only as a bundle, at a single price (“we only sell both
together”).


---PAGE BREAK---

•  Cross subsidization. Selling one product at terms that deliberately
promote the sale of complementary products (“we sell one to sell
another”).
The ﬁrst strategic choice a ﬁrm must make is whether it should supply
complementary products itself or allow outside suppliers to provide some of
them. This is an issue in competitive scope. Having resolved this question, a
ﬁrm must then decide how to compete in the complementary products. One
option is to bundle, or sell the complements together as a package. Bundling
in some form is present in almost every industry, though it is frequently not
recognized as such. Cross subsidization is a different approach to selling
complementary products, in which products are not sold together at one
price but sold separately with prices that reﬂect their complementarity. A
ﬁrm whose products have important complements must make choices in all
three areas.
These three practices are pervasive and affect competitive advantage and
industry structure in some form or another in many industries. Yet all three
issues are frequently overlooked, and the pitfalls in dealing with them are
numerous. Many ﬁrms do not even recognize that they are bundling, for
example. Or ﬁrms maintain cross subsidization after the conditions
supporting it have changed, thereby creating an opening for competitors to
attack them by focusing on the products being used to subsidize.
In this chapter I will describe in detail the conditions under which
control over complements, bundling, and cross subsidization can lead to
competitive advantage, as well as the risks of each practice. I will also
describe how a ﬁrm’s strategy toward complements should change as its
industry evolves. Finally, some of the strategic pitfalls that ﬁrms have
encountered in pursuing each of the three practices will be identiﬁed.
Control Over Complementary Products
In nearly every industry, products are used by the buyer in conjunction
with other complementary products. Computers are used with software
packages and programmers, for example, and mobile homes are often used
in mobile home parks—plots of land specially designed as permanent sites


---PAGE BREAK---

for mobile homes, complete with streets, electricity, and sewer hookups.
Tennis equipment is used with tennis courts, and jet engines are used with
spare parts.
The sales of complementary products are necessarily linked, so that their
fortunes tend to rise and fall together. However, complementary products
can have a strategic relationship to each other that goes far beyond related
growth rates. One complementary product often affects another’s market
image and perceived quality, as well as the cost of using the other from the
buyer’s viewpoint. Both of these effects are important to differentiation
(Chapter 4). The relationship among complements can also affect the cost
of supplying them (Chapter 3).
Where an industry’s product is used with complements, an important
strategic issue arises: the extent to which a ﬁrm should offer the full range
of complements or leave some to be provided by independent suppliers.
Offering the range of complements provides an important competitive
advantage in some industries, but represents an unnecessary and even risky
distraction in others. Control over complements is a distinct issue from
bundling, though the two issues are related. A ﬁrm that supplies
complements may or may not choose to bundle, because the beneﬁts of
controlling complements can often be gained even if they are sold
separately.
Competitive Advantages from Controlling Complements
A ﬁrm can potentially gain competitive advantage from controlling
complements in one of several ways, depending on the ﬁrm’s strategy and
industry structure. Broadly, the advantages stem from coordinating the
value chains of a ﬁrm’s product and complements in order to gain
interrelationships that are similar in character to those discussed in Chapter
9:
Improve Buyer Performance and Thus Differentiate. Complements often
affect the performance of a product or the ﬁrm’s overall value to the buyer.
Well-designed software can improve the performance of a personal
computer, just as toner affects the copy quality of plain paper copiers.


---PAGE BREAK---

Similarly, a food concessionaire can signiﬁcantly affect the buyer’s
satisfaction with a racetrack. Gaining the performance beneﬁt of controlling
complements often requires bundling. A ﬁrm that controls a complement
may thus be able to enhance differentiation.
A ﬁrm gains a competitive advantage in differentiation from controlling
complements if competitors do not. Even if control over a complement is
widespread in an industry, however, it can still be beneﬁcial if it improves
overall industry structure though no ﬁrm gains a competitive advantage.
Improve the Perception of Value. Complements frequently affect each
other’s image or perceived quality. If mobile home parks look shoddy or are
poorly designed, for example, this can adversely affect how buyers perceive
mobile homes. Because of their association in the buyer’s mind,
complements are frequently signaling criteria for each other.1 Controlling a
complement can yield a competitive advantage in signaling even if a ﬁrm
does not bundle. For example, Kodak’s strong position in ﬁlm improves its
perceived differentiation vis-à-vis other camera manufacturers that do not
sell ﬁlm, even though Kodak sells cameras and ﬁlm separately.
Controlling complements to signal value may be beneﬁcial to industry
structure even if no one ﬁrm gains a competitive advantage from doing so.
In the mobile home industry, for example, the overall image of mobile
homes could be improved if all mobile home producers also developed
high-quality mobile home parks. This would increase the demand for
mobile home versus other forms of housing and beneﬁt the entire industry.
Control over complements by one ﬁrm may, in fact, have little impact on
buyer perceptions unless a sufﬁcient number of competitors also control the
complement. In these cases a ﬁrm should actually work to encourage its
competitors to enter the complementary industry along with it.
Optimal Pricing. The buyer’s purchase decision is frequently based on
the total cost of a product and complements, rather than on the cost of the
product alone. For example, buyers usually measure the cost of a
condominium or automobile by the total monthly payment required
(including principal and ﬁnancing cost), rather than looking solely at the
price of the condominium or automobile itself. Similarly, buyers may


---PAGE BREAK---

evaluate the cost of going to a movie in terms of the cost of the movie plus
the cost of parking.2
Under these circumstances, prices must be set jointly to maximize
proﬁts, and this is difﬁcult to do without controlling the complement. When
setting the price of parking at a movie theater, one must recognize that
lowering the cost of parking may increase the number of movie tickets sold,
for example. I will discuss when such deliberate cross subsidization is the
best strategy in the ﬁnal section of this chapter.
As with differentiation, the beneﬁts of controlling a complement for
pricing do not require that the ﬁrm sell the product and complements as a
bundle, or even that the ﬁrm have a market share in the complement that is
comparable to its share of the base product. Even with a relatively small
position in the complement, a ﬁrm can inﬂuence pricing in the
complementary industry by initiating pricing moves that competitors are
forced (or inclined) to follow. By lowering its own parking prices, for
example, a movie theater ﬁrm may be able to force down prices at other
parking garages in the area to some extent. Thus a position in the
complement gives the ﬁrm a leverage point with which to inﬂuence the
development of the complement’s industry, and its position in the
complement need only be big enough to allow exercising such leverage.
Reduce Marketing and Selling Cost. Control over complements can lead
to economies in marketing, because the demands for a product and for
complements are related. Advertising and other marketing investments for
one complement often boost demand for the other, and complements may
be susceptible to shared marketing or selling. Similarly, an installed base in
one product can lower the cost of marketing complements. In video games,
for example, an installed base of machines helps the ﬁrm sell game
cartridges. The economies are sometimes large enough so that a ﬁrm not
controlling complements is unable to reach the threshold spending on
marketing needed to be effective.
A ﬁrm gains a cost advantage in marketing if it is one of relatively few
ﬁrms that controls a complement. Widespread control over complements
can beneﬁt the industry as a whole, however, if it raises marketing
expenditures and boosts overall industry demand relative to substitute
products. Widespread control over complements may also help overcome


---PAGE BREAK---

the “free rider” problem, where ﬁrms selling one complement piggyback on
the marketing investments of ﬁrms selling others. Even if a ﬁrm’s decision
to control a complement is quickly imitated by competitors, such a move
will still be beneﬁcial to the industry as a whole.
Sharing Other Activities. Controlling a complement may allow a ﬁrm to
share other activities in the value chain besides marketing and sales. The
same logistical system may be employed to deliver a product and
complements, for example, or the same order entry system. Opportunities
for sharing will often be present because of the fact that complements are
sold to the same buyers. The circumstances under which sharing value
activities leads to a competitive advantage are discussed in Chapter 9.
Raise Mobility Barriers. Where controlling a complement leads to one or
more of the competitive advantages described above, it may also increase
overall entry/mobility barriers into the industry if entry barriers into the
complementary product are signiﬁcant. For example, a real estate developer
that could own a bank (and get preferential access to ﬁnancing) would
signiﬁcantly increase the sustainability of its competitive advantage because
the barriers to entry into banking are signiﬁcant for most real estate
developers. Today real estate developers are legally prohibited from owning
banks, though deregulation may change this in the future.
The beneﬁts of controlling a complement are not mutually exclusive, and
any or all can be present in an industry. For example, the food concession
can not only affect the buyer’s satisfaction with the racetrack, but prices
should be set jointly on concessions and admission. Depending on the
characteristics of buyers, low admission prices may well raise the number
of patrons who will buy high priced hot dogs. Control over both the
racetrack and the food concession can lead at the same time to economies in
marketing. The sustainability of the competitive advantage from controlling
a complement depends on the presence of some barriers to entering the
complementary good. Without them, competitors can readily replicate the
advantage through entering the complementary industry themselves.
The beneﬁts of controlling a complement can sometimes be achieved
through coalitions with other ﬁrms without the need for actual ownership.


---PAGE BREAK---

For example, a ﬁrm and the supplier of a complement can agree to
coordinate prices, or agree to pool their marketing budgets. The problem
with such arrangements is the difﬁculty of reaching a stable agreement. As
long as ﬁrms supplying complements are independent, each will be tempted
to free-ride on the other, and to set prices and strategies to maximize its
proﬁts rather than the joint proﬁts of both. Nevertheless, the possibilities of
using coalitions to achieve the beneﬁts of controlling complements must
always be explored. If the possibility exists it may be the most cost-effective
option for a ﬁrm (or for the ﬁrm’s competitors). Sometimes equity
investments or other forms of quasi-integration between a ﬁrm and the
supplier of a complementary product can overcome the difﬁculties of
coordinating behavior.3
Problems of Controlling Complements
Against the beneﬁts of controlling complements must be weighed some
potential problems. The ﬁrst is that the structural attractiveness of a
complementary industry may be low, and its proﬁtability signiﬁcantly lower
than in the base industry. Though control of the complement may improve
proﬁtability in the base industry, this must be weighed against the
proﬁtability of the complement relative to alternative uses for the funds. The
tradeoff does not always favor control of the complement.
A second problem with controlling complements is that the
complementary 
industry 
may 
involve 
very 
different 
managerial
requirements for which a ﬁrm is ill-equipped and a ﬁrm may have little
competitive advantage in the complementary industry. Thus any beneﬁts
from controlling a complement must be weighed against the risk that the
ﬁrm will fail or only achieve a weak competitive position. The lack of skills
in the complementary industry cannot be completely overcome by acquiring
a complementary product supplier and managing it as a free-standing entity,
because close coordination between complements is required to achieve
most of the beneﬁts.
Control over Complements and Industry Evolution


---PAGE BREAK---

The value of controlling complements may well shift as an industry
evolves. The need to control complements to improve their quality or image
may be greatest early in the evolution of the complementary industry,
because of uneven quality or the presence of ﬂy-by-night ﬁrms.4 In the early
years of color TV, for example, RCA’s need to have an in-house service
organization was much greater than later when independent service shops
had mastered color set repair techniques. As a complementary industry
matures, it may become desirable to exit or harvest a ﬁrm’s position in the
complementary industry. Independent suppliers may be able to do an
adequate job, and the ﬁrm may no longer be able to offer anything unique in
the complementary industry to bolster its overall differentiation. Staying in
a complement too long when there are capable outside suppliers can
actually erode differentiation rather than enhance it.
The pricing advantages of controlling a complement also may erode as
the complementary industry matures. In the emerging phase, prices of
complements are more likely to be higher than would be desirable because
suppliers are skimming or inefﬁcient. Early fragmentation of the
complementary industry may also lead to inefﬁciency of complementary
products suppliers, and to under-investment in marketing.
While there is a tendency for the need to control complements to decline
with industry maturity, this is by no means a universal pattern. The
advantages of controlling complements for marketing costs and other
shared activities often persist, for example. A resort that owns not only a
hotel but also the golf course, other sports facilities, and transportation may
have a compelling advantage over one who only operates the hotel. What is
necessary is for a ﬁrm to ask itself periodically whether there are beneﬁts to
controlling each complement. For some complements the beneﬁts will
persist or even increase, while for others a timely exit may be justiﬁed.
Identifying Strategically Important Complements
In view of the potential importance of complements both to a ﬁrm’s
competitive position and to industry structure, a ﬁrm must be aware of what
products are complements to its product. The identiﬁcation of complements
is sometimes subtle, and often complements can be uncovered that are not


---PAGE BREAK---

generally perceived as such. Most industries will have a rather long list of
products that are complementary to some degree. Table 12–1 gives an
illustrative (and partial) list of products that are at least somewhat
complementary to residential home building.
TABLE 12–1 Partial List of Complements to Houses
Financing
Lawn mowers
Homeowner’s insurance
Grass seed
Real estate brokerage
Swimming pools
Furniture
Barbecue grills
Appliances
Light bulbs
Carpets
Pets
Nurseries
Garden hose
Given the potentially numerous complements in many industries such as
home building, it is necessary to distinguish those complements that are
strategically important from those that are not. It is clear that a house
builder such as U.S. Home will gain little competitive advantage from
competing in all the industries listed in Table 12–1, though it may well gain
an advantage from competing in some of them.
Strategically important complements have two characteristics: (1) they
are or could be associated with each other by the buyer, and (2) they have a
signiﬁcant impact on each other’s competitive position. Some association of
a complement and a ﬁrm’s product by the buyer is implied in most of the
potential competitive advantages of controlling a complement. The
association among complements leads the buyer to connect their images,
measure their performance collectively rather than individually, or measure
their cost as a group. This association is also what underlies joint marketing
or sales.
The strategic relationship among complements is thus in large part a
function of buyer perceptions. A ﬁrm can rank complements based on how
strong the association with its product is or could be. Houses and ﬁnancing
are commonly associated by buyers, for example, while houses and grass
seed are rarely associated though their demand is undeniably related.
Similarly, movies and parking costs are commonly associated, while the
cost of driving to the movie is rarely associated with the cost of the movie.


---PAGE BREAK---

If products are in fact connected but not presently associated by buyers, a
ﬁrm may be able to gain competitive advantage by educating buyers to
make the association. A sophisticated knowledge of buyer purchasing
behavior is necessary to uncover actual or potential buyer associations
among complements.
The second test of the strategic signiﬁcance of a complement is the effect
of controlling it on competitive advantage or industry structure. A
complement will not be important for a ﬁrm to control unless it has a
material effect on overall cost or differentiation of the group of related
products. Light bulbs are complements to lamps, for example, but light
bulbs do not have a meaningful impact on the differentiation of a lamp or on
the cost of marketing it. Since widespread control over complements can be
a signiﬁcant beneﬁt for industry structure, however, some complements are
important to control even if they cannot be turned into a competitive
advantage.
Bundling
Bundling is selling separable products or services to buyers only as a
package, or “bundle.” For example, IBM bundled computer hardware,
software, and service support for many years, while the manufacturers of
antiknock additives for gasoline have traditionally provided various
technical services along with their product all at a single price. Bundling in
some form is pervasive, though not always recognized. Identifying when
bundling is occurring often requires a rather fundamental look at an
industry akin to that in segmentation (Chapter 7). All the potentially
separable products and services that are offered must be isolated, even
though they may not be seen as separate by industry participants. For
example, delivery and after-sale service are often included as part of the
product although they are potentially separable and could be sold
separately. Similarly, retailers often provide free parking, while airlines
provide free meals and baggage handling. Because some forms of bundling
are age-old industry practices, ﬁrms may not even perceive that they are
bundling.


---PAGE BREAK---

Bundling means that all buyers are provided with the same package of
products and services, regardless of differences in their needs. Some buyers
of antiknock compounds, for example, would prefer to sacriﬁce the service
provided by manufacturers in return for a lower price, but they do not have
that option. Buyers often differ in their receptiveness to bundling because
they want different collections of products or services, or because they
differ in the intensity of their need for the various products or services. In
either case, bundling is suboptimal for some buyers.
Bundling will not be desirable unless it has some countervailing beneﬁts
that overcome the fact that it is suboptimal for some buyers. Bundling can
create competitive advantage in a number of ways, however, that vary in
importance from industry to industry and even by industry segment. In
some industries bundling also has signiﬁcant risks that must be identiﬁed.
Competitive Advantages of Bundling
The potential competitive advantages grow broadly out of the ability to
share activities in the value chains for providing parts of the bundle if the
entire bundle is supplied together. The advantages of bundling can be
grouped into a number of categories:
Economies of Providing the Bundle. A ﬁrm may lower its costs by
providing only a single package instead of whatever mix of products or
services a particular buyer desires. These economies arise from
interrelationships in a ﬁrm’s value chain that can be exploited by supplying
only the package. Bundling can allow a ﬁrm to better share activities in the
value chain in supplying the parts of the bundle. If the same bundle of
products is sold to each buyer by the same salesperson, shipped on the same
truck, or serviced by the same technician, for example, there may be cost
savings in providing the bundle together. The price of the bundle could thus
be lower than the collective price of the individual parts. For example, in
providing services for offshore drilling for oil, a ﬁrm that provides two
related services together may need only one person on the rig while
competitors require a person for each service. Economies from bundling
can also result from shared cost of gathering information about buyers. A


---PAGE BREAK---

consulting ﬁrm may learn about a client through providing one service, and
apply this knowledge at low cost in providing other services in the bundle.
The unbundled competitor must make the full investment in information
even though it provides only one service.
Bundling may also reduce costs by promoting manufacturing economies
of scale or learning. Providing the same package to all buyers guarantees an
equivalent volume of all items in the bundle, perhaps lowering cost. For
example, manufacturing a ﬁre engine with standard features would allow a
manufacturer to achieve greater economies of scale and learning than if
each engine gets a different collection of bells and whistles, the current U.S.
industry practice. Providing a common package may also increase the
productivity of the sales force, by eliminating the need to inform the buyer
about what parts of the bundle to select. Finally, bundling can signiﬁcantly
reduce administrative and selling costs. Providing the same package to all
buyers usually simpliﬁes transaction costs, including paperwork, logistical
arrangements, and the like. Economies of standardization, scale, or learning
can in some cases allow a ﬁrm to sell the bundle at a lower price than it
would have to to charge customers who only wanted part of it.
Economies from bundling will yield a substantial competitive advantage
to a bundled ﬁrm only if unbundled competitors cannot duplicate them
through coalitions or contractual arrangements among themselves.
However, the difﬁculties of reaching agreement on such coordination with
independent ﬁrms often preclude a contractual solution.
Increased Differentiation. Bundling may allow a ﬁrm to differentiate
itself vis-à-vis competitors selling only parts of the bundle. The role of
bundling in differentiation arises from linkages among parts of the bundle in
the buyer’s value chain because they are used or purchased together.
Without bundling, a ﬁrm may not only forgo differentiation but be forced to
compete with each specialist competitor in its area of greatest strength.
Bundling can increase differentiation in the following ways:
MORE BASES FOR DIFFERENTIATION. A ﬁrm that can bundle has more
dimensions on which to differentiate itself than a competitor with a more
limited offering. For example, a bundled ﬁrm may be able to guarantee


---PAGE BREAK---

reliability of the entire bundle or offer a single point for after-sale service.
Similarly, it may differentiate itself or its service even though its product is
not unique.
HIGH-PERFORMING INTERFACE. Bundling may be necessary when the
interface among complementary products is not standardized. Compatibility
among items in the bundle is facilitated if the same ﬁrm provides the whole
package of items needed jointly to meet the buyer’s needs. This presumes
that interface technology is relatively difﬁcult, and that compatibility cannot
be achieved.
OPTIMIZED PACKAGE PERFORMANCE. Even if the interface among products
in the bundle is standard, the bundled ﬁrm may be able to optimize the
performance of the whole package (system) by controlling the design,
manufacture, and service of all the parts. It may have better information
about the capabilities of each part of the bundle than a specialist competitor
who must gather information externally about parts of the bundle and
cannot control their design directly. This advantage of bundling presumes
that the parts of the bundle are interdependent in determining its overall
performance.
ONE-STOP SHOPPING. Bundling simpliﬁes the buyer’s shopping task.
Offering the bundle may also reassure the buyer that all the items in the
bundle will work, and reduce the buyer’s perceived risk of purchase. A
single point of responsibility, a single place where complaints can be
lodged, and a single service organization may also be valued by buyers.
Buyer frustration over divided responsibility in the newly deregulated Bell
System is a good example of how unbundling can lower differentiation
through this mechanism.
Enhanced Opportunity for Price Discrimination. Bundling may allow a
ﬁrm to increase total proﬁts where different buyers have different price
sensitivities for the individual parts of the bundle. Particularly in a “mixed”
bundling strategy—where a ﬁrm offers both the full bundle at one price and
the individual parts of the bundle at prices which sum to greater than the


---PAGE BREAK---

bundle price—bundling may increase total revenue compared to selling the
parts separately.5
The mechanism by which this occurs is a function of the cost of the
bundle versus the cost of the parts of the bundle a buyer would want if they
could be purchased separately. Bundling can cause some buyers to buy the
whole bundle even though they would not buy all the parts individually,
provided the incremental cost of the whole bundle over the cost of the parts
they desire is low. In addition, a mixed bundling strategy can allow the ﬁrm
to extract high prices from buyers who strongly desire only one part of the
bundle, while at the same time selling the whole bundle to other buyers.
The value of bundling in pricing depends on the distribution of buyer
needs in the industry. Bundling is most likely to raise proﬁts if buyers have
widely differing price sensitivities for parts of the bundle. Bundling is a way
of capturing differing price sensitivities without charging different prices to
different buyers for the same product.
Increased Entry/Mobility Barriers. Bundling may lead to higher
entry/mobility barriers, presuming there are one or more of the other
competitive advantages of bundling. Bundling raises barriers because a
competitor must develop capabilities in all parts of the bundle rather than
being able to specialize.
Mitigated Rivalry. Rivalry among a group of bundled competitors may
be more stable than rivalry in an industry containing both bundled and
unbundled competitors. If all competitors offer the same bundle and the
only industry price is the bundle price, the ability to recognize mutual
dependence among ﬁrms is likely to be higher and the incentives for price
cutting may be less than if competitors offer any part of the bundle
separately.
Risks of Bundling
A bundled strategy involves a number of risks, which vary in importance
depending on a ﬁrm’s strategy and industry structure. The risks of bundling
are determined by the potential vulnerability of a bundled ﬁrm to attack by
an unbundled competitor employing a more focused strategy.6 Sometimes a


---PAGE BREAK---

ﬁrm with a substantial competitive advantage can preserve bundling despite
signiﬁcant risks, as IBM did for many years in computers.
Diversity of Buyer Needs. Bundling presumes that a signiﬁcant
proportion of buyers desire and are willing to pay for the whole bundle. If
buyer needs vary widely in an industry, a bundled strategy may be
suboptimal for a segment of buyers and thereby vulnerable to a focused
competitor who tailors the particular bundle it offers to the needs of the
segment. For example, if the need for after-sale service varies widely
among buyers in an industry, a focused competitor may be able to enter by
selling only the product with no service included, and achieve enough
market share to be viable. People Express, for example, unbundled the
airline product by eliminating free meals, free baggage handling, and other
parts of the traditional airline bundle. This appealed to price-sensitive
buyers who had little need for the parts of the bundle that were eliminated.
Similarly, off-price retailers have successfully attacked traditional retailers
with strategies involving little service, no credit, no alterations, and no
advertising to appeal to a particular buyer segment.
Buyer Ability to Assemble the Bundle. In a bundled strategy, the ﬁrm
assembles the bundle and sells it as a package to the buyer. This strategy is
vulnerable if buyers have the technological, ﬁnancial, and administrative
capabilities to assemble the bundle themselves. The buyer may purchase the
parts of the bundle individually from suppliers and put them together, or
purchase some parts from suppliers and produce others (e.g., service) in-
house.
Specialist Ability to Provide Parts of the Bundle on More Favorable
Terms. A bundling strategy is vulnerable if specialists that focus on one or a
few parts of the bundle can achieve low cost or differentiation in producing
them. A specialist may gain a competitive advantage for the reasons
described in Chapter 7. It can tailor its value chain to produce and sell just
one item in the bundle that it views as its primary business. A specialist may
also avoid costs of coordination or compromise with shared activities
supplying other parts of the bundle that are borne by a bundled competitor.


---PAGE BREAK---

A specialist that focuses on one part of the bundle can also potentially
reap advantages from interrelationships with other industries. A specialist
electronics company may have a cost advantage in producing an electronic
part for an electromechanical system vis-à-vis a bundled competitor who
provides the entire system, for example, because the electronics company
can share value activities (e.g., R&D, test equipment) with other related
electronics businesses.7
Bundling Through Coalitions. A bundled competitor is vulnerable if the
advantages of bundling can be duplicated by focused competitors who form
coalitions among themselves. Coalitions can take many forms, such as
technology sharing and joint sales or service organizations.
Bundled Versus Unbundled Strategies
The balance between the competitive advantages of bundling and its
risks determines the appropriateness of the bundled strategy for a ﬁrm. The
risks of bundling provide the strategic levers with which focused
competitors attack bundled competitors. Bundling will be the predominant
strategy in an industry if the competitive advantages of the bundled ﬁrm are
signiﬁcant and the risks of bundling low. Bundled and unbundled strategies
are natural adversaries, however, and the balance between them can shift
quickly in an industry in either direction.
In many industries, it may be difﬁcult for the bundled and unbundled
strategies to coexist. If a successful unbundled competitor becomes
established, this creates pressure on the bundled competitor to unbundle.
The presence of an unbundled competitor makes buyers more aware that
their needs are not being exactly met by the bundled ﬁrm, and provides an
alternative to purchasing the whole bundle.
In entering an industry against bundled ﬁrms, an unbundled competitor is
likely to attack those parts of the bundle that by themselves would fully
satisfy the needs of a signiﬁcant group of buyers, such as a basic product
without the ancillary services. Another likely avenue of attack is to supply a
peripheral item such as spare parts or service, where the bundled competitor
is inefﬁcient or overcharging. Attacking a bundled ﬁrm through unbundling


---PAGE BREAK---

is one of the characteristic ways of gaining market position that are
discussed in detail in Chapter 15.
After the ﬁrst entry by an unbundler, the incentive is created for other
unbundled competitors to enter and offer other parts of the bundle. Over
time, then, more buyers are able to construct the particular bundle they
desire. Once a number of unbundled competitors achieve signiﬁcant market
penetration, some of the motivations for bundling, such as scale economies,
rivalry reduction, or building barriers, are often eliminated. Thus the
remaining bundled competitors may be forced to unbundle.
The bundled and unbundled strategies can coexist in an industry,
however, if there are wide differences in buyer needs and compelling
advantages to bundling for some buyer segments that are not a function of
volume (or of bundling being the dominant strategy). For example,
optimization of system performance through bundling may be particularly
critical for some buyers, and thus a bundled strategy will remain sustainable
for this buyer segment despite the fact that specialist competitors supply
parts of the bundle to other segments. Bundling may also be particularly
valued by less sophisticated buyers, even though sophisticated buyers want
to assemble the bundle themselves. In business aircraft, for example, Cessna
is offering a bundle including a plane, maintenance, pilots, a hangar, ofﬁce
space, and landing fees all for a single monthly price. This appeals to
buyers that want the convenience of one ﬁrm’s taking responsibility for
everything. A strategy of mixed bundling may also be appropriate
depending on the particular competitive advantages sought from bundling.
While offering the buyer an option to purchase either the whole bundle or
parts of it from the same ﬁrm tends to undermine the ﬁrm’s ability to sell
the bundle, mixed bundling may be appropriate if the key advantage to
bundling is differentiation or price discrimination.
Bundling and Industry Evolution
The appropriateness of bundling often changes as an industry evolves,
because industry structural change alters advantages of bundling or the
risks. There is no valid generalization possible about whether bundling
becomes more or less attractive as an industry evolves, because many


---PAGE BREAK---

patterns are observed in practice. In the majority of industries, however,
there seems to be a tendency towards unbundling as an industry evolves. In
commercial insurance, for example, standardized insurance packages have
been replaced by the separate sale of services such as loss prevention
counseling. Buyers are able today to purchase broad coverage or specialized
services depending on their needs. Another industry where unbundling may
well occur is video systems. Just as audio systems were once bundled but
are now often unbundled, video systems are likely to unbundle into
displays, speakers, controllers, game units, and so on. Unbundling trends
have also been evident in such other industries as building control systems,
gasoline retailing, computers, and hospital management services.
The tendency for unbundling to occur over time is due to some
characteristic changes in the competitive advantages and risks of bundling
that accompany industry evolution:8
Buyer Ability to Assemble the Bundle Increases. Buyer learning over
time, coupled with diffusion of technology, implies that buyers may become
more able to assemble the bundle themselves. Buyers can gain the expertise
to ensure compatibility, and need less reassurance from a single source of
responsibility. This is reinforced by the tendency of buyers to backward
integrate as industry volume grows. Buyers become more able to make
some parts of the bundle themselves, and therefore do not desire the whole
package.
Product/Technological Standardization Occurs. Standardization of the
product as an industry matures often reduces the need to control the entire
package in order to optimize system performance. It also lowers entry
barriers into parts of the bundle, and simpliﬁes the buyer’s task of
assembling the bundle in-house. The problems of interface compatibility
also tend to be reduced over time as an industry matures and standards are
established. Qualiﬁed suppliers thus appear for parts of the bundle where
there were none previously, and trigger the unbundling process described
above.
Needs for Various Parts of the Bundle Are Reduced/Changed. Industry
maturity tends to reduce the need of many buyers for service, applications


---PAGE BREAK---

engineering, and other parts of the bundle. Early in industry development,
product quality is often erratic, products are unproven, and the perceived
risk of purchase is often high (see Chapter 8). All of these characteristics
lead buyers to seek the security of a bundled competitor, and bundling may
be necessary to get an industry off the ground (the case in ﬁber optics and in
electronic fuel injection systems for cars). As the industry matures,
however, service and support either move in-house or are less needed by
buyers. In addition, new buyers are often attracted to the industry and/or
competitors segment the industry more ﬁnely, increasing the diversity of
buyer needs. Different bundles thus become appropriate for different
buyers, and the stage is set for an unbundled competitor to enter.
Industry Size Offsets Bundling Scale Economies. As an industry passes
from emerging to maturing, the increase in industry size may make it
possible for specialists to viably provide only parts of the bundle. Growth in
demand for the parts of the bundle overcomes manufacturing scale
thresholds as well as ﬁxed selling costs. This is a special case of the
emergence of a new segment as viable for a focus strategy, discussed in
Chapter 7.
Increasing Buyer Price Sensitivity Leads to Pressures for Cost Reduction
through Unbundling. Increasing buyer price sensitivity leads buyers to press
for cost savings. One avenue is often for a buyer to purchase parts of the
bundle and assemble it in-house, or to purchase just those parts of the
bundle that it needs. Buyers often provide the impetus for unbundling even
if no specialist competitors emerge.
Specialist Competitors Are Attracted. The success and growth of bundled
ﬁrms may attract competitors looking for a way to get into the industry.
Since entering with a bundled strategy usually involves overcoming higher
entry barriers, new entrants naturally gravitate toward unbundled strategies
(see Chapter 15). All the other forces described above provide the opening
for them to succeed.
The tendency for unbundling to occur over time tends to be accentuated
where an industry has powerful, capable buyers. Such buyers often have the


---PAGE BREAK---

technological strength to quickly develop in-house capability to assemble
the bundle themselves, the bargaining leverage to force suppliers to
unbundle, and the resources to lower the barriers facing specialist
competitors. For example, the leading automobile ﬁrms purchase entire
systems such as brake systems or fuel injection systems only very early in
their development. Later, when the technology becomes developed, these
ﬁrms break the systems into parts to be sourced from separate suppliers.
They in the process often help put unbundled suppliers in business.
Unbundling is also triggered or accelerated during periods of intense
industry rivalry, such as an economic downturn. Desperate competitors turn
to unbundling for incremental revenue, setting in motion an often
irreversible process. This pattern seems to have been at work in commercial
insurance, where a disastrous downcycle has made ﬁrms anxious to gain
incremental sales.
Industry followers or new entrants are often the ﬁrst to break down the
bundle. Followers tend to lead unbundling because of their desire to
neutralize their competitive disadvantages in competing with bundled
competitors. Often the best hope is to change the competitive rules in order
to lower mobility barriers. New entrants also often break down the bundle
by identifying latent or emerging segments or situations where there is no
clear economic motivation for bundling, where bundling creates mixed
motives in retaliation for bundled ﬁrms, or where buyer needs are changing.
A prime source of new entrants that unbundle is spinoffs from bundled
competitors, who recognize that some buyers’ needs are not being served.
Despite a tendency for unbundling to occur over time, bundling is
sustainable if the competitive advantages from bundling remain signiﬁcant
and unattainable any other way. Performance or cost beneﬁts of bundling
can persist, for example, even after the buyer’s need for reassurance or
assistance in assembling the bundle disappears. Bundling is also sustainable
if an industry leader controls a proprietary part of the bundle and buyers are
forced to purchase the entire bundle to gain access to it. Moreover, a leader
can sometimes protect the bundle by protecting proprietary interfaces
among parts of it. By making the problem of interfacing with its products
difﬁcult, the leader can deter the entry of specialist competitors.9 IBM has
been accused of such behavior, for example.


---PAGE BREAK---

While the more common direction of change is from bundled to
unbundled competition, it is important to recognize the opposite possibility.
Technological changes may lead to product performance or interface
motivations for bundling. Economies of scale in providing the bundle may
also sometimes increase over time if the manufacturing process changes.
Regulatory barriers that prevented economically rational bundling may fall.
Unbundled strategies may also have developed over time in an industry
where in fact there are economic motivations for bundling. If many
specialists initially entered the industry and no ﬁrm had the resources or
orientation to develop total capability in the whole bundle, buyers may have
been forced to take the role of assembling the bundle themselves. A
strategic innovation by one ﬁrm in bundling may transform the industry
structure.
Two cases where bundling appears to be supplanting unbundled
strategies are ﬁnancial services and health care. Services such as Merrill
Lynch’s Cash Management Account (CMA), which combine stock
brokerage, a checking account, a credit card, and other ﬁnancial services,
are bundles of previously separate services. They are a manifestation of
deregulation as well as developments in information system technology that
made such accounts feasible. Similarly, health maintenance organizations
are combining separate services. In the same health care sector, however,
home care services and specialized emergency room or ﬁrms performing
minor surgery are a form of unbundling of the product line offered by
hospitals. This example illustrates how the competitive advantages of
bundling must be viewed on a segment-by-segment basis.
Strategic Implications of Bundling
The analysis of bundling carries important strategic implications for both
bundled and unbundled competitors. There is usually a constant tension
between bundled and unbundled strategies that requires that both be
continually reexamined:
Bundle Where the Advantages Outweigh the Risks. Bundling can be a
powerful source of competitive advantage where the beneﬁts described


---PAGE BREAK---

above outweigh the risks. Where producers of products have lost sight of
the buyer’s ultimate need to integrate them into a system, a bundled
competitor can sometimes transform the industry in its favor. Sophisticated
analysis of the buyers value chain and how it varies by segment is a
prerequisite to effective choices to bundle and unbundle.
Avoid Unconscious Bundling. Many companies have de facto bundled
strategies though they do not recognize them as such. Unconscious bundling
is dangerous because a bundled ﬁrm may be vulnerable to attack by a
focused competitor but may not perceive the threat. A bundled strategy
should be the result of a conscious decision in which the advantages of
bundling are judged to outweigh the risks, and not the result of a failure to
distinguish among the potentially separable products or services that the
ﬁrm offers.
Be Prepared to Unbundle Over Time if Conditions Change. Given the
tendency for unbundling to occur over time, a bundled competitor must be
constantly aware of the potential need to unbundle if the balance of
advantages and risks shifts. A ﬁrm must distinguish between hard economic
reasons for bundling and reasons based on lack of buyer sophistication that
may be transient. Many bundled competitors have surrendered market share
unnecessarily because they have stubbornly clung to bundled strategies.
Bundled Competitors May Represent Opportunities for Industry
Restructuring. Bundling can create vulnerabilities that an unbundled
competitor can exploit, particularly if bundling is unconscious or if the
industry is evolving structurally. Industries in which bundling is being
practiced, ideally as a long-standing industry convention, are potential entry
targets for a ﬁrm.
Cross Subsidization
When a ﬁrm offers products that either are complementary in the strict
sense of being used together or are purchased at the same time, pricing can
potentially exploit the relatedness among them. The idea is to deliberately


---PAGE BREAK---

sell one product (which I term the base good) at a low proﬁt or even a loss
in order to sell more proﬁtable items (which I term proﬁtable goods).
The term “loss leadership” is commonly used to describe the application
of this concept in retailing. Some products are priced at or below cost in
order to attract bargain-conscious buyers to the store. The hope is that these
buyers will purchase other more proﬁtable merchandise during their visit.
Loss leader pricing is also a way of establishing a low price image for the
store.
The same pricing principle is at work in the so-called “razor and blade”
strategy, which involves complementary products. The razor is sold at or
near cost in order to promote future sales of proﬁtable replacement blades.
This same strategy is also common in amateur cameras, aircraft engines,
and elevators. The complementary good is either a consumable item used
with the product (e.g., ﬁlm), a nonconsumable product used with the item
(e.g., software cartridges with video games), replacement parts (e.g., aircraft
engine parts), or service (e.g., elevator maintenance and repair).
Another variation of cross-subsidization is a trade-up strategy. Here
product varieties that are typically ﬁrst purchases are sold at low prices, in
the hopes that the buyer will later purchase other more proﬁtable items in
the line as trade-up occurs. This strategy is sometimes employed, for
example, in light aircraft, motorcycles, copiers, and computers.
Conditions Favoring Cross Subsidization
The motivation for cross subsidization is clear—increase total proﬁt by
selling larger quantities of proﬁtable goods as a result of discounting the
base good. The logic of this strategy depends on the existence of a number
of conditions:
Sufﬁcient Price Sensitivity in the Base Good. Demand for the base good
must be sufﬁciently sensitive to price that discounting increases volume (or
foot trafﬁc) enough to result in a more than compensating increase in proﬁt
through the induced sales of the proﬁtable good. If demand for the base
good is not sensitive to price, however, the ﬁrm is better off making normal
proﬁts on both the base good and proﬁtable good.


---PAGE BREAK---

Sufﬁcient Price Insensitivity in the Proﬁtable Good. The proﬁtable good
must have demand that is not very sensitive to price, so that raising price
does not greatly lower volume. Unless this is the case, proﬁts lost in
discounting the base good will not be recouped through proﬁts on proﬁtable
goods. Insensitivity of demand to price in the proﬁtable good is a function
of the value it creates for the buyer and the threat of substitution for it.
Strong Connection between the Proﬁtable and Base Good. The sale of
proﬁtable goods must also somehow be tied to the sale of the base good, so
that buyers do not cherry-pick by purchasing only the low-priced base good.
The connection between the products does not necessarily have to be
binding, but it should be strong enough so that the proportion of buyers that
purchase both from a ﬁrm is sufﬁcient to justify discounting the base good.
The source of the connection between the base good and proﬁtable good
will vary from industry to industry. In retailing, the connection is created by
shopping costs, which lead buyers to purchase other goods during the same
visit to the store. In trade-up, brand loyalty and switching costs are the
connection between one product and another. In a razor and blade strategy,
brand loyalty and switching costs also may cause the buyer to purchase the
blade from the ﬁrm that supplies the razor. In addition, perceived or actual
compatibility may connect the goods (e.g., in ﬁlm, spare parts), as does the
belief of the buyer that the manufacturer of the product is best qualiﬁed to
provide parts, maintenance, or repair (e.g., in elevators). The connection
between the base and proﬁtable goods also depends on the possibility of
substituting for the proﬁtable good. If spare parts can be refurbished, for
example, then there is no longer the same relationship between equipment
sales and parts sales.
Barriers to Entry into the Proﬁtable Good. It must be difﬁcult to enter
the proﬁtable good in order for cross subsidization to succeed, unless the
base good and proﬁtable good are strongly tied. Barriers to copying spare
parts or consumables are essential, for example, to the logic of the razor and
blade approach.
Risks of Cross Subsidization


---PAGE BREAK---

The risks of cross subsidization tend to arise from failure to meet the
third condition above. If the connection between the base good and
proﬁtable good is not sufﬁciently strong, a ﬁrm practicing cross
subsidization may ﬁnd itself selling only the low-priced base good and not
the proﬁtable good, which is purchased by the buyer from competitors. This
can happen in a number of ways:
Buyer Cherry-picking. The buyer only purchases the base good, and
either does without the proﬁtable good or purchases it from another supplier
that is not cross subsidizing.
Substitutes for the Proﬁtable Good. If the need for the proﬁtable good
can be eliminated or reduced, cross subsidization is compromised because
the buyer will not purchase the proﬁtable good. For example, refurbishing
spare parts instead of buying new ones or increasing the life of consumable
items would have this effect.
Buyer Vertical Integration. The buyer purchases the base good but
integrates to produce the proﬁtable good internally. For example, service is
performed in-house, or the buyer fabricates or refurbishes its own spare
parts.
Specialist (Focused) Competitors. A specialist competitor sells the
proﬁtable good at lower prices. For example, independent service
companies are common in a number of industries which specialize in
servicing a particular brand of equipment, or in copying spare parts. They
target an industry leader, and perform relatively simple types of service or
copy the most frequently replaced parts. The equipment manufacturer’s
margins on parts and service are thus undermined, and it may increasingly
be left with only exotic repairs or low-volume parts. Sulzer Brothers, for
example, is the prime target of unlicensed parts suppliers in marine diesel
engines. The risk of entry by a specialist competitor is a function of the
tightness of the connection between the base good and proﬁtable good, and
the barriers to entry into the proﬁtable good.
Cross Subsidization and Industry Evolution


---PAGE BREAK---

The appropriateness of cross subsidization often changes as an industry
matures. As in bundling, the tendency is for it to become less appropriate
over time, though this not always the case. Cross subsidization can become
less attractive for the following reasons:
The Strength of the Connection between the Base Good and Proﬁtable
Goods Falls. As the buyer becomes knowledgeable and more price-
sensitive, the perceived need to purchase the proﬁtable good from the same
ﬁrm that sells the base good often diminishes. The tie between the goods
may also weaken as diffusion of technology reduces switching costs, or
compatible imitations for the proﬁtable good become available.
Barriers to Entry into the Proﬁtable Good Fall. More available
technology and falling differentiation tend to reduce barriers to entry into
the proﬁtable good. One outcome may be buyer integration into the
proﬁtable good.
Substitution Possibilities for the Proﬁtable Good Increase. Substitutes
are sometimes discovered for the proﬁtable good as the industry matures.
For example, new technology for parts refurbishing appears (e.g., aircraft
engine parts), or methods of conserving consumables are discovered (e.g.,
reuse of dialysers in artiﬁcial kidney machines).
Strategic Implications of Cross Subsidization
Cross subsidization can be a way to signiﬁcantly improve performance if
the necessary conditions hold. Such well-known ﬁrms as Gillette, Kodak,
and Xerox have practiced the strategy successfully. However, the conditions
supporting cross subsidization can be ﬂeeting, and require active efforts to
sustain. Moreover, a ﬁrm must be sure that cross subsidization is intended
rather than unintended.
Some important strategic implications ﬂowing from cross subsidization
are as follows:
Create Barriers to Entry into the Proﬁtable Good. Sustaining a cross
subsidization strategy requires that a ﬁrm create or enhance barriers to entry


---PAGE BREAK---

into proﬁtable goods. This implies, for example, that a ﬁrm must protect its
proprietary servicing procedures, parts fabrication technologies, and designs
for consumable supplies against imitators. Doing so may require aggressive
patenting, deliberately creating different consumables for use in different
models, and active marketing of the need to purchase proﬁtable goods from
the supplier of the base good. Many ﬁrms have squandered the advantages
of cross subsidization by not paying attention to such factors.
An example of a ﬁrm that has worked hard to protect its proﬁtable goods
is Xerox. Consumables are a major contributor to proﬁtability in copiers,
and Xerox has maintained specialized toners for different models and
actively marketed the beneﬁts of purchasing consumables from the
manufacturer to ensure highest quality.
Strengthen the Connection between the Base Good and Proﬁtable
Goods. Anything that tightens the connection between the base good and
proﬁtable goods will help defend a ﬁrm’s ability to cross-subsidize. Designs
that increase the competitor’s difﬁculty in achieving a compatible interface
are one such tactic. Another is Kodak’s tactic of advertising to consumers
about the desirability of ﬁnishing pictures on Kodak paper, attempting to
more closely tie the sales of machines and paper to photoﬁnishers.
Be Prepared to Modify Cross Subsidization as the Industry Evolves. A
ﬁrm must be prepared to modify cross subsidization if the supporting
conditions change. The relative margins on the base good and proﬁtable
goods should often be gradually equalized over time. A ﬁrm may also
beneﬁt from devising more complex pricing schemes over time that lower
the price of the proﬁtable good to those buyers most susceptible to
defection. A ﬁrm must avoid the tendency to provide an umbrella that
encourages entry by competitors into the proﬁtable good.
Encourage Entry into the Base Good to Boost Sales of the Proﬁtable
Good. If the proﬁtable good is proprietary, it may be desirable to encourage
entry into the base good to boost sales of the proﬁtable good with such
tactics as licensing.10 Kodak has encouraged entry into cameras that use its
ﬁlm formats, for example.


---PAGE BREAK---

Avoid Unintended Cross Subsidization. A ﬁrm should cross-subsidize
only as a deliberate strategy and not because it fails to understand its true
costs. Failure to understand how costs differ by segment will almost
guarantee that cross subsidization is occurring. A good system for strategic
cost analysis, described in Chapter 3, is essential to effective cross
subsidization. Unintended cross subsidy is an invitation to cherry-picking
by competitors, as well as a way of attracting new entrants.
Complements and Competitive Strategy
Complements are pervasive in industries. A ﬁrm must know what
complementary products it depends on, and how they affect its competitive
advantage and the structure of the industry as a whole. A ﬁrm must decide
which complements it should produce itself, and how to package and price
them. Bundling and unbundling of complements is one of the ways in
which fundamental industry restructuring takes place. The challenge is to
make strategy towards complements an opportunity rather than a source of
competitive advantage for competitors.


---PAGE BREAK---

IV
Implications 
for 
Offensive 
and 
Defensive
Competitive Strategy


---PAGE BREAK---

13
Industry Scenarios and Competitive Strategy under
Uncertainty
How does a ﬁrm choose a competitive strategy when it faces major
uncertainties about the future? Oil ﬁeld suppliers currently are agonizing,
for example, over how long the drop in drilling activity will last; the
estimates range from less than a year to the rest of the decade. Industry
structure is not static, and ﬁrms in many industries face considerable
uncertainty about how structure will change in the future. The sources of
uncertainty are numerous and originate both within the industry and in the
industry’s broader environment. Most observers would agree that
uncertainty has increased dramatically in the last decade, due to such things
as ﬂuctuating raw material prices, swings in ﬁnancial and currency markets,
deregulation, the electronics revolution, and the growth of international
competition.
This chapter has beneﬁtted from comments by participants in the Colloquium on Scenario Planning
and Competitive Strategy held at the Harvard Business School, June 1983, especially Pierre Wack,
Richard Rumelt, and Ruth Robitschek.
Every ﬁrm deals with uncertainty in one way or another. Uncertainty is
not often addressed very well in competitive strategy formulation, however.
Strategies are frequently based either on the assumption that the past will
repeat itself, or on managers’ own implicit forecasts about the most
probable future of an industry. Explicit and implicit forecasts of the future
structure are often biased by conventional wisdom, and by their very design
may average out all the potential uncertainties facing the industry. Managers


---PAGE BREAK---

often fail to consider—or underestimate the probability of—radical or
discontinuous changes that might be unlikely but would signiﬁcantly alter
industry structure or a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage.
A few ﬁrms construct contingency plans as part of the strategic planning
process, in an attempt to test strategies against major sources of uncertainty.
Contingency planning is rare in practice, however, and usually tests
strategies incrementally against only one or two key uncertainties such as
the inﬂation rate or the price of oil. Contingency plans seldom examine
alternative future industry structures, or compel managers to consider their
implications. When facing considerable uncertainty, ﬁrms tend to select
strategies that preserve ﬂexibility, despite the costs in terms of required
resources or diminished competitive position.
Scenarios as a Planning Tool
As the perceived need to address uncertainty explicitly in planning has
grown, a few ﬁrms have begun to use scenarios as tools to understand the
strategic implications of uncertainty more fully. A scenario is an internally
consistent view of what the future might turn out to be. By constructing
multiple scenarios, a ﬁrm can systematically explore the possible
consequences of uncertainty for its choice of strategies. The use of
scenarios started to become signiﬁcant after the 1973 oil crisis magniﬁed
certain forms of uncertainty.
The scenarios traditionally used in strategic planning have emphasized
macroeconomic and macropolitical factors—I refer to these types of
scenarios as macroscenarios. Scenario building has concentrated on
creating alternative views of the national or global economic and political
environment, including such things as the rate of economic growth,
inﬂation, protectionism, regulation, energy prices and interest rates. The use
of macroscenarios reﬂects the fact that oil, natural resources, and aerospace
companies were the early leaders in employing scenarios for planning, with
Royal 
Dutch/Shell 
widely 
recognized 
as 
a 
pioneer.1,2 
Global
macroeconomic and political events can have a profound effect on the
success of an international oil or natural resource company. Moreover,
scenarios have usually been developed at the corporate level in diversiﬁed


---PAGE BREAK---

ﬁrms, hence the attention to variables that broadly impact many business
units.
Macroscenarios, despite their relevance, are too general to be sufﬁcient
for developing strategy in a particular industry. The implications of
macroscenarios for individual industries are often poorly understood.
Constructing macroscenarios requires the analysis of a broad and highly
subjective set of factors. Few aspects of the macroeconomic and political
environment have important strategic ramiﬁcations for all but the most basic
industries. Other uncertainties that macroscenarios leave out such as
technological change and competitor behavior can emerge as dominant
factors driving industry structural change in particular industries. As a
result, macroscenarios have encountered skepticism from many operating
managers, and have not become integral to strategic planning in a
widespread way.
Industry Scenarios
Scenarios are a powerful device for taking acount of uncertainty in
making strategic choices. They allow a ﬁrm to move away from dangerous,
single-point forecasts of the future in instances when the future cannot be
predicted. Scenarios can help encourage managers to make their implicit
assumptions about the future explicit, and to think beyond the conﬁnes of
existing conventional wisdom. A ﬁrm can then make well-informed choices
about how to take the competitive uncertainties it faces into account.
In competitive strategy, the appropriate unit for analysis of scenarios is
the industry—I term such scenarios industry scenarios. Industry scenarios
allow a ﬁrm to translate uncertainty into its strategic implications for a
particular industry. By focusing on the industry, macroeconomic, political,
technological, and other uncertainties are not analyzed for their own sake
but probed for their implications for competition. Industry scenarios also
explicitly include competitor behavior, a key source of uncertainty in the
choice of strategies.
This chapter describes how to construct industry scenarios, and how to
use them to guide the choice of competitive strategy. I begin by describing
how to identify the sources of uncertainty facing an industry and how to


---PAGE BREAK---

translate them into the most meaningful industry scenarios. Next, I discuss
how to analyze scenarios, and how to identify those with the greatest
implications for industry structure and competitive advantage. I then show
how a ﬁrm can select the best strategy in light of the uncertainties
confronting it. The chapter concludes with a discussion of how industry
scenarios should ﬁt into a ﬁrm’s ongoing strategic planning process.
Constructing Industry Scenarios
An industry scenario is an internally consistent view of an industry’s
future structure. It is based on a set of plausible assumptions about the
important uncertainties that might inﬂuence industry structure, carried
through to the implications for creating and sustaining competitive
advantage. An industry scenario is not a forecast but one possible future
structure. A set of industry scenarios is carefully chosen to reﬂect the range
of possible (and credible) future industry structures with important
implications for competition. The entire set of scenarios, rather than the
most likely one, is then used to design a competitive strategy. The time
period used in industry scenarios should reﬂect the time horizon of the most
important investment decisions.
An industry typically faces many uncertainties about the future. The
important uncertainties are those that will inﬂuence industry structure, such
as technological breakthroughs, entry of new competitors, and interest rate
ﬂuctuations. External factors such as macroeconomic conditions and
government policy affect competition through, and not independently of,
industry structure. Structural change almost always requires adjustments in
strategy and creates the greatest opportunities for competitors to shift their
relative positions.
The ﬁve competitive forces described in Chapter 1 constitute the
conceptual foundation for constructing industry scenarios. Uncertainties
that affect any of the ﬁve competitive forces will have implications for
competition, and therefore must be considered in constructing scenarios.
Constructing industry scenarios begins by analyzing current industry
structure and identifying all the uncertainties that may affect it. These


---PAGE BREAK---

uncertainties are then translated into a set of different future industry
structures. An overview of the process is shown in Figure 13–1.
The process shown in Figure 13–1 is deceptively simple. Constructing
industry scenarios requires several iterations and is a judgmental process. It
can be difﬁcult to determine fully what uncertainties are the most important
for strategy until a number of preliminary scenarios have been analyzed,
hence the feedback loops on Figure 13–1.
The process shown in Figure 13–1 postpones the introduction of
competitor behavior into each scenario until the industry structure and
requirements for competitive advantage have been developed, despite the
fact that competitor behavior can inﬂuence structure and is often a source of
uncertainty in its own right. However, predicting competitor behavior in a
scenario poses a nearly impossible task without some understanding of the
structural environment in which competitors will operate. Expected
behavior of competitors under a scenario may serve to modify industry
structure; uncertainty about competitor behavior may lead to additional
scenarios.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 13–1. The Process of Constructing Industry Scenarios
I will use an extended example drawn from the U.S. chain saw industry
in describing how to construct industry scenarios. It is necessary to provide
some background on the U.S. chain saw industry so that the scenarios can
be better understood. The chain saw industry had enjoyed a stable and
proﬁtable structure for decades prior to the 1970s. In the early 1970s,
however, there were indications that the industry might be on the threshold
of a major structural change. It was believed that sales of small chain saws
to homeowners and other “casual users” might enter a period of explosive
growth. If this happened, a major structural change in the industry would be
triggered which could proceed in several directions.
In the early 1970s, the great majority of chain saws were sold to
professional users including loggers, farmers, and others for whom chain
saws were a primary tool of their trade. Professionals tended to use saws
heavily and valued durability, comfort and reliability. They purchased saws
primarily through chain saw dealers that also provided service and spare


---PAGE BREAK---

parts. Dealers tended to carry the product lines of relatively few
manufacturers. Most chain saws were large, powerful gasoline saws
assembled by manufacturers from a combination of purchased and
manufactured parts. Suppliers of parts such as chains, bars, and sprockets
were high-volume producers that enjoyed scale economies and some
bargaining power. Electric saws were a potential substitute for gasoline
saws, but were inadequate for most professional applications.
The major competitors in the early 1970s were Homelite (a division of
Textron), McCulloch, and Stihl, followed by Roper, Remington and Beaird-
Poulan. Industry rivalry was moderate, centering on quality, features, dealer
network, and brand reputation. Homelite had the largest market share,
followed by McCulloch. Both pursued differentiation strategies. Stihl
competed by focusing on the premium-quality segment, and differentiated
itself on quality, durability, and service.
By 1973, some major uncertainties loomed. The initial spurt in demand
for chain saws by casual users had been brought on by the energy crisis, the
do-it-yourself movement, and other causes. Casual users were much less
sophisticated than professionals and used their saws less intensively for less
demanding applications. Casual users also did not necessarily purchase
saws from servicing dealers, and distribution channels for chain saws were
broadening to include hardware chains, catalog showrooms and department
stores, among others. This encouraged new entrants into the market. Black
& Decker acquired McCulloch, and Beaird-Poulan was acquired by
Emerson Electric. These acquisitions had created the potential for an
injection of resources into competitors that had previously been ﬁnancially
constrained. In the remainder of this chapter, I will construct a set of
industry scenarios for the chain saw industry while describing the principles
that underlie scenario building.
Identifying Industry Uncertainties
Identifying uncertainties with the most important ramiﬁcations for
competition lies at the heart of the industry scenario technique. Yet the
sources of uncertainty can be hard to recognize and managers may ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to detect discontinuous changes or shed their conventional wisdom.


---PAGE BREAK---

To identify uncertainties each element of industry structure must be
examined and placed into one of three categories: constant, predetermined,
and uncertain. Constant elements of industry structure are those aspects of
structure that are very unlikely to change. Predetermined elements of
structure are areas where structure will change, but the change is largely
predictable. Predetermined trends may well proceed faster or slower
depending on the scenario. Often a variety of structural changes are
predetermined if a thoughtful industry analysis is done. Uncertain elements
of structure are those aspects of future structure which depend on
unresolvable uncertainties. Constant and predetermined structural variables
are part of each scenario, while uncertain structural variables actually
determine the different scenarios.
A way to begin determining which elements of industry structure fall
into each category is to list all apparent industry trends and any possible
major industry changes that have been discussed internally or mentioned by
industry observers. While only those uncertainties that might affect
structure will be important to scenario-building, it is important initially to
identify all the uncertainties to avoid omitting important variables.
Uncertainties with a low probability of occurrance but with a potentially
large impact on structure must also not be overlooked. Each trend or
possible change is then analyzed to determine whether it could have a
signiﬁcant impact on industry structure, and how uncertain or predictable its
impact is. Such a procedure will tend to produce a list of uncertainties that
mixes causes and effects.
By considering only apparent trends, however, important discontinuities
may be overlooked. Scenarios built only on apparent trends may reﬂect
conventional wisdom and may not provide insights into future structure not
available to competitors. One way to guard against overlooking
discontinuities is to uncover observers of the industry who might foresee
new possibilities. Soliciting opinions from outsiders new to the industry,
who can view it objectively, provides another mechanism for overcoming
conventional wisdom.
A wide range of environmental factors can lead to both predetermined
and unpredictable industry changes, including technological trends,
government policy shifts, social changes, and unstable economic conditions.
Environmental changes are not important for their own sake, but because of


---PAGE BREAK---

their possible effect on industry structure. A number of underlying
evolutionary processes, at work in every industry, are shown in Table 13–1.3
These provide a census of the forces that drive industry structural change.
Each should be examined to see if and how it might affect the industry.
Sometimes the evolutionary processes will proceed in predictable ways,
while in other cases their speed and direction will be uncertain and lead to
uncertainty about some elements of structure.
TABLE 13–1 Evolutionary Forces
Driving Industry Structural Change
Long-run changes in growth
Changes in buyer segments served
Buyer learning
Reduction of uncertainty
Diffusion of proprietary knowledge
Accumulation of experience
Expansion (or contraction) in scale
Changes in input and currency costs
Product innovation
Marketing innovation
Process innovation
Structural change in adjacent industries
Government policy changes
Entries and exits
The possible industry changes that are most difﬁcult to anticipate are
frequently those that originate outside an industry. For example, many ﬁrms
in industries that had little or no previous contact with electronics were
taken by surprise by the development of microcomputers. New entrants also
have less predictable and often more profound impacts on industry structure
than do start-up competitors.
In some industries, therefore, scenarios are best constructed by starting
inside the industry and looking outward for additional sources of
uncertainty. In other industries, it is more appropriate to begin with
macroscenarios and then narrow the focus to the industry. Macroscenarios
can provide important insights into possible industry changes. They can
expose possible shifts in macroeconomic, political, or social variables that
are not foreseen in a more industry-centered view of the external
environment. Another way of identifying uncertainties is broadly based


---PAGE BREAK---

technological forecasting. A systematic look at how any of the technologies
in the ﬁrm’s value chain (Chapter 5) might be affected by outside
developments can sometimes help to reveal changes unforeseen by
technical personnel inside a ﬁrm.
In constructing scenarios, it is important to try to identify one or more
major discontinuities that would have a signiﬁcant impact on structure, such
as a revolutionary technological change. If major discontinuities have a
material probability of occurring, they should be treated as one of the
important uncertainties in developing scenarios. If a major discontinuity
will have a fundamental impact on structure but is very remote, it is usually
best treated separately from the normal scenarios.
To illustrate the application of these ideas, Table 13–2 lists the uncertain
elements of structure in the chain saw industry in 1973. Signiﬁcant
uncertainties existed in all of the ﬁve forces except for suppliers. Since each
uncertain element of structure can serve as the basis for several scenarios
and the list of uncertainties can be quite long, as it is in the chain saw
industry, these sources of uncertainty must be distilled into the few
scenarios that will be truly important to strategy.
Independent Versus Dependent Uncertainties
Converting the list of uncertain structural elements into scenarios begins
by dividing them into independent and dependent uncertainties:
•  Independent uncertainties. Those elements of structure whose
uncertainty is independent of other elements of structure. The sources
of the uncertainty may be inside the industry (e.g., competitor
behavior) or outside the industry (e.g., oil prices).
•  Dependent uncertainties. Those elements of structure that will be
largely or completely determined by the independent uncertainties. In
chain saws, for example, the future level of advertising on television is
quite uncertain but will be primarily a function of the size of casual
user demand. Casual users are receptive to television advertising while
professional and farm buyers are best reached through specialized
magazines.


---PAGE BREAK---

TABLE 13–2 Uncertain Elements of Structure in the U.S. Chain Saw
Industry
Entry Barriers
Will there be new proprietary product designs?
How high will future scale economies in manufacturing be?
How high will future scale economies in marketing (media mix and spending rates) be?
How difﬁcult will gaining access to each channel be?
What safety regulations will be enacted?
Buyers
What will casual user demand be?
What will professional/farm demand be?
What will be the mix of dealer versus nondealer sales?
How signiﬁcant will private labeling be outside of the servicing dealer channel?
Will distribution be direct or through distributors?
How price sensitive will buyers be?
Rivalry
What will be the shape of the casual user penetration curve?
How will traditional competitors behave?
How will newly acquired competitors behave?
Will additional foreign ﬁrms be attracted to the U.S. industry?
How high will ﬁxed costs be?
How committed is each competitor to chain saws?
Substitutes
How much will electric saws penetrate versus gas saws?
Suppliers
Relatively constant.
Independent uncertainties are the scenario variables on which scenarios
are based. Only independent uncertainties are an appropriate basis for
constructing scenarios because they are true sources of uncertainty.
Dependent uncertainties are resolved once assumptions about the
independent uncertainties have been made, and thus become part of each
scenario.
Independent and dependent uncertainties often differ only in degree,
because many industry structural characteristics will be determined in part
by independent uncertainties and partly inﬂuenced by other industry
characteristics. Industry concentration, for example, is largely based on the
height of entry barriers and hence dependent, but is also a function of
independent factors such as an unexpected acquisition or entry by a strong
competitor. Thus, as in all phases of scenario construction, one must


---PAGE BREAK---

attempt to assess the most signiﬁcant factors inﬂuencing each uncertain
variable and use them to classify it as either dependent or as a true scenario
variable. It is often not apparent in the beginning of an analysis which
uncertainties are dependent. Once scenarios are analyzed, it may be
necessary to modify the way a particular element of structure is classiﬁed.
Separating uncertain elements of industry structure into those that are
scenario variables and those that are dependent requires that the causal
factors of uncertain elements of structure be identiﬁed. Causal factors
determine the future state of each uncertain structural element. For example,
the level of casual user demand in chain saws will be a function of such
causal factors as energy prices, the rate of household formation, how many
new houses are built with ﬁreplaces, and so on.
Practical considerations may dictate not going all the way back to the
most fundamental causal factors determining an uncertain variable since
they may be numerous and hard to measure. However, causality must be
traced back far enough to separate scenario variables from dependent
variables. Causal factors also are important in determining the appropriate
range of assumptions that should be made about each scenario variable. If
the level of casual user demand is strongly inﬂuenced by energy prices, for
example, then forecasting the range of possible energy prices is necessary to
understand the range of feasible levels of demand.
Table 13–3 identiﬁes the scenario variables in the chain saw industry
from the full list of uncertainties that were shown in Table 13–2 and ranks
them in terms of their importance to industry structure. The scenario
variables in the chain saw industry are relatively few, because many of the
uncertainties in the industry will be resolved once the demand for casual
user saws and the channels through which they are sold become clear.
Future safety regulations by government, for example, will probably be
introduced if casual user demand grows and the number of accidents
increases with the number of less sophisticated users. Marketing activity
will also increase sharply and shift toward television advertising if casual
user sales grow.
TABLE 13–3 Scenario Variables in Chain Saws
Most Important Scenario Variables
Level of casual user demand


---PAGE BREAK---

Shape of casual user penetration curve
Mix of dealer versus non-dealer sales
Extent of private label versus branded sales through nondealers
Less Important Scenario Variables
Professional and farm demand
Penetration of electric saws
Table 13–4 shows the causal factors for the four important scenario
variables in the chain saw industry. Several causal factors underlie each
variable, as is typically the case. Causal factors reﬂect forces both within
and external to the industry. It is also apparent from Table 13–4 that some of
the causal factors reﬂect other aspects of industry structure or competitor
behavior. Casual user demand, for example, is partly determined by the
intensity of marketing activity and pricing behavior of competitors. The
future mix of channels will in turn be inﬂuenced by the level of casual user
demand, because casual users prefer different channels than professionals.
It is not uncommon for scenario variables to have some internal causes
along with external ones, and the analysis of scenarios must reﬂect such
interdependencies.
The uncertainty that surrounds the causal factors of each scenario
variable leads to scenarios. Assumptions about the scenario variables will
determine the outcome of dependent uncertainties. Predetermined and
constant elements of structure are then added to the scenario to complete
the proﬁle of the future structure of the industry, recognizing that the rate of
change of predetermined trends may be different under each scenario.
Figure 13–2 illustrates the process schematically.
Constructing a useful scenario involves developing a logic for how the
various elements of industry structure interrelate, separating true scenario
variables from dependent and predetermined industry changes. A scenario
must seek to expose second-order effects of structural changes that result
from one industry change affecting others. Such a logic for how various
aspects of industry structure interrelate is at the heart of the usefulness of
the scenario technique because it is usually important to understanding the
implications of scenarios for strategy.
TABLE 13–4 Causal Factors Determining the Uncertainties in Chain
Saws


---PAGE BREAK---

SCENARIO VARIABLE
CAUSAL FACTORS
Level of casual user demand
External
Social trends
Energy costs
Woodburning stove and ﬁreplace installations
Number of households formed
Channels selling casual saws
Internal
Marketing activity of competitors
Product changes by competitors
Shape of the casual user penetration curve*
External
Economic conditions
Pattern of energy price changes
Pattern of social trends
Replacement rate for saws
Channel strategies regarding chain saws
Internal
Marketing activity by competitors
Mix of dealer versus nondealer sales
External
Channel product line policies
Consumer shopping habits for chain saws
Ability of channels to provide service
Usage patterns of casual saws (which determine
replacement behavior, spare parts usage and
service needs)
Internal
Channel policies of competitors
Extent of private label versus branded sales
through nondealers
External
Channel branding policies
Channel product policies
Internal
Channel policies of competitors
Branding policies of competitors
*The penetration curve is the growth in the number of households who own chain saws.
Identifying a Set of Scenarios
An industry scenario is based on a set of plausible assumptions about
each of the scenario variables, derived from the causal factors. The
consequences of this set of assumptions for industry structure ﬂows from


---PAGE BREAK---

the process diagrammed in Figure 13–2. A scenario emerges as an
internally consistent view of the future industry structure under one set of
assumptions. The range of plausible assumptions about the potential
outcomes of scenario variables determines the appropriate set of scenarios
for analytical purposes.
Constructing a set of industry scenarios would be relatively simple once
the scenario variables had been determined if there was only one scenario
variable. If the only scenario variable in the chain saw industry was the
level of casual user demand, for example, then a manageable number of
scenarios could be constructed by making several plausible assumptions
about demand. However, the number of relevant scenario variables is
greater than one in most industries. The number of combinations generated
by differing assumptions about each scenario variable can multiply rapidly,
and with it the number of scenarios that might be analyzed. With four
scenario variables in chain saws, for example, dozens of scenarios could
easily be constructed.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 13–2. Determinants of Future Industry Structure
There are two ways to limit the proliferation of scenarios—reducing the
number of scenario variables and reducing the number of assumptions made
about each one. The ﬁrst step is to ensure that the scenario variables are all
truly uncertain and independent. This test may lead to the elimination of
some variables. Another way to reduce the number of scenario variables is
to concentrate on only those with a signiﬁcant potential impact on structure.
While many factors will have some impact on future structure, fewer will
have an impact signiﬁcant enough to inﬂuence competitive strategy.
Sometimes the impact of a variable on structure only becomes clear once
the analysis of scenarios has begun. In the chain saw industry, however, all
four scenario variables are important.
The next step in determining the set of scenarios to analyze is to specify
the different assumptions to be made about each scenario variable. The
appropriate range of assumptions will depend on the extent to which its
causal factors could differ. Scenario variables can be discrete or continuous.
When a scenario variable is discrete (e.g., a regulation is either signed into
law or it is not), the choice of assumptions is relatively clear. When the
scenario variable is continuous (e.g., the level of casual user demand), a
question arises as to how to make the appropriate assumptions about its
value.
The choice of assumptions should be governed by four factors: the need
to bound the uncertainty, regularity of the impact on structure, managers’
beliefs, and practicality. Assumptions about a scenario variable should
bound the feasible range of values that variable could take, exposing the
important differences in possible industry structure. Since scenarios are not
meant to be forecasts, it is important that those with a low probability of
occurrence not be ignored. The use of extreme values can increase the
understanding of the directions in which industry structure could evolve.
Wide differences in the level of casual user demand, for example, will
strongly inﬂuence the path of evolution in the chain saw industry. However,
this does not mean that very unlikely values for a variable should be used in
constructing scenarios unless these very unlikely outcomes would lead to
industry structures that differ substantially from more likely outcomes. The


---PAGE BREAK---

credibility of scenarios can be damaged if they are based on highly
implausible assumptions.
Having bounded the feasible range of uncertainty, the number of
assumptions in between about each variable must be selected. If changes in
the value of a scenario variable affect structure in a predictable way
between its extremes, the number of assumptions can be small. If this is not
the case, however, the range of assumptions must reﬂect major
discontinuities. In chain saws, for example, a medium level of casual user
demand is likely to have an impact on structure that is not simply between
that of very low and very high demand. A medium level of demand
provides room for only one or two new efﬁcient-scale manufacturing
facilities, and thus raises the possibility that several competitors will expand
simultaneously, leading to overcapacity. An even more striking case of
irregularity of impact is in the extent of sales through servicing dealers. It is
possible that the percentage of saws sold through dealers will fall rapidly as
casual user demand grows, but recover once ﬁrst-time chain saw buyers
trade up to larger saws and require service. This has quite different
structural implications from scenarios featuring low or high dealer share.
A third consideration in choosing what assumptions to make about each
scenario variable is the beliefs held by senior management. It is important
to build at least one scenario around assumptions that reﬂect their
commonly held beliefs. This lends credibility to the scenario building
process. Scenarios reﬂecting managers’ assumptions can also be useful in
exposing the differences in the assumptions of various senior managers, as
well as in testing the overall consistency of assumptions that managers have
made independently about each scenario variable. If the scenario that results
from combining these assumptions is implausible, managers’ thinking about
the future may be changed. All this is also important in demonstrating the
validity of employing multiple scenarios rather than a single scenario.
A ﬁnal consideration in choosing the number of assumptions about each
scenario variable is the practical limit on the number of scenarios that can
be meaningfully analyzed. A proliferation of scenarios beyond three or four
may make analysis so onerous that the strategic issues are obscured. Thus
compromises may well be necessary to reduce the number of assumptions
examined. Since scenarios can be added, eliminated, or combined later in
the analysis, it is important not to impose this constraint too strongly.


---PAGE BREAK---

TABLE 13–5 Range of Assumptions in Chain Saw Industry Scenarios
SCENARIO VARIABLE
ASSUMPTIONS
Level of casual unit demand
Low
Medium
High
Shape of casual user penetration
curve
Steady
increase
Peaked
 
Mix of dealer versus non-dealer
sales
Dealers
dominate
High
nondealer
share
Short-term shift to nondealers, with
return to dealers in the long term
Extent of private label versus
branded sales through
nondealers
High
percent
branded
High percent
private
label
 
Table 13–5 shows the range of assumptions chosen for the scenario
variables in the chain saw industry. Except for the level of casual user
demand and mix of dealer versus nondealer sales, two assumptions about
each variable are sufﬁcient to expose the implications for industry structure.
The key distinction in the shape of the penetration curve is whether it rises
smoothly, or rises rapidly and then levels off (peaking). Peaking raises the
risk of excessive capital investment by competitors. The extent of private
label sales is important in determining the bargaining power of buyers and
the relative position of well-known brands such as McCulloch and Homelite
(manufacturers’ brands are clearly not as important in private label sales).
Each assumption shown in Table 13–5 can be quantiﬁed.
Consistency of Assumptions
A scenario should be an internally consistent view of what future
industry structure could be. Internal consistency is partly ensured by
separating the scenario variables from the dependent ones. Another critical
requirement, however, is the consistency of the assumptions made about
each scenario variable with each other.
Often scenario variables affect one another, and thus some combinations
of assumptions about them are not internally consistent. This can lead to the
elimination of some scenarios. Figure 13–3 and 13–4 illustrate the process


---PAGE BREAK---

in the chain saw industry. Figure 13–3 compares the level of casual user
demand and the shape of the casual user penetration curve. It is unlikely
that the penetration curve will be peaked unless casual user demand is high.
Hence, two combinations of assumptions (cells in Figure 13–3) are
inconsistent. Figure 13–4 compares the four consistent combinations of
assumptions about demand and the shape of the penetration curve against
the mix of channels. Once again, some combinations of assumptions are not
mutually consistent and can be eliminated. Servicing dealers will dominate
only if casual user demand is not high. Nondealers will not gain a high
share of sales unless casual demand is medium or high. A short-term shift
to nondealers is likely only if demand for casual users is high and peaked,
leading to an increase in nondealer share followed by a fall-off in casual
demand and the migration of the more serious casual users to dealers. The
fourth scenario variable, the percentage of saws sold under private label
versus sold branded through nondealers, is not shown on Figure 13–4.
However, high private label penetration is clearly inconsistent with
domination by the dealer channel.
Figure 13–3. Consistency of Casual User Demand and the Penetration Curve in Chain Saws


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 13–4. Consistency of Demand and Mix of Channels in Chain Saws
Figure 13–5. Consistent Scenarios for the Chain Saw Industry
Thus we can reduce the number of consistent scenarios in the chain saw
industry to the ten shown in Figure 13–5. These ten combinations of
assumptions about the scenario variables are internally consistent and,
therefore, are candidates for further analysis. The process of determining
internally consistent assumptions is vitally important to constructing


---PAGE BREAK---

industry scenarios, because consistency in viewing the future is one of the
principal beneﬁts of the scenario technique.
Analyzing Scenarios
The next step in scenario planning is to analyze the implications of each
scenario for competition. The analysis of a scenario involves the following:
• determining future industry structure under the scenario
•  developing the implications of the scenario for industry structural
attractiveness
•  identifying the implications of the scenario for the sources of
competitive advantage
To determine the implications of a scenario for future industry structure,
the process diagrammed in Figure 13–2 is carried out. Assumptions about
scenario variables determine the dependent elements of structure. These are
combined with the predetermined and constant elements of structure to
complete the scenario. Predetermined changes in structure may be speeded
up or slowed down for different scenarios. Each scenario will provide a
picture of the ﬁve forces representing the industry’s structure in the event
that the assumptions about the scenario variables come true.
This future structure will be more or less attractive in terms of
proﬁtability. The industry structure under each scenario will determine, and
possibly shift, the sources of competitive advantage. For example, a
scenario characterized by low casual user demand will imply very different
requirements for competitive advantage than a scenario where casual user
demand is high and the mix of channels shifts away from servicing dealers.
In the latter scenario, differentiation will be based more on advertising and
having light, compact saw designs rather than on traditional sources of
uniqueness such as excellent dealers and durable saws. The analysis of each
industry scenario must specify the resulting implications for competitive
advantage in the value chain.
Scenarios may differ in:


---PAGE BREAK---

• the relative importance of value activities
• the appropriate conﬁguration of the value chain
• the drivers of cost or uniqueness
• the importance of interrelationships
• the sustainability of different sources of competitive advantage
• the choice of generic strategies
Table 13–6 illustrates the analysis of two of the chain saw industry
scenarios. Scenario 1 results in a structure quite similar to the current
industry structure, while Scenario 7 results in a very different structure with
quite different requirements for competitive advantage.
An important part of analyzing a scenario is determining when it will
become clear that the particular scenario has come to pass. Sometimes a
scenario emerges quickly. In chain saws, however, a year passed before the
uncertainty over the level of casual user demand was reduced. Several more
years went by before the peaking of casual user demand was known.
Competitors must choose between committing to a strategy early or waiting
until better information becomes available. Therefore, a ﬁrm must estimate
when uncertainties will be resolved in order to predict competitor behavior
and to set the ﬁrm’s own strategy.
TABLE 13–6 Analysis of Chain Saw Scenarios
 
SCENARIO 1 “Casual user market never
materializes”
SCENARIO 7 “Private label dominates”
Future Industry
Structure
Same as currently
Entry barriers shift toward scale
economies and absolute cost
advantages
Channels increase in power and price
sensitivity
Rivalry pressures increase
Electric saws become a major product
line
Structural
Attractiveness
High
Mediocre on average, though a leader
can be proﬁtable
Sources of
Basically unchanged
Market share of causal units


---PAGE BREAK---

Competitive
Advantage
Low-cost product designs
Scale economies in advertising
Automated plants in low labor-cost
areas
or
Extreme strength in professional/farm
segment to insulate a ﬁrm from the
battle in the casual user segment
Introducing Competitor Behavior into Scenarios
If the ﬁrm has a dominant position in its industry or if competitor
behavior has little potential effect on structure, the analysis of each scenario
can stop at the industry level. In most industries, however, competitors can
affect industry structure and their strategies will inﬂuence a ﬁrm’s options
and likely success. Thus the analysis of scenarios must include competitors.
In industries where a few powerful competitors exist, competitor analysis
can be the most important part of analyzing each scenario.
The future industry structure under each scenario will usually have
different consequences for different competitors. Increased casual user
demand, for example, will greatly beneﬁt ﬁrms with existing casual user
models and representation in mass distribution channels compared to ﬁrms
that exclusively serve professionals. Competitors will respond to structural
change in ways that reﬂect their goals, assumptions, strategies, and
capabilities. For example, Beaird-Poulan’s response to growing casual user
demand is likely to be aggressive, conditioned by its parent company’s
(Emerson Electric) aggressive growth goals. The behavior of competitors
may, in turn, affect the speed and direction of structural changes in the
scenario through a feedback loop. In chain saw Scenario 7, for example,
aggressive investment in new capacity by Beaird-Poulan and McCulloch
would enhance rivalry compared to the situation where one or both chose a
conservative stance.
The full arsenal of competitor analysis tools should be brought to bear in
predicting how competitors will behave under different scenarios. Strategic
mapping is often a useful tool for integrating predictions of likely
competitor’s responses under a scenario.4 The axes of the map are chosen to


---PAGE BREAK---

reﬂect the critical sources of sustainable competitive advantage implied by
the scenario. Since each scenario implies a different future industry
structure, the variables that will most inﬂuence the relative position of
competitors may vary. For example, since industry structure under chain
saw Scenario 7 will shift toward more price rivalry, manufacturing scale
will become an important source of competitive advantage though it is not
as important under Scenario 1.
Strategic mapping allows the simultaneous display of all competitors’
expected behavior under a scenario. It also facilitates the analysis of
interactions among competitors and their responses to each others’ moves.
If all competitors are forecast to move in one direction under a scenario, for
example, some may modify their strategies as the scenario unfolds to avoid
a head-on confrontation.
Often competitor behavior is difﬁcult to predict. If the behavior of one or
more important competitors under a scenario is both uncertain and likely to
have an important impact on competition, this introduces an additional
scenario variable into the scenario. Scenarios under which there are key
uncertainties about competitors must then be split into two or more
additional scenarios based on assumptions about how competitors’ behavior
will differ. This same approach may be necessary to deal with uncertainty
about the likelihood of potential new entrants with differing resources and
skills from existing competitors.
Figure 13–6 illustrates the most important competitor uncertainties in the
chain saw industry scenarios analyzed in Table 13–6. Under Scenario 1, the
major uncertainty is whether McCulloch and Beaird-Poulan will
aggressively invest in new capacity and advertising even though the casual
user market never fully materializes. Both have strong proclivities to be
aggressive given their new parent companies. Moreover, it will not be
immediately clear to either ﬁrm which scenario is coming to pass. Under
Scenario 7, Homelite’s strategy poses the key uncertainty because
McCulloch and Poulan’s actions are quite predictable. Homelite may
choose to pursue the entire casual user market despite the shift in strategy
implied, or remain in its traditional segments and earn high proﬁts at the
expense of share. While Homelite’s parent company may be prone to
demand high proﬁts, the opportunity for rapid growth could also inﬂuence
Homelite’s choice.


---PAGE BREAK---

The Number of Scenarios To Analyze
Since the analysis of a scenario is often complex and time consuming,
scenarios should be analyzed in a sequence that yields the necessary insight
for the selection of a strategy without requiring full blown analysis of every
possible scenario. A good starting point is to analyze the polar, or most
widely separated, scenarios ﬁrst. The polar scenarios typically lead to the
most different industry structures and thus will help bound the range of
strategic options. The stark contrast between polar scenarios is often very
stimulating to strategic thinking. In the chain saw industry, Scenarios 1 and
7 were the polar scenarios on Figure 13–5.
Figure 13–6. Competitor Behavior under Chain Saw Scenarios
The next scenario analyzed after the polar scenarios should be one where
the structural outcome is expected to differ signiﬁcantly from the polar
scenarios. The scenario deemed most likely to occur should also be
analyzed. This process should continue until the way in which the scenario
variables determine future structure is understood. In addition, major
discontinuities with a low probability of occurring should be included as
special scenarios which are analyzed less extensively but factored into
strategic choices.
Figure 13–7 shows the analysis of an intermediate chain saw scenario,
Scenario 9. This is very different scenario from Scenarios 1 and 7, because
it assumes that casual user saws are a fad and private label sales will never
catch on. Thus Scenario 9 creates a dilemma for ﬁrms about how to


---PAGE BREAK---

capitalize on the short-lived casual user boom without alienating dealers or
sacriﬁcing key competitive strengths. It is clear from Figure 13–7 that the
determinants of competitive advantage and likely competitor behavior will
be quite different under Scenario 9 than under the other two scenarios.
Briefer consideration of other chain saw scenarios suggests that these three
industry scenarios are representative of the impact of uncertainty on
competition.
The purpose of scenarios is to understand the different ways in which
industry and competitive conditions might change. Forecasts are frequently
not accurate, and scenarios attempt instead to illustrate the logical outcomes
of a range of forecasts. The scenarios actually analyzed will be but a few of
the almost inﬁnite number of possible futures that might occur in an
industry. However, well-chosen scenarios will illuminate the range of
futures germane to strategy formulation. Scenarios should be chosen to
communicate, educate, and stretch managers’ thinking about the future.
Attaching Probabilities to Scenarios
Rarely will each scenario be equally likely to occur. Industry scenarios
are not intended to cover all possible outcomes—they are devices for
exploring the strategic implications of possible future industry structures.
However, the strategic implications of scenarios are partly a function of
their likelihood of occurring. It is important to determine the relative
probabilities of outcomes that are broadly similar to each scenario. If the
scenarios analyzed are well chosen, they will represent the range of industry
outcomes that might occur. In chain saws, outcomes close to Scenario 1 are
the least likely to occur, while outcomes close to Scenarios 7 and 9 are
about equally likely.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 13–7. Analysis of an Intermediate Chain Saw Industry Scenario
Attaching probabilities to scenarios is beset with problems of bias and
conventional wisdom. It is important to ﬁnd unbiased ways to assess the
probabilities of scenarios, based on the underlying causal factors of each
scenario variable. Managers’ own implicit probabilities should be identiﬁed
and confronted if they vary widely or contradict those indicated by industry
analysis.
Summary Characteristics of Industry Scenarios
A number of characteristics distinguish industry scenarios. Each scenario
is, in effect, a full analysis of industry structure, competitor behavior, and
the sources of competitive advantage under a particular set of assumptions


---PAGE BREAK---

about the future. The whole range of techniques available for analyzing
industries and competitive advantage must be brought to bear; the scenario
tool is merely a framework for identifying the key uncertainties and
analyzing them, not an end in itself. The process of understanding how
uncertainty affects future industry structure is as important as the scenarios
that are actually constructed.
The successful analysis of industry scenarios hinges on judgment and
compromise. Constructing scenarios is a process of abstracting those
elements of uncertainty that will drive strategic choices. Selecting and
analyzing a few scenarios from the range of future industry structures
requires picking the most important cases and simplifying them. The
process is nearly always iterative, because the analyst will better understand
the relationship between the key uncertainties and industry structure as the
analysis proceeds.
Finally, it should be clear that a major purpose of industry scenarios is to
ensure internal consistency of a ﬁrm’s view of the future. A scenario aims to
create a view of future industry structure that recognizes the interactions
among variables and the need for consistency among assumptions about
different industry characteristics. Scenarios provide a way of linking
uncertain trends together into a number of alternate but consistent views of
the future. Thus scenarios emphasize the ways in which industry trends and
competitor behavior will interact or reinforce each other. Scenarios aim to
reduce the chances that actions taken to deal with one element of
uncertainty in an industry will unintentionally worsen a ﬁrm’s position vis-
à-vis other uncertainties.
Industry Scenarios and Competitive Strategy
Having developed and analyzed a set of industry scenarios, the next task
is to use them to formulate competitive strategy. Scenarios are not an end in
themselves. Many companies falter in translating scenarios into strategy.
The bulk of attention is often placed on developing scenarios and not on
determining their implications. There is also little guidance in the literature
on scenarios about how to use them to formulate strategy.


---PAGE BREAK---

A ﬁrm’s optimal strategy would usually—though not always—be
different under each scenario if the ﬁrm knew the scenario would occur.
Each scenario involves a different industry structure, behaviors of key
competitors, and requirements for competitive advantage. Figure 13–8
illustrates this in the chain saw industry, where the strategy for a leading
ﬁrm is quite different under each scenario.
A ﬁrm does not know which scenario will occur, so it must choose the
best way to cope with uncertainty in selecting its strategy, given its
resources and initial position. The typical prescription for coping with
uncertainty is to choose a strategy that is “robust,” or viable regardless of
which scenario occurs.5 However, this is by no means the only option. A
ﬁrm might decide instead to prepare for one scenario despite the risk that it
will not occur. Conversely, a ﬁrm with massive resources may sometimes be
able to pursue the strategies necessary to cope with all scenarios
simultaneously and wait for events to unfold before focusing its efforts. If
there is uncertainty over the mix of channels, for example, a strong chain
saw competitor might develop its position in all likely channels.
A strategy built around one scenario is risky, while a strategy designed to
ensure success under all scenarios is expensive. Moreover, the strategies
implied by the different scenarios are often contradictory. For example,
developing nondealer channels for chain saws will run a high risk of
alienating dealers, and it is hard to pursue nondealers and dealers at the
same time. In such circumstances, positioning for several scenarios may
leave the ﬁrm “stuck in the middle” with no competitive advantage, a
blurred brand image, and a suboptimal organizational structure (see Chapter
1). The inconsistency of implied strategies under different scenarios often
raises a serious strategic dilemma. In chain saws, preparing for all three
scenarios would clearly lead to suboptimization, and thus chain saw
competitors will have to resolve some difﬁcult tradeoffs before selecting
their strategies. One of the important functions of scenarios is to reveal
elements of strategy for which a ﬁrm must make such choices.
Strategic Approaches Under Scenarios


---PAGE BREAK---

There are ﬁve basic approaches to dealing with uncertainty in strategy
selection when a ﬁrm faces plausible scenarios with differing strategic
implications. The approaches can sometimes, though not always, be
employed sequentially or in combination.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 13–8. Competitive Strategy Under Alternative Chain Saw Scenarios


---PAGE BREAK---

1. Bet on the most probable scenario. In this approach, the ﬁrm designs
its strategy around the scenario (or range of scenarios) that is seen to be
most probable, accepting the risk that it may not occur. In chain saws, a ﬁrm
would bet on whichever of the three scenarios it believed to be the most
likely.
In practice, betting on the most probable scenario is a common approach
to strategy formulation under uncertainty though it is done implicitly.
Managers often base their strategies on implicit assumptions about the
future. Without becoming explicit, however, a scenario may be based on
ignorance and may fail the test of internal consistency so critical to good
planning under uncertainty.
The desirability of consciously designing strategy for the most probable
scenario depends on how likely it is that the most probable scenario will
occur, how adverse the consequences are if other scenarios in fact occur,
and how close the ﬁt is between the resources and initial position of the ﬁrm
and the strategy for dealing with the most probable scenario. The risk of
designing strategy around the most probable scenario is that other scenarios
will occur which make the strategy inappropriate, and it is difﬁcult to
modify the strategy mid-course.
2.  Bet on the “best” scenario. In this approach, a ﬁrm designs its
strategy for the scenario in which the ﬁrm can establish the most sustainable
long-run competitive advantage given its initial position and resources. This
approach seeks the highest upside potential by tuning the strategy to the
possible future industry structure that yields the best outcome for the ﬁrm.
The risk, of course, is that the best scenario does not occur and the chosen
strategy is thereby inappropriate.
3.  Hedge. In this approach, a ﬁrm chooses a strategy that produces
satisfactory results under all scenarios, or at least under all scenarios that
are deemed to have an appreciable probability of occurring. This is one
approach to designing a robust strategy. The idea is similar to the
“minimax” strategy in game theory, where a player makes the move that
minimizes his maximum loss. In chain saws, hedging might entail
developing a very wide model line, or entering nondealer channels with


---PAGE BREAK---

slightly different models sold under a different brand name at the same time
as the ﬁrm continued to serve dealers.
Usually hedging will yield a strategy that is not optimal for any scenario.
The resulting sacriﬁce in strategic position is traded off in favor of a
reduction in risk. Moreover, hedging usually implies higher costs (or lower
revenues) than a betting strategy because it must prepare a ﬁrm for several
different possible competitive circumstances rather than one.
4.  Preserve ﬂexibility. Another approach to dealing with uncertain
scenarios is to choose a strategy that preserves ﬂexibility until it becomes
more apparent which scenario will actually occur. This is another way of
creating a robust strategy and illustrates that robustness must be carefully
deﬁned. The ﬁrm postpones resource commitments that lock it into a
particular strategy. Once the uncertainties begin to resolve themselves, a
strategy that ﬁts the scenario that appears to be occurring is chosen, taking
into account the ﬁrm’s resources and skills. In chain saws, ﬂexibility might
be preserved by maintaining the ﬁrm’s strategy in the professional segment
and sourcing casual user saws initially from another ﬁrm.
A ﬁrm preserving ﬂexibility often pays a price in strategic position
because of ﬁrst-mover advantages gained by ﬁrms that commit early. First-
mover advantages—e.g., reputation, a proprietary learning curve, and
ability to tie up the best retail channels—were discussed in detail in Chapter
5. In chain saws, the ﬁrm that moves into new channels ﬁrst may well get its
pick of the best ones. Preserving ﬂexibility sacriﬁces ﬁrst-mover advantages
in return for a reduction in risk. It is different from hedging because it
involves delaying commitment, rather than embarking on a strategy that
works reasonably well under all feasible scenarios. If a ﬁrm can recognize
early which scenario is going to occur, it can minimize the cost of
preserving ﬂexibility.
5.  Inﬂuence. In the ﬁnal approach to addressing uncertainty, a ﬁrm
attempts to use its resources to bring about a scenario that it considers
desirable. A ﬁrm seeks to raise the odds that a scenario will occur for which
it has a competitive advantage. Doing so requires that a ﬁrm try to inﬂuence
the causal factors behind the scenario variables. Since a causal factor in
casual user demand for chain saws is woodburning stove installations, for


---PAGE BREAK---

example, a ﬁrm might try to inﬂuence stove demand. This might involve
coalitions with woodburning stove manufacturers, or advertising that
stressed the value of woodburning stoves at the same time that it advertised
chain saws. Technological changes, channel policies, government
regulation, and many other sources of uncertainty can sometimes be
inﬂuenced. The possibility for inﬂuence and its cost must be weighed
against the competitive advantage to be gained if a ﬁrm can raise the odds
that its preferred scenario will occur.
Combined and Sequenced Strategies
It is often possible and desirable to employ combined and sequential
strategies. Betting on the most probable or best scenario can be combined
with attempting to inﬂuence which scenario occurs. Similarly, the approach
of preserving ﬂexibility is logically part of a sequential strategy that
ultimately involves a bet on the most probable scenario. A ﬁrm can also
choose to hedge initially and then bet on a future industry structure as the
actual scenario becomes clearer, though this is usually more costly than
preserving ﬂexibility and then betting.
A ﬁrm may also be able to set policies in some activities in the value
chain to bet on a scenario, while hedging or preserving ﬂexibility in others.
In chain saws, for example, a ﬁrm might bet on high casual demand in its
manufacturing and technology development activities through building new
low-cost facilities and designing several inexpensive, lightweight models.
At the same time, though, it could hedge its bet by minimizing the level of
vertical integration in manufacturing to reduce capital investment and
thereby transfer some of the risk to suppliers. It could also hedge its bets by
spending heavily on marketing and sales activities to maintain dealer
relations and preserve market position in the professional and farm segment.
A ﬁrm may also choose to contain risk in another way, by committing
early to reversible actions (advertising) while postponing commitments on
irreversible investments (e.g., plants). Any form of avoiding commitments
or hedging will usually involve some sacriﬁce in competitive advantage,
though, and may also be confusing to both employees and outside observers
such as security analysts.


---PAGE BREAK---

The Choice of Strategy Under Industry Scenarios
Each of the ways of coping with uncertain industry structural change has
its potential beneﬁts, costs, and risks in terms of competitive advantage. The
following factors are most important in choosing a ﬁrm’s approach:
First-mover Advantages. The size of ﬁrst-mover advantages (Chapter 5)
has a major inﬂuence on the attractiveness of betting versus postponing
commitments. Where the ﬁrst mover gains a signiﬁcant competitive
advantage, for example, the option of ﬂexibility may be ruled out. In chain
saws, gaining access to new channels may well involve signiﬁcant ﬁrst-
mover advantages, because many mass merchandisers are unlikely to carry
multiple lines of saws.
Initial Competitive Position. Scenarios will differ in their potential for a
ﬁrm given its initial competitive position. Designing a strategy for the
scenario that ﬁts a ﬁrm’s initial position may produce a signiﬁcantly better
outcome than designing a strategy around the most probable scenario. This
difference in performance may compensate for the risk of betting on a less
probable scenario. Inﬂuencing which scenario occurs is an attempt to shift
probabilities in the direction of the scenario where a ﬁrm has the most
advantages.
Cost or Resources Required. Hedging and inﬂuence tend to require
greater resources or imply higher costs than does betting on one scenario.
Preserving ﬂexibility is usually somewhere in between.
Risk. The risk of each approach is a function of a number of factors:
TIMING OF RESOURCE COMMITMENT. Early commitment is usually riskier
than later commitment. Preserving ﬂexibility minimizes risk by postponing
commitment, while hedging seeks to reduce risk in a different way. How
long the ﬁrm can delay its commitment depends on ﬁrst-mover advantages
and the lead time in making moves.
THE DEGREE OF INCONSISTENCY OF STRATEGIES FOR ALTERNATE SCENARIOS.
Risk is a function of how poorly a strategy will perform if the “wrong”


---PAGE BREAK---

scenario occurs. Hedging minimizes this risk at the price of higher costs or
poorer position. The degree of inconsistency among strategies for alternate
scenarios is a function of how different industry structure and the sources of
competitive advantage are under each scenario.
RELATIVE PROBABILITY OF THE SCENARIOS. The choice of approaches
depends on the relative probability of the scenarios. Hedging is a way to
deal with risk by reducing the exposure of a ﬁrm to any scenario, while
inﬂuence seeks to reduce risk by shifting probabilities toward the desired
scenario. Betting on the most probable scenario is more risky than hedging,
while betting on the best scenario can be the most risky approach.
THE COST OF CHANGING STRATEGIES ONCE UNCERTAINTY IS RESOLVED. Risk
depends on the degree to which a ﬁrm is locked in once it commits to a
strategy by setting its product line, channels, advertising policies, facilities,
and so on. This will depend on the degree of irreversibility of the required
investments, which will differ from industry to industry and strategy to
strategy. Preserving ﬂexibility seeks to minimize the cost of changing
strategies.
Competitors’ Expected Choices. A ﬁrm’s choice of how to deal with
uncertainty must reﬂect the choices its competitors have made or are
expected to make. Competitor bets may preempt a ﬁrm from certain
strategies and open up others. Hedging or preserving ﬂexibility by
competitors usually raises the payoff to the ﬁrm that makes a bet that proves
correct.
The best way to deal with uncertainty is to make a conscious choice to
follow one or more approaches, rather than a choice based on inertia or an
implicit scenario. Weighing the factors involved in choosing an approach
described above requires a logic for each scenario that portrays the
interdependencies between various aspects of industry structure. The most
challenging part of dealing with uncertainty is to ﬁnd creative ways to
minimize the cost of preserving ﬂexibility or hedging, and to maximize the
advantages of betting correctly. Understanding the way in which each


---PAGE BREAK---

activity in the value chain can contribute to competitive advantage under the
various scenarios may allow the ﬁrm to do so.
Scenario Variables and Market Intelligence
Which scenarios will occur is determined by the scenario variables.
Scenario variables are thus key indicators of the path of industry structural
change—they can become clear quickly or the uncertainty may persist for
long periods. Scenario variables and their causal factors should be the focal
point for gathering market intelligence. Changes affecting scenario
variables are warning signals of industry structural change. A ﬁrm
preserving ﬂexibility, for example, will want to closely monitor the state of
scenario variables to decide when to commit.
Early information about the future state of scenario variables has a high
strategic value. The earlier a ﬁrm can conﬁdently predict the occurrence of a
particular scenario, the sooner it can commit to a strategy with the
accompanying gains in position described above. Thus investments in
information gathering should concentrate on scenario variables rather than
on indiscriminate tracking of the myriad other changes that accompany
industry evolution.
Good information on scenario variables is also extremely valuable at the
time when industry scenarios are constructed. Since the scenario variables
are essential to structural change, understanding them may improve the set
of scenarios investigated or even turn what initially appear to be scenario
variables into predetermined elements of structure. In chain saws, for
example, good data about household formation, the number of dwellings
with ﬁreplaces and other causal factors could reduce the range of
assumptions that had to be made about casual user demand.
Scenarios and the Planning Process
Every plan is based on an industry scenario in one form or another,
though the process is frequently an implicit one. The use of explicit industry
scenarios brings the uncertainty in planning out into the open, and bases
strategy on a conscious and complete understanding of the likely


---PAGE BREAK---

signiﬁcance of uncertainty for competition. The resistance to employing
scenarios will be greatly mitigated if they are seen in this light—as nothing
fundamentally new or arcane. Industry scenarios are a useful device for
getting a management team involved in thinking about the future
systematically, and modifying unrealistic assumptions in a nonthreatening
way because scenarios are not intended as forecasts.6
Industry scenarios are best developed by business unit managers, with
guidance and input from others in the ﬁrm as well as outsiders. This places
the task of understanding the effects of uncertainty in the hands of those
who must actually set competitive strategy, and ensures that scenarios are
truly relevant to the business unit. Industry scenarios should be constructed
well into the planning process, once basic industry, competitor, and value
chain analysis has been done. Industry scenarios will be ineffective without
a good base of knowledge, and probably should not be introduced into the
planning systems of ﬁrms without good basic planning skills. Scenarios are
best used to guide the choice of a strategy, rather than as a means of
conﬁrming one.
Scenarios are not needed every year for every business unit. They are
necessary only when signiﬁcant uncertainties are present in an industry.
However, constructing industry scenarios irregularly runs the risk that
managers will overlook key uncertainties in their industries. Scenarios force
a creative search for possible structural changes. How often scenarios are
constructed must depend in part on the conﬁdence of top management in
the objectivity and vision of business unit managers.
An important organizational issue in using industry scenarios is the
relationship between recognizing uncertainty and the level commitment of
management to a direction. Scenarios emphasize the uncertainty present in
an industry, while successful implementation of strategies is usually more
effective if there is widespread commitment to the chosen strategy within an
organization. This suggests that scenarios should be constructed by the
management team of a business unit, but only the chosen strategy should be
widely communicated in the organization. Organizations can only cope with
so much uncertainty and ambiguity.
Corporate Role in Constructing Industry Scenarios


---PAGE BREAK---

A corporate planning group or other corporate level managers can play a
role in industry scenarios, even though industry scenarios should be
constructed at the business unit level.
Macroscenarios as an Input. A corporate group can provide
macroscenarios to business units, as a part of the environmental analysis
needed to construct industry scenarios. Macroscenarios can stretch
traditional modes of thinking by business unit managers in a way that is
difﬁcult if scenarios are purely business unit driven.
Technology Forecasting. A corporate group can conduct or sponsor
technological forecasting in core technologies areas or in technologies with
a potentially broad impact on many industries, a suggestion I made in
Chapter 5. Such research may help expand the horizons of business unit
managers about possible technological impacts on their industries, a key
source of uncertainty.
Training and Challenging. A corporate planning group can play an
important role in providing training and guidance in the use of the industry
scenario technique itself. Constructing scenarios is a complicated task that
gets much easier with experience, and experience can be shared within a
ﬁrm.
In addition to training, an outside perspective can often be useful in
identifying scenario variables, determining the most important ones,
assigning objective probabilities, probing ways of hedging or preserving
ﬂexibility at low cost, and devising ways to inﬂuence which scenario will
occur. Corporate, sector, or group managers can play a useful role through
participating in these ways in business unit scenario building efforts.
Corporate Risk Analysis. By analyzing each business unit’s industry
scenarios, higher-level managers can identify scenario variables that have
widespread importance for a diversiﬁed ﬁrm. The overall consequences to
the ﬁrm should a particular scenario variable turn out one way or another
can thus be assessed. In cases where corporate exposure to a particular
scenario variable is great, some business unit strategies may have to be
modiﬁed. At the same time, large investments may be justiﬁed in attempting


---PAGE BREAK---

to inﬂuence a scenario variable if it affects a number of business units. This
approach to corporate risk analysis is based on well-informed assessments
of uncertainties by business units. Top-down approaches to corporate risk
analysis in many ﬁrms tend to be based on aggregate and oversimpliﬁed
assessments of risks in each business unit by outsiders.
Industry Scenarios and Creativity
Most strategic plans are based on single-point estimates about the future,
usually the best guess of the managers involved. Rarely are managers able
to perceive fundamental shifts in their competitive environment ahead of
time, and ﬁnd imaginative ways of dealing with them. Industry scenarios
are a systematic tool for examining the impact of uncertainty on
competition by explicitly identifying the key uncertainties—the scenario
variables. Scenarios aim to stretch thinking about the future and widen the
range of alternatives considered. Scenarios provide a mechanism for
improving the chances that views of the future are consistent. Having
identiﬁed industry scenarios, a ﬁrm can then either mitigate uncertainty
through its choice of strategy (inﬂuence, hedging, preserve ﬂexibility) or
make a bet on the future mindful of the risk involved. Industry scenarios
also illuminate the consequences of mistaken forecasts about the future, and
the key information to be acquired in forecasting efforts. Thus industry
scenarios are fundamentally a tool to improve the creativity of strategic
planning. They cannot insure creativity, but they can signiﬁcantly raise the
odds.
The industry scenario tool is not sufﬁcient for strategy formulation in
and of itself. Rather, scenarios provide a framework for formulating strategy
under conditions of uncertainty. When combined with substantive
conceptual tools for understanding industry structure, competitor behavior,
and competitive advantage, the scenario tool can be an important part of the
strategist’s arsenal.


---PAGE BREAK---

14
Defensive Strategy
Every ﬁrm is vulnerable to attack by competitors. Attacks come from two
types of competitors—new entrants into the industry and established
competitors seeking to reposition themselves. I will use the term
“challenger” to describe either type. A well implemented offensive strategy
constitutes the single best defense against attack by a challenger. A ﬁrm that
continuously invests to gain competitive advantage by improving its relative
cost position and differentiation will be difﬁcult to challenge successfully.
Even with a vigorous offensive strategy, however, an important role remains
for defensive strategy. A ﬁrm can make it harder for challengers to attack it
through the way it chooses to compete.
Defensive strategy aims to lower the probability of attack, divert attacks
to less threatening avenues, or lessen their intensity. Instead of increasing
competitive advantage per se, defensive strategy makes a ﬁrm’s competitive
advantage more sustainable. Almost all effective defensive strategies
require investment—a ﬁrm foregoes some short term proﬁtability to
enhance sustainability. The most successful competitive strategies combine
offensive and defensive components.
This chapter describes the principles of defensive strategy. Defensive
strategy rests on inﬂuencing competitors’ decision-making processes in
order to make an attack on a ﬁrm’s position less desirable from the
challenger’s perspective. This is done by reducing the inducement for a
competitor to challenge the ﬁrm, or raising barriers to entry and mobility to
make a challenge more difﬁcult. Since an attack by any challenger changes
character over time, appropriate defensive steps will change at different


---PAGE BREAK---

stages of the process. I will describe how defensive strategy should evolve,
and the range of defensive tactics a ﬁrm can employ as well as some of their
important characteristics. I will then show how a ﬁrm can identify the most
effective defensive tactics in a particular industry. These considerations are
drawn together to show how ﬁrms can formulate an overall defensive
strategy. Finally, I describe the circumstances in which a ﬁrm should
consider disinvesting in an industry rather than investing heavily in defense.
The Process of Entry or Repositioning
Defensive strategy rests on an acute understanding of how a challenger
views the ﬁrm and on the perceived proﬁtability of the challenger’s various
options for improving position. The formulation of defensive strategy must
begin by recognizing that an attack by either a new or an established
competitor is a time-phased sequence of decisions and actions. Appropriate
defensive strategy must be formulated in the context of the entire assault,
and not just one move. The appropriate modes of defense will change at
different stages because of the challenger’s differing levels of commitment
and investment as the process proceeds.
The process of entry or repositioning consists of four periods. I will
discuss them ﬁrst for the case of a new entrant, and later show how the same
process applies to an established competitor seeking to reposition itself.
Preentry. This is the period before an entrant has commenced its entry,
during which it examines the industry as an entry target. Investments by an
entrant during this period typically are limited to market studies, product
and process technology development, contacts with investment bankers
regarding acquisitions, and the like. This is the hardest stage to detect,
because the entrant’s intentions regarding entry are frequently not known
with certainty. At the conclusion of the preentry period many potential
entrants decide not to enter.
Entering. During this period an entrant invests in establishing a base
position in the industry. This period involves such activities as continued
product and process technology development, test markets, national rollout,
assembling a sales force, and plant construction. The entrant hopes to have


---PAGE BREAK---

gained a viable position in the industry at the end of this period. The
entering period can last a few months or several years, depending on the
lead times involved in the activities necessary for establishing an initial
position. In a service business, such as a restaurant, the period might only
be a few months; in a natural resources industry it could be ﬁve years or
more.
Sequencing. This is the period during which an entrant’s strategy evolves
from its entry strategy to its long-run target strategy. This period does not
occur in every entry, but reﬂects the beneﬁts of a sequenced entry strategy
in many industries.1 Procter & Gamble’s entry into the consumer paper
products industry provides an example. P&G acquired Charmin Paper, a
regional ﬁrm with little brand identity, and then repositioned its strategy by
going national, investing heavily in advertising, and improving products.
During the sequencing period, an entrant may take such actions as
broadening its product line, vertically integrating, or widening its
geographic coverage. These activities involve continued investment in the
industry beyond the investment necessary to gain a foothold position.
Postentry. This is the period after entry has fully occurred. At this stage
in the entry process, investment by the entrant has shifted to that needed to
maintain or defend its position within the industry.
The process of repositioning by an existing competitor involves the same
stages. A competitor ﬁrst contemplates repositioning, then actually begins
to invest in repositioning, and ultimately reaches or fails to reach its sought-
after position. An established competitor may also reposition itself through
a sequence of steps. Therefore, the initial moves a challenger makes in
repositioning often do not reliably indicate its ultimate target strategy.
The stages in the entry or repositioning process are important to
defensive strategy for a number of reasons. First, a challenger’s level of
commitment to its strategy may well differ in the various stages. Generally,
a challenger’s commitment increases as it progresses in the process if some
success is achieved. The initial level of commitment to an entry or
repositioning strategy will vary, reﬂecting the unanimity of management
opinion about the appropriateness of the decision in the ﬁrst place and the


---PAGE BREAK---

attractiveness of other opportunities available to the challenger. However,
commitment will tend to rise as decisions are made, resources are
committed, time passes, and the strategy progresses. The level of
commitment of a challenger is crucial to defensive strategy, since it mirrors
the difﬁculty of forestalling or limiting a challenger’s objectives.
Exit and shrinkage barriers will also tend to rise as the process
proceeds.2 The presence of high exit or shrinkage barriers make it difﬁcult
to dislodge a challenger or force it to limit or scale down its objectives. Exit
and shrinkage barriers increase as the challenger commits to specialized
assets, long-term contracts, horizontal strategies with sister business units,
and investments in product or process development. In some industries,
establishing even a foothold position implies the creation of signiﬁcant exit
barriers. In other industries, a challenger may be able to postpone the risk of
increasing exit barriers until late in the entry process.3 Developing an
understanding of the height of a challenger’s exit and shrinkage barriers and
how they will change over time is essential to defensive strategy.
Defense becomes more difﬁcult the greater are a challenger’s
commitment and exit barriers. Since commitment and exit barriers usually
rise, often in discrete steps as investment commitments are made, the timing
of defensive moves is critical. Defensive actions taken just before a
challenger must decide whether to take steps that will raise exit or shrinkage
barriers may cast a shadow over the challenger’s internal decision-making
process.4 Critical junctures for a challenger can be predicted by identifying
costly or risky investments necessary in conﬁguring the value chain. An
important principle of defensive strategy, then, is to take defensive action
before exit barriers have risen.
A challenger learns continuously as its entry or repositioning process
proceeds. Assumptions were made in its initial decision that experience will
verify or contradict. Its experience will also shape its future assumptions,
and a challenger may modify its strategy based on events early in the
process. This presents the defender with an important opportunity to shape
a challenger’s information and assumptions. Often a ﬁrm will know more
about the industry than the challenger, and may be able to predict better
than the challenger where the challenger’s strategy will lead. This may
allow a ﬁrm to inﬂuence the direction of a challenger’s strategy in such a
way as to minimize its negative impact.


---PAGE BREAK---

A defender must also try to prevent a challenger’s commitment from
building. When considering risky and uncertain moves into new territory, a
challenger’s management may be particularly sensitive to setbacks or signs
of early success or failure. A skillful defender seeks to prevent a challenger
from meeting its initial targets and attempts to change industry competition
in such a way as to cause the challenger to question its original assumptions
about the attractiveness of the industry or a particular position.
As the entry or repositioning proceeds, uncertainty about the intentions
of the challenger diminishes. This also has important implications for
defensive strategy. Before entry or repositioning begins, a ﬁrm can only
speculate about the identity of potential entrants or of competitors intending
to launch an attack. Once entry or repositioning begins, however, the
identity of the challenger becomes known. The challenger’s strategy and
long-term intentions may still not be clear at ﬁrst. However, they will
emerge more clearly as the process proceeds. A challenger’s ultimate
strategy will not be known until well into the sequencing stage when
signiﬁcant investments have been made.
A ﬁrm cannot defend against attacks of any conceivable type, mounted
by every conceivable competitor or potential competitor. Therefore, defense
before a challenger appears must be more generalized, and effective defense
of this type can be very costly. Once a challenge is under way, defensive
strategy can be tailored to meet the threat posed by a speciﬁc challenger. A
principle that emerges is that there is a high payout to anticipating which
ﬁrms represent the most likely challengers and what their logical avenues of
attack might be. This will allow defense to be more cost-effective, by
focusing defensive investments where they are most needed.
Defensive Tactics
Defensive strategy aims to inﬂuence a challenger’s calculation of the
expected return from entry or repositioning, causing the challenger to
conclude that the move is unattractive or to opt for a strategy that is less
threatening. To do this, a defender invests in defensive tactics. Most
defensive tactics are costly and reduce short-term proﬁtability in order to
raise the longer-term sustainability of a ﬁrm’s position. However, most


---PAGE BREAK---

ﬁrms cannot eliminate the threat of attack completely, except at prohibitive
costs. Hence a defender should invest to reduce the threat of attack to an
acceptable level, balancing the risk of attack against the cost of defense.
Three types of defensive tactics underlie any defensive strategy:
• raising structural barriers
• increasing expected retaliation
• lowering the inducement for attack
Structural barriers to entry/mobility are sources of disadvantage for a
challenger relative to the ﬁrm (see Chapter 1). The presence of structural
barriers worsens the challenger’s expected proﬁt from a move. For example,
General Foods’ Maxwell House Coffee brand enjoys scale economies in
marketing that will force a challenger to bear higher than proportional
marketing costs relative to General Foods until it reaches proximity in
market share. These higher costs will reduce the challenger’s projected
proﬁt from entry below that of General Foods, and therefore reduce the
likelihood of a challenge.
The second type of defensive tactic is those that increase the threat of
retaliation perceived by challengers. Expected retaliation by the ﬁrm will
lower a challenger’s revenues or raise its costs, and thus erode the
challenger’s expected proﬁtability. Raising structural barriers and increasing
expected retaliation both seek to worsen a challenger’s position vis-a-vis
cost drivers or drivers of uniqueness, thereby eroding its relative position.
A third type of defensive tactic involves lowering the inducement for
challengers to attack. While raising barriers and expected retaliation is
aimed at reducing a challenger’s expected proﬁt, lowering the inducement
requires that a ﬁrm accept lower proﬁts. If a ﬁrm reduces prices or takes
proﬁts in an interrelated business unit instead of in the industry, for
example, a challenger will see less to gain if an attack is successful.
All three types of tactics can be employed both before a challenge has
occurred and once it has begun. Once a challenge has begun, however, a
ﬁrm must consider not only its position toward the challenger but also how
its behavior toward the challenger might discourage or encourage others.
Investments in defensive tactics cannot and should not be measured against
conventional short-term proﬁtability targets. This ignores their purpose.


---PAGE BREAK---

Actions that deter challengers deliberately reduce short-term proﬁtability to
ensure long-term proﬁtability.
Raising Structural Barriers
Chapter 1 summarized the types of structural barriers to entry/mobility
that may be present in an industry. Every type of barrier can be inﬂuenced
by a defender. In some industries, the levels of spending on advertising,
sales force, plant capacity, and other activities that is necessary for doing
business (ignoring defensive considerations) creates high barriers as a by-
product. If the barriers naturally created by ongoing activities are very high,
a ﬁrm is in the happy position of not having to make further defensive
investments in barriers. However, in the long run it may be proﬁtable to
invest in building barriers even higher than natural barriers.
While offensive moves to enhance competitive advantage in the value
chain can raise structural barriers, I concentrate here on defensive moves to
raise barriers. Defensive tactics that raise structural barriers are actions that
block logical avenues of attack for challengers. Some of the most important
are the following:
Fill Product or Positioning Gaps. Barriers are increased when a ﬁrm ﬁlls
gaps in its product line or preempts alternative marketing themes that a
challenger might logically employ. Such moves force a challenger to take
the defender head-on instead of being able to gain an unopposed beachhead,
or command premium prices that can be used to offset higher costs. Filling
gaps can take a number of forms:
• Broadening the product line to close off possible product niches. Seiko
acquired the Pulsar watch brand to block attacks at the low end by
Citizen and Timex.
•  Introducing brands that match the product characteristics or brand
positionings the challenger has or could use. These blocking or
ﬁghting brands raise barriers without undermining the position of the
principal brand.


---PAGE BREAK---

•  Foreclosing alternative marketing themes by using such themes on
secondary product lines or in secondary marketing campaigns.
•  Defensive low pricing of product varieties adjacent to competitors’
lines in order to discourage competitor line extensions (Chapter 7).
•  Encouraging good competitors (Chapter 6) that ﬁll gaps without
threatening the ﬁrm.
Defensive product varieties and marketing activities should not be
expected to be as proﬁtable as a ﬁrm’s core business, and prices must reﬂect
their defensive value.5 However, the defensive value of such products or
marketing activities does not necessarily require that a ﬁrm spend heavily
on them. Even if gap-ﬁlling products are not pushed aggressively, their
mere presence acts as a deterrent because of the threat that they will be
activated if a challenger threatens. Raising barriers may thus at the same
time lead a challenger to expect greater retaliation.
Block Channel Access. When a ﬁrm makes it more difﬁcult for a
challenger to gain access to distribution channels it raises a major structural
barrier. Defensive strategy should be directed not only toward a ﬁrm’s own
channels but also toward blocking access to other channels that may be a
substitute channel or a springboard for the challenger’s entry in the ﬁrm’s
channels. For example, challengers often gain incremental volume and
experience by using private label channels.
Channel-blocking tactics include the following:
• Exclusive agreements with channels.
•  Filling product line gaps in order to offer the channel a full line.
Competitors then have a harder time getting established.
• Expanding the product line to include all possible sizes and forms of a
product, in order to clog the channels’ shelf or warehouse space.
•  Bundling or unbundling as appropriate to reduce vulnerability to
challengers (Chapter 12).
• Aggressive volume discounts or discounts based on the channels total
purchases to discourage experimentation with new suppliers.


---PAGE BREAK---

• Attractive after-sales service support of a ﬁrm’s products that prompts
channels to forgo their own investment in after-sales support personnel
and facilities.
•  Willingness to supply private label sellers in order to preempt a
challenger’s access to volume.
•  Encouraging good competitors, who ﬁll up channels without
threatening the ﬁrm.
Raise Buyer Switching Costs. The ﬁrm can raise barriers by raising the
switching cost of buyers. I have described the ways to increase switching
costs in Chapters 4 and 8. Some common approaches in defensive strategy
include:
• Free or low-cost training of buyer personnel in the use or maintenance
of a ﬁrm’s product, or in specialized procedures such as record keeping
that are only compatible with purchasing from the ﬁrm. Johns
Manville has employed buyer training effectively to raise the switching
costs of rooﬁng contractors in buying rooﬁng products.
• Participating in joint product development with buyers, or providing
applications engineering assistance to them to help integrate a ﬁrm’s
product into the buyer’s product or process.
• Establishing ties to the buyer through the use of dedicated computer
terminals to allow direct ordering or inquiries, or through maintaining
buyer data bases on the ﬁrm’s computer.
• Ownership of on-premise storage facilities or equipment that is used at
the buyer’s location. In motor oil, for example, leading suppliers own
tanks for bulk storage located on the garage or repair shop’s premises.
Raise the Cost of Gaining Trial. If a challenger faces high costs of
getting buyers to try its product, it faces a considerable barrier. Raising this
barrier requires that a ﬁrm understand those product varieties that are
purchased ﬁrst, as well as the types of buyers that are most likely to be early
experimenters and purchasers of a challenger’s product. Steps to close off
these avenues of trial for competitors include:


---PAGE BREAK---

•  Selective price reduction on items in the line most likely to be
purchased ﬁrst.
•  High levels of couponing or sampling of buyers most prone to
experiment.
•  Discounting or deals that increase the inventory held by the buyer,
lengthen the time between orders, or lengthen the period of contracts.
All these impede a challenger’s access to orders.
• Announcing or leaking information about impending new products or
price changes that cause buyers to postpone purchases.
Defensively Increase Scale Economies. Barriers increase if economies of
scale grow. It is often possible to increase scale economies in areas such as
advertising and technology development, where scale thresholds are
competitively determined. By boosting its spending rate on technology
development and hence increasing the rate of new product development, for
example, a ﬁrm can increase the challenger’s required technology
development investment, which is amortized over a smaller base of sales. A
ﬁrm can increase scale economies most effectively in value activities where
minimum scale is determined by competitive spending levels rather than
determined by technology (see Chapter 3). Often this implies differentiating
in ways where the ﬁrm has a cost advantage in differentiation (Chapter 4).
Scale thresholds are often increased defensively in a number of ways:
• Increased advertising spending.
• Increased spending to boost the rate of technological change.
• Shorter model life cycles, where models require ﬁxed or quasi-ﬁxed
development costs.
• Increased sales force or service coverage.
Defensively Increase Capital Requirements. If a ﬁrm can raise the
amount of capital needed to compete with it, a challenger may be
discouraged. While many defensive tactics in effect raise a challenger’s
capital requirements by increasing start-up costs, a number of defensive
moves have a particular impact on capital requirements:


---PAGE BREAK---

• Raising the amount of ﬁnancing provided to dealers or buyers.
• Increasing warranty coverage or liberalizing policy toward returns.
•  Reducing delivery time for products or spare parts, implying an
increase in the amount of inventory required or the need for excess
manufacturing capacity.
Foreclose Alternative Technologies. If a ﬁrm can foreclose alternative
technologies a challenger might employ, it blocks this avenue of attack.
Some tactics for foreclosing technologies are:
•  Patenting the feasible alternative technologies in the product or
process, as Xerox did effectively in the early phases of the copier
industry.
•  Maintaining a participation in alternative technologies, through
purchasing licenses, maintaining pilot plants employing alternative
technologies, forming coalitions with other ﬁrms with expertise in
alternative technologies, or actually producing products using an
alternate technology. All these tactics let a challenger know that the
ﬁrm has access to the alternative technologies if it needs them.
•  Licensing or encouraging good competitors to employ alternative
technologies (see Chapter 6).
• Discrediting alternative technologies through signaling.
Invest in Protecting Proprietary Know-how. If a ﬁrm can protect its
proprietary know-how in products, processes, or other activities in the value
chain, it raises barriers. Firms often have no systematic program in place to
limit the diffusion of their know-how. Building on the discussion in Chapter
5, some elements of such a program include:
• Strictly limiting access to facilities and personnel.
• Fabricating or modifying production equipment in-house.
• Vertical integration into key components to avoid passing know-how to
suppliers. Michelin practices this aggressively in tires.
• Human resource policies to minimize personnel turnover and prevent
disclosures.


---PAGE BREAK---

• Aggressive patenting of inventions.
• Litigation against all infringers. Litigation may delay investments by
challengers until the uncertainties are resolved, even if the possibility
of success in the litigation is low.
Tie Up Suppliers. Barriers increase if a ﬁrm can foreclose or limit a
challenger’s access to the best sources of raw materials, labor, or other
inputs. Some representative tactics are as follows:
• Exclusive contracts with the best suppliers.
• Backward integration or partial or complete ownership of suppliers to
foreclose sources of supply.
• Purchasing key locations (mines, forest lands, etc.) in excess of needs
to preempt them from competitors.
• Encouraging suppliers to customize their value chains to meet a ﬁrm’s
needs, raising supplier switching costs to serving new competitors.
•  Signing long-term purchasing contracts to tie up supplier capacity.
Coca-Cola reportedly pursued this strategy in sourcing high-fructose
corn syrup, a low cost substitute for sugar.
Raise Competitors’ Input Costs. If a ﬁrm can raise a challenger’s relative
input costs, it raises barriers. Most opportunities to do so rest on differences
in competitors’ (or potential competitors’) cost structures, so that a given
input price change has a greater impact on them than on the ﬁrm. Some
common tactics are as follows:
• Avoiding suppliers that also serve competitors or potential competitors,
raising these suppliers’ costs and avoiding the transfer of some of the
ﬁrm’s scale economies to competitors through the suppliers.
•  Bidding up the price of labor or raw materials if they represent a
higher percentage of costs for competitors. This tactic may well have
been used by large beer companies against smaller ﬁrms with less
automated plants.


---PAGE BREAK---

Defensively Pursue Interrelationships. A ﬁrm can often reduce its costs
or enhance differentiation by harnessing interrelationships that competitors
cannot match (Chapter 9). At the same time, pursuit of interrelationships by
competitors that a ﬁrm cannot match are threats that must be defended
against. Defensive considerations may suggest that a ﬁrm pursue particular
interrelationships, including entering some new businesses, to enhance its
defensive posture.
Encourage Government Policies That Raise Barriers. Government
policies can become major structural barriers in areas such as product or
plant safety, product testing and pollution control. Policies such as these can
increase economies of scale, capital requirements, and other potential
barriers. A ﬁrm can often shape the character of government policies in
ways that are favorable to defending its position. It can:
• Encourage stringent safety and pollution standards.
•  Challenge competitors’ products or practices in regulatory
proceedings.
• Support requirements for extensive product testing.
• Lobby for trade ﬁnancing or other favorable trade policies to deal with
foreign competitors.
Form Coalitions To Raise Barriers or Coopt Challengers. Coalitions
with other ﬁrms can raise barriers in many of the ways described above,
such as foreclosing alternative technologies or ﬁlling product gaps. At the
same time, coalitions with likely challengers may be a way to convert a
threat into an opportunity.
Increasing Expected Retaliation
A second type of defensive tactic is an action that increases the threat of
retaliation perceived by challengers. The threat of retaliation hinges on both
the perceived probability of retaliation and its expected severity. A range of
tactics are available to a defender to signal its intentions to retaliate against
potential challengers. For example, Dow Chemical has built capacity in


---PAGE BREAK---

advance of demand in magnesium for many years, indicating its
commitment to defending its share. Had Dow been continually constrained
for capacity, challengers might have been more tempted to enter.
Expected retaliation can be increased by tactics that indicate that a ﬁrm
intends to vigorously defend its position, that create conditions making it
inevitable that the ﬁrm must retaliate, or that indicate it has the resources to
do so. The threat of retaliation perceived by potential challengers is
continually being inﬂuenced by a ﬁrm’s behavior. A ﬁrm’s reputation for
retaliation is strongly inﬂuenced by its history, particularly its response to
past challengers. The ﬁrm must carefully manage the image it projects to
actual and potential competitors. Some of the most important ways of
increasing a ﬁrm’s perceived threat of retaliation include:6
Signal Commitment To Defend. A ﬁrm increases expected retaliation if it
consistently signals its intention to defend its position:
• Announced intentions by management to defend market share in the
industry.
• Corporate pronouncements of the importance of a business unit to the
ﬁrm.
• Announced intention to build adequate capacity ahead of demand.
Such signaling can and should be carried out consistently via all the
available channels, such as public statements, trade press, distributors, and
buyers, in order to have the greatest defensive impact.
Signal Incipient Barriers. Most tactics that raise effective structural
barriers require the ﬁrm to make a signiﬁcant investment. However, a ﬁrm
may sometimes be able to achieve the same effect through market signaling
or partial investment. Market signaling of planned moves or partial
investment has the purpose of increasing expected retaliation by the ﬁrm in
the future. For example, a ﬁrm might announce or leak information about a
new product generation, a ﬁghting brand or new process technology, raising
the risk perceived by a challenger that the actual move will be forthcoming.
Such market signaling can cause challengers to postpone future
commitments until more information can be gained to learn if the signals


---PAGE BREAK---

are credible. IBM frequently announces new product generations well in
advance, for example.
Establish Blocking Positions. A ﬁrm can provide a lever for retaliation
by maintaining blocking or defensive positions in other countries or
industries occupied by competitors or potential competitors (see Chapter 9).
Blocking positions in business units where competitors generate a
disproportionate share of their cash ﬂow or proﬁtability become the basis
for particularly effective retaliation.
Their value rests on the principle that price cutting and other retaliatory
tactics may be less costly in industries or countries where a ﬁrm has a small
position than in a ﬁrm’s key industries. Blocking positions may also be a
less risky form of retaliation than direct retaliation, which has a greater
propensity to trigger escalation and to spill over to damage good
competitors.
Match Guarantees. A ﬁrm raises the expectation of retaliation if it
commits itself to match or better prices or other terms offered by
competitors (“We will not be undersold”). A public stance that it will do so
often deters challengers from attempting to gain position through
discounting, particularly if a ﬁrm backs its claim once or twice in a
publicized way. Of course the ﬁrm must be capable of supporting such a
claim in the eyes of challengers.
Raise the Penalty of Exit or Lost Share. Anything that increases the
economic need for a ﬁrm to maintain its market share (raises its shrinkage
barriers) is often a convincing way to demonstrate seriousness about
retaliation:
• Constructing capacity well ahead of demand.
• Entering into long-term supply contracts for ﬁxed quantities of inputs.
• Increasing vertical integration.
• Investing in specialized facilities.
• Publicized contractual relationships that raise the ﬁxed cost of exit.


---PAGE BREAK---

• Interrelationships with other business units in the ﬁrm that demonstrate
an overall corporate commitment to succeeding in the industry.
Raising the penalty of lost share or exit surely introduces the risk that a
ﬁrm will actually have to pay that penalty. However, this and most other
effective defensive tactics raise cost or risk in order to enhance the
sustainability of position.
Accumulate Retaliatory Resources. The threat of retaliation is increased
if a ﬁrm has the resources in place needed to retaliate effectively. Some
ways of demonstrating the capacity to retaliate include:
• Maintaining excess cash reserves or liquidity (a “war chest”).
• Holding new models or product generations in reserve, though leaking
their existence.
Encourage Good Competitors. Good competitors increase the threat of
retaliation in many industries by serving as a ﬁrst line of defense against
challengers (see Chapter 6). The presence of the right competitors may also
divert attacks in their direction.
Set Examples. A ﬁrm affects its image for retaliation through its behavior
toward competitors that may not be real threats as well as through its
behavior in response to threatening challengers. Defensive value is often
reaped from using moves against nonthreatening challengers to demonstrate
how tough the ﬁrm is in responding to real challengers. A very vigorous
response to one challenger sends a message to others.
Establish Defensive Coalitions. Coalitions with other ﬁrms may increase
the threat of retaliation by affecting many of the factors described above. A
coalition, for example, may provide blocking positions or retaliatory
resources a ﬁrm itself does not have.
Many of the ways to increase the perceived threat of retaliation force the
ﬁrm to increase its level of risk. Indeed, by raising the ﬁrm’s risk the tactics


---PAGE BREAK---

become signiﬁcant to competitors. Thus a ﬁrm must be prepared to invest if
it wants to improve the sustainability of its position in this way.
RETALIATION DURING ATTACK
So far I have discussed the steps a ﬁrm can take to increase the perceived
threat of retaliation and prevent an attack. The period immediately after a
move has begun is a particularly delicate one for a challenger, however,
during which it is hungry for information on its progress and is sensitive to
early successes or setbacks. Challengers have a tendency to read a great
deal into early results, often using them as a basis for longer-term
projections. Hence, even if a defender’s retaliation is unsustainable for long,
it may serve to shape a challenger’s expectations. As a general rule, quick
and vigorous retaliation is necessary to limit an attack.
A number of additional tactics become possible once an attack has been
mounted, because a ﬁrm then knows the identity of the challenger and
something about its strategy.
Disruption of Test Markets or Introductory Markets. A wide range of
actions can disrupt market introductions and cloud the interpretation of
early results. Procter & Gamble is a tenacious rival in competitor test
markets, for example. Such actions can raise a challenger’s level of
uncertainty about its position or cause it to adopt a more pessimistic view of
future prospects. Typical disruptive tactics include:
• High but erratic levels of advertising, couponing, or sampling.
• Low-cost service, warranties, or trade-ins.
Leapfrogging. If a ﬁrm can introduce a new product or process during a
challenger’s attack, this can be very discouraging to the challenger. This is
particularly true if such a move forces the challenger to make further
investments to stay in the game just after it has expended considerable
resources.
Litigation. Litigation can raise the risks or costs of further investment by
a challenger, thereby delaying its progress. Forms of litigation that can be


---PAGE BREAK---

used in retaliation are as follows:
•  Patent suits that raise uncertainty about the future of a challenger’s
product or process.
•  Antitrust suits that contest any aggressive tactics used by the
challenger.
• Suits that dispute product performance claims by challengers.
Lowering the Inducement for Attack
A third type of defensive tactic is actions that lower the inducement for
attack instead of raise its cost. Broadly, proﬁt serves as the inducement for a
challenger to attack a ﬁrm. The proﬁts expected by a challenger if it
succeeds are a function of a ﬁrm’s own proﬁt targets as well as the
assumptions held by potential challengers about future market conditions.
Reducing Proﬁt Targets. The proﬁts earned by a ﬁrm are a highly visible
indication of the attractiveness of its position. An essential part of any
defensive strategy, then, is to decide what current price and proﬁt levels are
sustainable. Many ﬁrms have invited attack by being too greedy. A ﬁrm can
deliberately choose to forgo current proﬁts to reduce the inducement for
attack. This may imply lowering prices, raising discounts, and so on.
There must be a balance between structural entry/mobility barriers and
threat of retaliation on the one hand, and a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability on the other.7
If a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability is very high, challengers will attempt to cross even
high barriers or combat strong retaliation. The high historical proﬁtability in
oil ﬁeld services and pharmaceuticals industries, for example, attracted
many ﬁrms to invest heavily in entry despite the presence of high entry
barriers and entrenched competitors. For example, TRW has moved into oil
ﬁeld services while Procter & Gamble has entered pharmaceuticals. Many
entrants attracted by high proﬁtability fail to consider carefully the costs of
entry, and often underestimate them. Similarly, high temporary proﬁts in a
cyclical industry are frequently misread as a long-term opportunity. The
effect of being too greedy is thus to begin an implicit or explicit harvesting
strategy as challengers erode the ﬁrm’s position.


---PAGE BREAK---

Managing Competitor Assumptions. A challenger’s assumptions about
future industry prospects may lead it to attack a ﬁrm. If challengers believe
that an industry possesses explosive growth potential, for example, they
may attack a ﬁrm despite high barriers. Managing competitor assumptions
was discussed in general terms in Chapter 6. While a ﬁrm cannot credibly
cause potential competitors to dismiss realistic assumptions about the
industry, defensive strategy should attempt to make potential challengers’
assumptions more realistic. Some options include:
• Making realistic internal growth forecasts public.
• Discussing realistic interpretations of industry events in public forums.
•  Sponsoring independent studies that will question unrealistic
assumptions held by competitors.
Defensive strategy can be viewed in a broad sense as inﬂuencing
competitor assumptions, including their assumptions about retaliation and
the height of barriers. Inﬂuencing competitor assumptions about future
industry conditions is an important part of the task.
Evaluating Defensive Tactics
The defensive tactics described above differ greatly in their
characteristics and in their appropriateness for a ﬁrm. A ﬁrm must decide
which tactics will be most effective in its industry in view of the potential
challengers it faces. A number of important tests can be used to assess
defensive tactics:
Value to Buyers. A ﬁrm should select those defensive tactics which are
valuable to buyers (Chapter 4). Many defensive tactics involve investments
in such things as advertising, ﬁghting brands, and price reductions on
certain product varieties. A tactic directed toward buyers will not be
effective for defensive purposes unless the buyer values it. If increased
advertising leads to no increase in buyer awareness or loyalty, for example,
then higher advertising spending will have no defensive value because a
challenger need not match it. If buyers are highly sensitive to credit, on the


---PAGE BREAK---

other hand, then offering more credit will force a challenger to provide
comparable credit or face a disadvantage.
A defensive tactic that enhances differentiation at the same time as it
increases the sustainability of the ﬁrm’s competitive position partly pays for
itself. The buyer response to a defensive tactic need not pay for its entire
cost, however, but only enough to place a challenger that fails to match the
defensive tactic at a disadvantage. The defensive value of an advertising
increase should not be measured only by whether the ads pay for
themselves in increased sales, for example, but also whether they also force
any challenger to spend at higher levels to attack the ﬁrm’s position.
Cost Asymmetry. A ﬁrm should choose defensive tactics that place
potential challengers at the greatest relative cost disadvantage. The
effectiveness of a defensive tactic is a function of the asymmetry between
the cost of the tactic to the ﬁrm and the cost imposed on the challenger. For
example, an increase in national network TV advertising by a large share
ﬁrm usually imposes proportionally greater spending requirements on a
challenger with smaller share, because national network TV advertising is
subject to economies of scale driven by national market share. Introducing a
new product generation may also raise a challenger’s cost proportionally
more than the ﬁrm’s, since new-product development costs are largely ﬁxed
and the challenger must amortize them over a much smaller initial volume.
Conversely, a price cut may cost a ﬁrm the same or even more than it costs a
challenger. Any fool can cut the price, goes the old maxim, and a ﬁrm often
hurts itself more than the challenger in defending in this way.
Cost asymmetry stems from differences in the ﬁrm’s and challenger’s
position vis-à-vis cost drivers such as scale, learning, location, or
interrelationships. The ﬁrm should select defensive tactics which elevate its
cost position less than they elevate challengers’—frequently these are
differentiating factors where the ﬁrm has a cost advantage in differentiating
(Chapter 4). In some industries boosting advertising will put challengers at
the greatest disadvantage, while in other industries it may be increasing the
size of a sales force. The analysis of cost behavior described in Chapter 3
provides the starting point for identifying such asymmetries.
Cost asymmetry in a defensive tactic is strongly inﬂuenced by whether
the tactic can be targeted at likely avenues of attack or threatening


---PAGE BREAK---

challengers, or whether it is more generalized. Tactics that must apply
across the board (e.g., a cut in list price) are generally more expensive than
those that can be targeted. For example, the ability to cut price only on
products that are likely initial purchases by new buyers is clearly much less
costly than a price reduction on the entire line. Good defensive strategy
requires that defensive investment be targeted as much as possible towards
the most serious threats.
The cost asymmetry of defensive tactics is also clearly a function of the
speciﬁc challenger involved. For example, an increase in national
advertising is one thing if challengers are start-up ﬁrms, but quite another
thing if the challenger is a large and successful consumer goods ﬁrm. Cost
asymmetry in defensive tactics, then, is relative and not absolute.
Sustainability of Effect. A ﬁrm should select defensive tactics that have a
lasting effect. The cost effectiveness of any defensive tactic is a function of
the need to reinvest to maintain its defensive value. An increase in
advertising has some effect beyond the current period, for example, but a
ﬁrm must continually reinvest in advertising in order to maintain the barrier.
An investment in a new production process, however, may not decay as a
barrier as rapidly. Similarly, investing in foreclosing access to suppliers may
yield a long-lasting barrier requiring little reinvestment. If a ﬁrm is unable
to create lasting barriers or a credible long-term threat of retaliation, then
little or no defensive investment in them is justiﬁed. A ﬁrm should invest
instead in lowering the inducement to enter or it should harvest its position.
Clarity of the Message. A ﬁrm should select defensive tactics it is
conﬁdent that potential challengers will detect as well as understand their
implications. Competitors often differ in their understanding of industry
economics and in their ability to perceive signals. Signals can be missed
and the signiﬁcance of some tactics misunderstood. Generally, tactics
involving price, credit, advertising, sales force, and new products are
particularly visible, while those involving indirect signals (e.g., announced
capacity expansion), process changes, or raising exit and shrinkage barriers
are often less visible.
The likelihood of a defensive tactic’s being noticed and understood is a
function not only of the tactic but also of the likely challengers.


---PAGE BREAK---

Competitors without a good cost system may not understand the impact of a
defensive tactic on their cost positions. In addition, challengers’
assumptions about the industry and about the ﬁrm will inﬂuence their
interpretation of the ﬁrm’s behavior.
Credibility. A ﬁrm should select defensive tactics that will be credible.
Defensive tactics differ greatly in the degree to which a challenger will take
them seriously. A defensive tactic that raises barriers will not be credible
unless challengers view it as a permanent or long-lasting feature of
competition. The credibility of a threat of retaliation rests on having
resources to carry it out and a communicated resolve to do so.
Impact on Competitors’ Goals. A ﬁrm should pick defensive tactics that
have a measurable impact on the particular goals of its potential
challengers. Since challengers’ goals may vary, not all tactics may be
equally effective. Defensive tactics that are effective against a competitor
with a similar ownership structure to the ﬁrm, for example, may not be at all
effective against a state-owned competitor. Similarly, challengers will differ
in their sensitivity to start-up losses and shortterm proﬁts. Managers
sometimes complain that they are attacked even though it is not “rational”
to do so. Seemingly irrational attacks are often the result of a challenger
having different goals. Defensive tactics should reﬂect challengers’ goals,
and not the ﬁrm’s.
Other Structural Effects. A ﬁrm should select defensive tactics that have
a positive or neutral inﬂuence on other elements of industry structure, and
avoid those tactics that permanently erode industry structure. A new product
generation that raises switching costs and encourages substitution, for
example, is a better defensive tactic than a price cut that has the effect of
increasing long-term buyer price sensitivity. Tactics that increase the
perceived threat of retaliation sometimes have the undesirable side effect of
creating rivalry pressures in an industry. Raising exit barriers, for example,
can increase the risk of warfare among incumbents if they choose to follow.
Leaders are particularly likely to inﬂuence industry structure through their
defensive moves.


---PAGE BREAK---

Defensive tactics may also hurt good competitors. Increases in
advertising spending or price cuts can worsen the relative position of good
competitors and compromise their ability to play the beneﬁcial roles
described in Chapter 6. Good competitors must perceive that defensive
moves are not directed at them but at other challengers. Defensive strategy
must not be set in a vacuum, then, but recognize its other structural effects.
Matching by Other Incumbents. Defensive tactics will usually have their
greatest impact in defending against new entrants if they are imitated by
other incumbents. Matching by other incumbents implies that a potential
entrant cannot avoid the barriers created in defensive investments by
attacking others in the industry. Smaller competitors may underinvest in
defense and accept a free ride from the leaders, however. Efforts to prod
other incumbents into matching a defensive move may well have a strategic
advantage in industries where new entrants pose a greater threat than attacks
by incumbents.
Defensive Strategy
Combined with an offensive strategy to increase a ﬁrm’s competitive
advantage, an explicit defensive strategy can raise the sustainability of
whatever competitive advantages a ﬁrm possesses. The ideal of defensive
strategy is usually deterrence—preventing a challenger from initiating a
move in the ﬁrst place or deﬂecting it to become less threatening. The other
type of defensive strategy, response, is one in which the ﬁrm reacts to
challenges as they occur. Response seeks to lower the challenger’s
objectives for a move once begun, or lead the challenger to rescind it
altogether. In both deterrence and response, the principle is to alter a
challenger’s assessment of the attractiveness of a move.
Deterrence
The cost of deterrence is often less than the cost of ﬁghting battles once a
challenge has begun. A ﬁrm cannot deter challengers, however, unless it
understands the nature of the threat. A maxim of defense in military


---PAGE BREAK---

strategy is that it is extremely costly to defend an entire perimeter against
attack from any direction where the challenger may employ any weapon.
The same principle applies in competitive strategy. A ﬁrm must determine
which competitors and potential competitors are most dangerous, and the
ways in which they might choose to behave. Only then can the appropriate
defensive tactics be marshaled. Scenarios (Chapter 13) can be a useful
device for examining the possibilities.
The important steps in deterrence can be summarized as follows:
1. Thoroughly understand existing barriers. A ﬁrm must have a clear
understanding of what entry and mobility barriers it currently possesses,
their speciﬁc sources, and how they might change. Is the ﬁrm protected by
economies of scale? Where do these stem from in the value chain? Is access
to channels difﬁcult? What underlies this difﬁculty? What are the value
activities that lead to differentiation? How sustainable are the sources of the
ﬁrm’s cost position and differentiation (Chapters 3 and 4)?
The height of existing barriers shapes the extent of the threat to a ﬁrm’s
position. If barriers are falling, for example, they must be rebuilt or replaced
if the ﬁrm is to preserve proﬁtability. The speciﬁc barriers present will also
determine the types of strategies that challengers will employ, and the areas
in which defensive tactics might prove most effective. A ﬁrm protected by
high barriers to channel access, for example, is more likely to face
competitors’ attempts to create new channels than invasions of the existing
ones. Conversely, a ﬁrm without scale or other sustainable cost barriers may
be vulnerable to small, low-overhead competitors that are satisﬁed with
what for the ﬁrm would be a poor return on investment. Challengers will
usually try to ﬁnd ways to sidestep existing barriers or somehow nullify
them (see Chapter 15).
A ﬁrm must have precise knowledge of the speciﬁc sources of each
barrier if it is to exploit them effectively. In residential rooﬁng products, for
example, a ﬁrm must recognize that economies of scale are driven primarily
by regional scale due to high transport costs, the economics of production
and sales force utilization, and regional differences in product mix. If a
rooﬁng products ﬁrm is satisﬁed in attributing its barriers only to scale but
does not understand the speciﬁc sources of its scale barriers, it may mount
the wrong defensive strategy.


---PAGE BREAK---

2.  Anticipate the likely challengers. A ﬁrm must anticipate the most
likely challengers, whether they be potential entrants or competitors
attempting to reposition themselves. Knowing who the likely challengers
are is essential to focus and target defensive investments. The height of
barriers and the impact of retaliation are also relative to who the likely
challengers are, and not absolute. In motor oil, for example, the likely
potential entrants facing Castrol, Quaker State, and other competitors are
the oil majors. Given the resources of the majors, barriers such as capital
and scale become less important than they would be if likely entrants were
independents.
There are three questions to answer in anticipating likely challengers:
Which existing competitors are not satisﬁed? The most likely challengers
will be existing competitors that are not satisﬁed with their current position.
Competitors that consistently fail to meet their goals will be prone to
attempt to reposition themselves. An assessment of competitors’
assumptions, strategies, and capabilities should illuminate whether they are
likely to reposition themselves in a way that threatens the ﬁrm. Good
competitors (Chapter 6) pose a less serious threat of repositioning than bad
competitors. Often the acquisition of a competitor by another ﬁrm will alter
the competitor’s goals, and may create a would-be challenger. In beer, for
example, Miller’s acquisition by Philip Morris was a precursor of an
aggressive challenge of Anheuser-Busch.
Who are the most likely potential entrants? Determining the existing
competitors that are most likely to reposition themselves is not easy, but
anticipating likely potential entrants is often even more difﬁcult. A way to
identify potential entrants is to isolate those ﬁrms for which entry into the
industry would represent a logical extension of their existing activities. The
most common potential entrants tend to fall into the following categories:
• Regional competitors in other regions.
• Foreign ﬁrms not now operating in a country.
•  Firms for which the industry would be backward or forward
integration.


---PAGE BREAK---

•  Firms that can achieve tangible interrelationships, intangible
interrelationships, or create blocking positions by entering the industry
(see Chapter 9).
Regional ﬁrms often enter other regions or go national. This has been a
popular strategy recently in the food industry. A number of major food
companies such as Consolidated Foods and H. J. Heinz have acquired
regional companies in order to take them national. Foreign entry into a
country is also common as industries globalize—a contemporary example is
the attack on Upjohn in the U.S. antiarthritic drug market by Boots
Company, headquartered in Britain.
There are many forms of tangible interrelationships among businesses
that represent a path for diversiﬁcation into an industry, described in
Chapter 9. The potential interrelationships leading to an industry should be
traced to identify logical entrants. For example, entry into copiers was a
logical extension of Kodak’s chemical and optical expertise, and of
Matsushita’s ofﬁce automation strategy.
The major challenge in identifying potential entrants is to avoid being
trapped by conventional wisdom. Many companies overlook serious
potential competitors such as foreign ﬁrms or related diversiﬁers by
focusing too closely on traditional sources of new competitors such as
regional ﬁrms or spinoffs. The list of most likely potential entrants may also
shift as an industry evolves.8
Are there substitute competitors? In some industries, substitutes may be
the most dangerous competitors, and thus should be the appropriate focal
point for defensive strategy. Chapter 8 describes how to identify substitutes,
and how threatening substitutes can be deterred.
3.  Forecast likely avenues of attack. The third step in formulating a
strategy for deterrence is forecasting the likely avenues of attack. A ﬁrm
must determine the best ways in which its position might be attacked so that
it can focus its defensive investments on the most vulnerable areas. Every
management team should ask itself the question, “Given what I know, how
would I attack this ﬁrm if I were a competitor?”


---PAGE BREAK---

The likely avenues of attack will be a function of the barriers to entry or
mobility that are present, and how they might be changing. In the mustard
industry, for example, Grey Poupon has increased advertising spending
dramatically and attacked French’s with a differentiation strategy. This was
much more logical than a head-on price battle given French’s scale-related
advantages. The same sort of logic would suggest that SCM’s portable
typewriters were vulnerable to private labeling by Brother combined with
new electronics technology, given SCM’s channel and brand loyalty. U.S.
farm equipment ﬁrms were more vulnerable in small tractors than in large
tractors, where their U.S. base gave them volume advantages over Japanese
ﬁrms.
The likely avenue of attack will also reﬂect the assumptions, strategies,
and capabilities of likely challengers. Miller Beer stressed heavy advertising
and market segmentation in the beer industry. This was not surprising given
the intangible interrelationships present involving its parent, Philip Morris.
Texas Instruments’ ill-fated price cutting in personal computers was
similarly predictable, given its traditional posture in semiconductors.
Acquisition of second-tier competitors is a common way for potential
entrants to challenge a ﬁrm, and this possibility must always be considered.
In the truck business, for example, Daimler Benz acquired Freightliner
(number six in the industry), Volvo acquired the truck operations of White
Motor (number seven), and Renault formed a coalition with Mack.
4.  Choose defensive tactics to block the likely avenues of attack.
Effective deterrence requires that a ﬁrm block the challenger’s likely
avenues of attack. This requires choosing defensive tactics that raise
structural barriers or increase expected retaliation that will be most cost-
effective from those described. The appropriate mix of defensive tactics will
vary from ﬁrm to ﬁrm, and must meet the tests outlined above. If a ﬁrm is
most vulnerable to private labeling, for example, it may have to invest in a
special private label model and signal its willingness to price-compete. In
addition, the defensive tactics chosen must be targeted against the most
likely challengers. It is particularly important that defensive tactics reﬂect
the actual goals of likely challengers and that they be noticed.


---PAGE BREAK---

5. Manage the ﬁrm’s image as a tough defender. In addition to investing
in defense, a ﬁrm must clearly communicate its intentions to defend. A ﬁrm
is continuously sending signals about its commitment to defend and must
carefully manage the image it projects. Every public statement and every
action in the marketplace must be weighed to determine the signals that will
be sent. Ideally, a ﬁrm can achieve the image that Procter & Gamble (P&G)
has. A poll of almost any group of managers, in and out of consumer goods,
will show overwhelmingly that P&G is viewed as totally committed to
defending share in its business. The fact that P&G has this image is not an
accident, but the result of statements and actions over a long period of time.
6. Set realistic proﬁt expectations. No defensive strategy can be effective
unless a ﬁrm has realistic proﬁt expectations. A ﬁrm’s proﬁt expectations
must reﬂect the barriers it possesses and those that can be created through
defensive investments. Often reducing proﬁtability today will allow the ﬁrm
to earn superior proﬁts in the future.
Response
If deterrence fails, a ﬁrm must decide how to react to a challenger once
an attack is under way. Deterrence cannot and should not try to reduce the
chance of attack to zero. Doing so is usually too expensive and every
possible challenge can rarely be anticipated. Hence responding to attacks
effectively and in a timely way is an important part of defensive strategy.
Effective response is based on shifting a challenger’s expectations. The
whole arsenal of defensive tactics I have described can be employed to
accomplish this, matched to the goals, assumptions, and capabilities of the
particular challenger. For example, General Foods’ Maxwell House has
mounted a tough and effective defense against P&G, and no doubt caused
P&G to reconsider its targets in the coffee industry. Aggressive pricing,
advertising, and ﬁghting brands have been employed to hold position and
demonstrate General Foods’ commitment. The vigor of the defense has
meant that P&G is believed to be earning little return on its investment in
the coffee business.
A number of important principles should guide response:


---PAGE BREAK---

Respond in Some Way as Early as Possible. A ﬁrm must respond in some
way to an attack as early as possible, because a challenger’s exit barriers
and commitment will grow as it meets its early targets and makes
incremental investments. While a ﬁrm is often not in a position right away
to completely counter an attack, making some immediate response is still
important to holding the challenger’s expectations in check. Even an
inadequate holding action, such as increased advertising, may be necessary
to keep a competitor from meeting its initial targets and thereby gaining the
conﬁdence necessary to increase its capital investment and raise its goals.
Invest in Early Discovery of Actual Moves. Given the advantages of
responding early in the entry or repositioning process, the ﬁrm can gain
substantial advantages in detecting actual moves of challengers very early.
This can be facilitated through activities such as:
• Regular contact with raw material suppliers, equipment suppliers, and
engineering ﬁrms to learn of orders or interest.
• Close contact with advertising media to detect purchases of advertising
space.
• Monitoring of attendance at trade shows.
• Regular contact with the most adventurous buyers in the industry, who
might be approached ﬁrst by a new competitor or most prone to be
seeking alternative sources.
• Monitoring of technical conferences, schools, and other places when
technical people might be recruited.
Base the Response on the Reasons for the Attack. A ﬁrm must attempt to
understand why a challenger is attacking, what its goals are, and what long-
term strategy it has adopted. An attack based on desperation should be
responded to differently than one emanating from parent company pressure
on a business unit for growth. A challenger’s goals and timetable must also
be assessed, because good response requires that they be disrupted and
ultimately modiﬁed. A good response also recognizes how one move by a
challenger might ﬁt into a longer term strategy.


---PAGE BREAK---

Deﬂect Challengers in Addition to Trying to Stop Them. Part of the
purpose of response is to make a move less threatening even if it cannot be
stopped. It is often easier to get a challenger to focus or redirect its strategy
than to withdraw it. A ﬁrm must identify ways in which a challenger’s goals
could be partially or completely met in less threatening ways and respond
accordingly.
Take Every Challenger Seriously Enough. There is no such thing as a
challenge that can be ignored. Every challenger must be analyzed for its
motivations and capabilities. Even weak challengers have the potential of
disrupting industry structure or damaging good competitors. Moreover, the
response to less threatening competitors sends signals to more threatening
ones. At the same time, however, a ﬁrm must avoid the tendency to
overreact to a challenger. Response is costly, and must be directed at real
and not imagined threats.
View Response as a Way to Gain Position. Response can often be used to
gain position rather than just to stop a competitor. A battle between strong
competitors often hurts weaker competitors more than the strong
competitors hurt each other, as has been the case in soft drinks and beer.
Moreover, an attack by a competitor in one segment may open that
competitor to vulnerabilities in another segment that can be exploited.
Response to Price Cutting
Price cutting is among the most difﬁcult forms of attack to counter, due
to its rapid effect on proﬁtability and the risk of an irreversible downward
price spiral. Thus a ﬁrm must be particularly careful in how it responds to
price cutting. Some additional issues may be useful to consider in
responding to a price cut in addition to those discussed above:
Reasons for Competitor Price Cutting. A competitor may be price-
cutting out of necessity to raise cash in the short term, or as part of a long-
term campaign to increase share. It might also be price-cutting because it
does not understand its costs and thinks it is pricing to achieve a fair return.
Worse yet, the competitor may be price-cutting because it enjoys


---PAGE BREAK---

signiﬁcantly lower costs. The correct response to price cutting will be very
different depending on the reason underlying it. Therefore, the reason must
be diagnosed as rapidly and accurately as possible.
Willingness To Do Battle. Price cutting by a competitor often rests on the
assumption that a ﬁrm will not react aggressively, but will maintain a price
umbrella in the hope of preserving proﬁts. Early and vigorous response is
thus often necessary if price cutting is to be contained. The response need
not always be a corresponding price cut, but it must be something besides
hoping the price cutter will go away. A ﬁrm must convince a price cutter
that mixed motives will not paralyze it.
Localized Response. Often the response to price cutting can and should
be localized to particularly vulnerable buyers, or to product varieties where
differentiation is lowest, and not involve across-the-board actions.
Localizing the response reduces its cost.
Cross Parry. Price cutting may be contained or eliminated if the ﬁrm
immediately attacks (with price and other moves) the price cutter’s key
buyers or product lines. Similarly, price cutting can sometimes be stopped if
blocking positions in other industries are employed to respond. The
principle is to demonstrate that the price cutter has more to lose from
initiating a price war than it is likely to gain.
Cut Price in Other Ways. Sometimes prices can be effectively reduced to
respond to a price cutter through providing free service, discounting
ancillary equipment, or other means that are easier to reverse than a price
cut itself. Also, indirect price cuts may be more susceptible to localization,
and less easy for competitors to match. Failing indirect price cuts, rebates or
other special discounts may be less difﬁcult to reverse later than reductions
in list prices.
Create or Employ “Special” Products. Price cutting can sometimes be
met more effectively with ﬁghting brands or stripped-down products (e.g.
no free service), than by lowering the price of the primary product line. The


---PAGE BREAK---

buyer can be offered a low price on special products, but reminded that they
are inferior to the ﬁrm’s normal offering.
Defense or Disinvest
In many industries, defensive investments yield a high return. However, a
ﬁrm should optimize rather than maximize its investment in defense. In
some industries, defensive investment is not appropriate at all, or is only
appropriate as a temporary delaying action. This is true where a ﬁrm’s
position is not ultimately sustainable. In such industries, the best defensive
strategy is to “take the money and run.” This means that the ﬁrm generates
as much cash as possible, knowing that entry or repositioning will
ultimately erode its position. Part of such a strategy may sometimes be to
encourage the entry of competitors to boost the growth rate of the market
while harvesting takes place.
The conditions that suggest that disinvestment is preferable to investing
in defense are as follows:
• low barriers, or falling barriers as the industry evolves
• little opportunity to create barriers
• potential entrants and existing competitors with superior resources
•  competitors with low return-on-investment targets or other
characteristics of a bad competitor
Pitfalls in Defense
There are many pitfalls in defending position. Even strongly positioned
leaders are regularly attacked successfully because they make errors in
defensive strategy. The single biggest pitfall in defense is a narrow concern
with short-term proﬁtability, which conﬂicts with the reality that defense
requires investment. Internal decision-making processes in many ﬁrms are
biased against defensive investments. They reward short-term proﬁtability,
and fail to reward the reduction of risk that defensive strategy seeks. The
beneﬁts of a successful defensive strategy are often hard to measure, since a
successful defense means that nothing happens.


---PAGE BREAK---

The second largest pitfall in defensive strategy is complacency. Firms
often do not examine their environment for potential challengers, or
seriously consider the possibility that challenge will occur. As a result, it is
striking how often ﬁrms fail to make simple and inexpensive defensive
moves. Moreover, ﬁrms often actually invite competitors into their industry
by earning unsustainable margins or by ignoring buyer needs. A number of
the other pitfalls in defensive strategy will become apparent when I discuss
the principles of gaining competitive position in the next chapter.


---PAGE BREAK---

15
Attacking an Industry Leader
When is a leader vulnerable? The market share and proﬁtability of leaders
can be inviting to a ﬁrm contemplating entry or repositioning in an industry.
Yet industry leaders usually enjoy some advantages in defending
themselves, such as reputation, economies of scale, cumulative learning,
and preferred access to suppliers or channels. Moreover, most leaders are
committed to their industry and possess the resources for protracted and
damaging retaliation against challengers. A ﬁrm thus confronts a
formidable and risky task in seeking to gain market position against a
leader.
However, leaders are often vulnerable. NIKE deposed ADIDAS in
athletic shoes. Stouffer’s overcame Banquet and Swanson in frozen dinners.
While successful strategies differ widely from industry to industry, a
common thread runs through them. They all seek to nullify the competitive
advantages of the leader, while avoiding full-scale retaliation. Though
industry structural change sometimes is what makes a leader vulnerable, a
follower or potential entrant that can understand the existing structure better
may be able to overtake a leader as well.
This chapter draws on the entire book to present a framework for
identifying vulnerable industry leaders, and for developing strategies to
attack leaders successfully. I take the point of view of a challenger—a
follower in the leader’s industry or a ﬁrm contemplating entry. The chapter
identiﬁes the stringent conditions that must be satisﬁed in order for a
challenger to attack a leader successfully. Next, I describe the types of
strategies that challengers can employ against leaders, ranging from those


---PAGE BREAK---

that attempt to shift the basis of competition to those that exploit a leader’s
inﬂexibility. I also describe the characteristics of industries and leaders that
signal a leader’s vulnerability. The chapter concludes with a discussion of
some common pitfalls in attacking leaders.
While every chapter in this book has provided suggestions for offensive
strategy, the difﬁcult task of attacking a leader successfully is a way of
drawing them together. Though the chapter is framed in terms of attacking
leaders, the same principles apply in choosing an offensive strategy against
any competitor. Moreover, industry leaders can employ these same concepts
to understand their own vulnerabilities and to develop defensive strategies
more effectively.
Conditions for Attacking a Leader
The cardinal rule in offensive strategy is not to attack head-on with an
imitative strategy, regardless of the challenger’s resources or staying power.
The built-in advantages inherent in a leader’s position will usually
overcome such a challenge and the leader will in all likelihood retaliate
vigorously. The ensuing battle will almost inevitably exhaust the
challenger’s resources before those of the leader.
Procter & Gamble (P&G) has violated this rule in the coffee industry in
challenging General Foods’ Maxwell House brand. In coffee, unlike many
of its other products, P&G’s Folger’s has little or no product superiority
over Maxwell House. P&G also produces and markets Folger’s using the
same value chain as General Foods. Maxwell House has retaliated
vigorously with a broad array of defensive tactics, beneﬁtting from its large
market share and favorable cost position. Folger’s has gained some share,
primarily at the expense of smaller competitors, but has yet to achieve
acceptable proﬁtability. Maxwell House, conversely, has maintained its
proﬁtability and continues to resist Folger’s attempt to gain share
successfully.
Coca-Cola’s sale of its wine operations, called the Wine Spectrum, to
Seagrams is still another manifestation of violating the rules for attacking
leaders. While Coke gained market share against second-tier competitors in
the wine industry, it faced a substantial cost disadvantage to Gallo (see


---PAGE BREAK---

Chapter 3) and had no innovative approach in product or marketing to
counteract it, only heavy spending. Gallo’s strong resistance to Coke meant
that Coke never earned acceptable proﬁts in wine. IBM has faced similar
difﬁculties in copiers. It has achieved little differentiation or cost advantage
and faces stiff resistance from Xerox and Kodak in medium-and high-
volume copiers.
Successfully attacking a leader requires that a challenger meet three
basic conditions:
1.  A sustainable competitive advantage. A challenger must possess a
clear and sustainable competitive advantage over the leader, in either cost or
differentiation. If the advantage is low cost, the ﬁrm can cut price to gain
position against a leader, or earn higher margins at industry average prices
to allow reinvestment in marketing or technology development. Both will
allow a challenger to gain share. Alternatively, if the ﬁrm achieves
differentiation, it will allow premium prices and/or minimize the cost of
marketing or gaining trial against the leader. Either source of competitive
advantage the challenger possesses must be sustainable, using the criteria
for sustainability in Chapters 3 and 4. Sustainability ensures that the
challenger will have a sufﬁciently long period to close the market share gap
before the leader can imitate.
2. Proximity in other activities. A challenger must have some way of
partly or wholly neutralizing the leader’s other inherent advantages. If the
challenger employs a differentiation strategy, it must also partially offset the
leader’s natural cost advantage due to scale, ﬁrst mover advantages, or other
causes. Unless a challenger maintains cost proximity, the leader will use its
cost advantage to neutralize (or leapfrog) the challenger’s differentiation.
Similarly, if the challenger bases its attack on a cost advantage, it must
create an acceptable amount of value for the buyer. Otherwise, the leader
will be able to sustain a price premium over the challenger, yielding the
leader the gross margin needed to retaliate vigorously.
3. Some impediment to leader retaliation. A challenger must also possess
some means for blunting the leader’s retaliation. The leader must be
disinclined or constrained from protracted retaliation against the challenger,


---PAGE BREAK---

either because of the leader’s own circumstances or because of the strategy
chosen by the challenger. Without some impediment to retaliation, an attack
will trigger a response by the leader that can overwhelm a challenger
despite its competitive advantage. A committed leader with resources and
an entrenched position can, through aggressive retaliation, force a
challenger to bear unacceptable economic and organizational costs.
The three conditions for successfully attacking a leader ﬂow directly
from the principles of competitive advantage described in Chapter 1. The
odds of success in gaining position increase with the challenger’s ability to
meet each condition. P&G’s Folger’s coffee, Coca Cola’s Wine Spectrum,
and IBM copiers did not decisively meet any of the conditions, and this
explains their disappointing experiences.
The difﬁculty of meeting the three conditions hinges largely on a leader’s
strategy and its aggressiveness. If a leader is “stuck in the middle” with no
competitive advantage, a challenger can often achieve a competitive
advantage in either cost or differentiation quite easily. In these instances, a
challenger need only recognize the leader’s vulnerability and implement a
strategy that exploits it. On the other hand, attacking a leader that is
aggressively pursuing a cost leadership or differentiation strategy will
usually require that a challenger conceive of a major strategic innovation,
such as developing a new value chain, if it is to mount a successful
challenge.
An example of an industry in which challengers met all three conditions
was corn wet milling. Cargill and Archer-Daniels-Midland (ADM)
successfully entered against CPC International, A. E. Staley, and Standard
Brands, the traditional industry leaders. Cargill and ADM entered the
industry with new continuous process plants that embodied recent changes
in process technology. They also restricted themselves to a narrow product
line, consisting only of higher-volume items, and reduced overhead through
streamlined sales forces. These choices allowed Cargill and ADM to gain a
signiﬁcant cost advantage over traditional producers. At the same time,
Cargill and ADM achieved parity or proximity in differentiation, despite the
efforts at differentiation by the industry leaders. The product itself is a
commodity and many buyers did not value extensive service. In addition,
several factors impeded retaliation by the traditional industry leaders. They


---PAGE BREAK---

preferred not to retaliate against the challengers for fear of upsetting the
industry equilibrium, where rivalry in the industry had traditionally been
characterized as a gentlemen’s club. At the same time, CPC (the number
one ﬁrm) and Standard Brands had embarked on diversiﬁcation programs,
diverting attention and resources from corn milling.
While the corn milling example illustrates a situation where challengers
met all three conditions, meeting one condition very well can offset a
challenger’s inability to meet another. The successful entry of “no frills”
airlines such as People Express and Southwest provides a case where
challengers met two conditions strongly enough to offset barely meeting the
third. Chapter 3 has described how the no-frills carriers achieved a
signiﬁcant cost advantage over the trunks by employing a different value
chain. At the same time, many passengers perceived the no-frills carriers’
product as similar to that offered by trunks, since differentiation in airline
transportation is difﬁcult. However, the no-frills carriers faced a major
threat of retaliation by the trunks as the trunks sought to defend their market
share. Though the trunks hesitated to retaliate because of the high cost of
cutting prices and the fear of eroding their quality images, the threat posed
by the no-frills carriers was so great that retaliation eventually occurred.
Though the no-frills carriers enjoyed only a relatively short period free of
retaliation, their signiﬁcant cost advantage greatly increased the cost of
retaliation for the trunks. Many trunks never attempted to match the prices
of the no-frills carriers.
Federal Express’s successful entry against Emery Air Freight provides
another illustration of a challenger using a strong advantage in one area to
offset a leader’s lingering strengths. Federal Express’s unique delivery
system, utilizing its own planes and a Memphis hub, quickly gave it
differentiation in overnight delivery of small packages. It achieved higher
reliability as well as other forms of differentiation, described in Chapter 4.
While Federal Express would ultimately achieve cost parity or even a cost
advantage, however, the greater scale sensitivity of its value chain meant
that its initial cost position was high relative to Emery’s. This cost
disadvantage and Federal’s heavy debt load made it initially very vulnerable
to retaliation. Emery, however, did not take Federal Express seriously. It
chose not to retaliate until Federal Express had gained enough share to
establish cost proximity. As the Federal Express example illustrates, slow


---PAGE BREAK---

retaliation by the leader buys a challenger time (and resources) to overcome
disadvantages in cost or differentiation. The principle of responding
quickly, described in Chapter 14, proves once again important in
determining a leader’s ability to defend position.
Avenues for Attacking Leaders
Successfully attacking a leader always requires some kind of strategic
insight. A challenger must usually ﬁnd a different strategy in order to
neutralize the leader’s natural advantages, and recognize or create
impediments to leader retaliation. While the strategies that have succeeded
against leaders differ widely from industry to industry, three avenues of
attack emerge as possible:
•  Reconﬁguration. A challenger innovates in the way it performs
activities in the value chain or in the conﬁguration of the entire chain.
• Redeﬁnition. A challenger redeﬁnes its competitive scope compared to
the leader.
•  Pure spending. A challenger buys market position through superior
resources or greater willingness to invest, out of which competitive
advantage grows.
Each of the three avenues changes the rules of competition in an industry
to offset a leader’s advantages and allow the challenger to gain a cost or
differentiation advantage of its own. The three avenues are not mutually
exclusive and have been successfully pursued in tandem. Redeﬁnition of
scope usually requires parallel reconﬁguration of the value chain, for
example. Employing more than one of these avenues of attack generally
raises the odds of success in attacking a leader. The three avenues are
displayed in Figure 15–1.
The avenues of attacking a leader differ along two important dimensions
that are represented in Figure 15–1: the conﬁguration of the challenger’s
value chain compared to the leader and the competitive scope of the
challenger compared to the leader’s. A challenger can employ the same
value chain or one in which it has reconﬁgured individual activities or the


---PAGE BREAK---

entire chain. At the same time, a challenger may compete with the same
scope of activities as the leader or for a wider or narrower scope. As
described in Chapter 2, scope encompasses segment scope within the
industry, degree of integration, geographic scope and industry scope, or the
range of industries in which the ﬁrm competes with a coordinated strategy.
Figure 15–1. Avenues for Attacking Leaders
Pure reconﬁguration involves reconﬁgured activities or ultimately a
signiﬁcantly different value chain, though with the same scope as the leader.
Pure redeﬁnition involves a different scope but the same basic value chain
for competing. Reconﬁguration and redeﬁnition combines both a new chain
and a different scope. Pure spending neither reconﬁgures the value chain
nor redeﬁnes scope, but relies on greater investment by the challenger to
lead to competitive advantage.
Reconﬁguration
Reconﬁguration allows a challenger to compete differently though it is
competing with the same scope of activities as the leader. The challenger
performs individual value activities differently or reconﬁgures the entire
chain to either lower cost or enhance differentiation. Reconﬁguration of the
value chain must be sustainable against imitation if it is to serve as the basis


---PAGE BREAK---

for attacking leaders. Sustainability comes from ﬁrst-mover advantages and
the other sources described in Chapters 3 and 4.1
The ways in which reconﬁguration leads to competitive advantage have
been discussed throughout this book, and can involve any activity in the
value chain. Chapters 3 and 4 described in detail how reconﬁguring the
value chain can lead to cost advantage or differentiation. In wine, for
example, Chapter 3 described how Gallo was able to achieve a signiﬁcant
cost advantage through reconﬁguring value activities in procurement,
blending, bottling, logistics and marketing compared to competitors. In
frozen entrees, similarly, Chapter 4 described how Stouffer’s reconﬁgured
marketing, technology developments, procurements, and broker relations to
achieve and sustain differentiation.
The more value activities that can be reconﬁgured, the greater the
possibility will usually be that the challenger’s competitive advantage over
the leader is sustainable. Reconﬁguring the entire chain, as in the no-frills
airline and Iowa Beef examples described earlier in the book, is usually the
most potent source of advantage against leaders who are often highly
committed to the traditional industry value chain.
Some illustrative examples of reconﬁgurations that have been the basis
of successful attacks on leaders are the following:
Product Changes. A challenger can attack a leader through changing the
product.
SUPERIOR PRODUCT PERFORMANCE OR FEATURES. Products with attributes
that are valuable to buyers grow out of an understanding of the buyer’s
value chain (Chapter 4). P&G’s Charmin bathroom tissue was softer and
more absorbent than Scott Paper’s product, which allowed P&G to emerge
as a leader. Similarly, CooperVision’s and Barnes-Hind/Hydrocurve’s (a
Revlon division) extended-wear soft contact lenses provided the vehicle for
attacking Bausch and Lomb.
LOW-COST PRODUCT DESIGN. Chapter 3 describes how product design can
affect relative cost position. Canon’s NP200 copier, using toner projection
development technology, required many fewer parts than competitors’


---PAGE BREAK---

machines. This low-cost design allowed Canon to improve position
signiﬁcantly in small plain paper copiers.
Outbound Logistics and Service Changes. A challenger can attack a
leader through changing such things as product support, after-sale service,
order processing, or physical distribution.
MORE 
EFFICIENT 
LOGISTICAL 
SYSTEM. Chapter 3 described how
opportunities to improve relative cost position in the logistical system can
be analyzed. Relative cost position can sometimes be signiﬁcantly reduced
by reconﬁguring its value activities as Federal Express did.
MORE RESPONSIVE AFTER-SALE SUPPORT. Chapter 4 showed how to assess
the parameters of service that are most valuable to buyers. A challenger can
create differentiation if it reconﬁgures the value chain to make it more
responsive in terms of response to buyer inquiries, documentation, etc.
Vetco, for example, a division of Combustion Engineering that sells
offshore oil drilling equipment, has gained position signiﬁcantly through
providing excellent training materials and other after-sale support to help its
buyers master the complex underwater drilling task.
ENHANCED ORDER PROCESSING. Chapter 4 described how possible
enhancements to the delivery system can be identiﬁed and evaluated, and
create differentiation. Enhancements include such things as performing new
functions like controlling buyer inventory—this, in effect, takes over
activities in the buyer’s value chain. Several wholesaling ﬁrms, for example,
have created differentiation by allowing online ordering to take over
inventory management for their retail customers. McKesson, for example,
has substantially improved its position through its 3PM order processing
system for distributing pharmaceuticals. The system allows pharmacists to
order directly and provides them other valuable information.
Marketing Changes. Challengers have employed innovations in
marketing value activities to launch successful attacks against leaders in
many industries. Some of the most common innovations include:


---PAGE BREAK---

INCREASED SPENDING IN AN UNDERMARKETED INDUSTRY. Challengers can
attack a leader by escalating marketing spending. In mustard, frozen
entrees, and frozen potatoes, for example, Grey Poupon, Stouffer’s, and
Ore-Ida respectively have succeeded or are now undertaking to raise the
traditional rates of advertising spending. Higher spending levels allow ﬁrms
to signal value better, gaining high levels of brand recognition and premium
prices.
NEW POSITIONING. A challenger can conceive of a new way to position a
product in order to attack a leader. Stouffer’s repositioning of frozen entrees
as a gourmet item was one of the key elements of its ascendancy, as
discussed in Chapter 4.
NEW TYPE OF SALES ORGANIZATION. A new type of sales organization,
perhaps with a different type of salesperson, can sometimes be the basis of a
successful attack on a leader. Crown Cork and Seal’s technically proﬁcient
sales force, reorganized to sell the complete line of Crown’s cans, bottle
caps, and packaging machinery to canners, was one of the reasons for
Crown’s success against American Can and Continental Can.
Operations Changes. Changes in operation’s value activities that lower
costs or enhance differentiation have provided the basis for many successful
attacks on leaders. As was discussed in Chapter 3, Iowa Beef pioneered an
entirely new value chain in meat packing. Cargill and ADM employed new
continuous process plants to enter corn wet milling. A modiﬁed production
process that enhanced quality also contributed to Ore-Ida’s success in
frozen potatoes. Sometimes entirely new technologies emerge that change
the process, or a subtechnology changes that allows an old process
technology to be reinvigorated (Chapter 5).
Downstream Reconﬁguration. Employing channels neglected by the
leader or preemptively concentrating on emerging channels have served as
avenues of attack against industry leaders. Some examples of downstream
innovations include:


---PAGE BREAK---

PIONEER A NEW CHANNEL. Timex opened up the drug store and mass
merchandisers as channels for watches in the 1950s, allowing it to gain a
leadership position in the industry despite the entrenched position of Bulova
and the Swiss watchmakers. The traditional leaders had employed the
jewelry store channel.
PREEMPT AN EMERGING CHANNEL. Richardson-Vicks pioneered the sale of
quality skin care products in supermarkets with its Oil of Olay product line.
Supermarkets were an emerging channel for this type of product, and
Richardson-Vicks gained substantial ﬁrst-mover advantages that have
allowed Oil of Olay to remain a leader.
GO DIRECT. YKK, the Japanese zipper company, took on Talon
successfully by bypassing wholesalers and selling directly to apparel
companies.
The most successful attacks on leaders often involve more than one
innovation in the value chain. Stouffer’s combined a product change with
several signiﬁcant marketing innovations. Cargill and ADM combined a
process change with product line and marketing changes. Timex combined
a new channel with low-cost manufacturing technology and unprecedented
TV advertising. Competitive advantage that is sustainable usually stems
from multiple sources, as Chapters 3 and 4 have illustrated.
Structural changes often create the opportunity for reconﬁguring of the
value chain. Timex’s attack on the Swiss exploited the emergence of TV
and mass distribution channels, in addition to wartime improvements in
manufacturing technology. At the same time, growth in buyer income and
shifting attitudes made a watch a product purchased for everyday use. In
many industries, however, reconﬁguration hinges on rethinking what has
been done rather than exploiting external changes. Ultimately, however,
reconﬁguring the value chain is a creative act that is difﬁcult to achieve
routinely or predictably. Industry analysis, value chain analysis, technology
analysis, industry scenarios, and other concepts in this book can help
identify possibilities for reconﬁguration.


---PAGE BREAK---

Redeﬁnition
The second broad avenue for attacking a leader rests on redeﬁning the
scope of competition. Broadening scope may allow the achievement of
interrelationships or the beneﬁts of integration, while narrowing scope can
allow the tailoring of the value chain to a particular target. As I have
discussed extensively in earlier chapters, particularly Chapters 2, 7, 9, and
12, the scope of a ﬁrm’s activities can greatly inﬂuence competitive
advantage. A challenger can change competitive scope in four ways which
reﬂect the four types of scope. These four modes of redeﬁnition are not
mutually exclusive:
•  Focus within the Industry. Narrowing the basis of competition to a
segment rather than across the board.
•  Integration or De-integration. Widening or narrowing the range of
activities performed in-house.
• Geographic Redeﬁnition. Broadening the basis of competition from a
region or country to worldwide, or vice versa.
• Horizontal Strategy. Broadening the basis of competition from a single
industry to related industries.
FOCUS
Successful focus strategies against leaders have taken all the forms
described in Chapter 7:
• Buyer focus. Motel ﬁrms such as La Quinta have focused on middle-
level business travellers and created a new low-cost value chain to
meet their particular needs.
• Product focus. Canon, Ricoh, and Savin focused on small, plain paper
copiers to challenge Xerox.
• Channel focus. Stihl focused on serving buyers only through servicing
dealers to succeed against Homelite and McCulloch in chain saws.
A focus strategy often has the advantage of being difﬁcult for a leader to
retaliate against without compromising its own strategy. This delays leader


---PAGE BREAK---

retaliation until the challenger has gained a secure foothold in the industry.
In addition, focus strategies to attack leaders can serve as part of sequencing
strategies.2 In a sequencing strategy, the challenger initially attacks a leader
through focus, and then broadens its scope over time to compete across-the-
board with the leader. Japanese producers have employed this strategy in
such industries as TV sets and motorcycles. In each instance, they began at
the low end of the product range and gradually broadened their lines. NIKE
also used this approach against ADIDAS in running shoes, beginning with a
focus on the premium segment and then leveraging the reputation gained
there to broaden its line downward. Sequencing strategies rest on the
presence of segment interrelationships (Chapter 7) that allow a ﬁrm in one
segment to gain competitive advantages in others. Sequencing has the added
advantage of not provoking the leader to retaliate early in the process.
INTEGRATION OR DE-INTEGRATION
A challenger may employ integration or deintegration as a means of
attacking a leader. Backward or forward integration can sometimes lower
cost or enhance differentiation.3 In the wine industry, for example, Gallo’s
integration in bottles is an important part of its cost advantage. Migros, the
leading Swiss food retailer, owes a part of its dramatic ascendancy in its
industry to backward integration into products and packaging. Changing
circumstances may also make deintegration a means of gaining competitive
advantage against a leader who is integrated.
GEOGRAPHIC REDEFINITION
A leader operating in one or a few countries may sometimes be attacked
successfully with a regional or global strategy.4 The challenger widens the
geographic boundaries of the market to gain cost or differentiation
advantages through geographic interrelationships. A global strategy, that
integrates and coordinates value activities in many countries, may allow
economies of scale in production or product development, create the ability
to serve worldwide buyers better, and other advantages I have described
elsewhere. Globalization of an industry has been an important part of
successful strategies of challengers in such industries as autos (Toyota and


---PAGE BREAK---

Nissan versus General Motors), motorcycles, lift trucks, TV sets, and
various types of medical equipment.
Where an industry is multidomestic, however, local country differences
imply that a global strategy is counterproductive. Here a leader with a
global strategy is vulnerable to a challenger who tailors its strategy on a
country-by-country basis. Castrol has been successful in automotive motor
oil with such an approach. Even within global industries there may also be
segments where a country-centered strategy can be sustainable though other
segments require a global strategy. In both cases, de-globalization can be
the route to attacking a leader.
In many industries, ﬁrms have concentrated on a particular city or area of
a country to succeed against national or even global competitors. Where
competitors are local, however, competitive advantage may come from
taking a national approach. Gannett’s USA Today is attempting this in
newspapers.
HORIZONTAL STRATEGY
Challengers may exploit interrelationships among business units as
another means of broadening the scope of competition. As Chapters 9 and
10 discussed in detail, interrelationships may lead to a competitive
advantage for a ﬁrm operating in related industries. A challenger with a
horizontal strategy encompassing related industries may successfully attack
a leader operating in a narrower or different range of industries. In personal
computers, for example, IBM exploited interrelationships with its other
business units to overwhelm early leaders such as Apple and Tandy.
Interrelationships also serve as a possible substitute for market share in any
one industry and neutralize a leader’s competitive advantage.
A particular form of interrelationship, complementary products, has been
discussed in Chapter 12. Bundling can create competitive advantage in
some industries, while unbundling can do so in others. Merrill Lynch’s
CMA, a bundled product combining previously separate ﬁnancial services,
allowed Merrill to gain signiﬁcantly vis-à-vis other broad line ﬁnancial
services ﬁrms.
MULTIPLE REDEFINITIONS


---PAGE BREAK---

The four modes of redeﬁnition are not mutually exclusive. A challenger
can globalize its strategy and pursue interrelationships at the same time, as
Matsushita has done in consumer electronics. Matsushita employs shared
manufacturing, distribution channels, and other value activities across its
many consumer electronics products. It also integrates and coordinates its
strategy worldwide. The strategy has overwhelmed single-product, single-
country competitors.
A challenger can also combine narrow scope in one dimension with
broad scope in another. A challenger can attack a leader by focusing on a
segment (scope within an industry) at the same time as it competes globally
(geographic scope). A ﬁrm may also focus within an industry but exploit
interrelationships with related industries, another example of combining
broad and narrow scope. Redeﬁning competitive scope simultaneously in
several ways has proven to be a powerful source of competitive advantage,
because the competitive advantage from each redeﬁnition cumulates.
The scope diagrams in Figure 15–2 illustrate several dimensions of
scope schematically. They suggest how challengers should examine each
dimension of scope to see if it might be a means of attacking a leader. A
leader’s scope is plotted, and then alternative redeﬁnitions (narrower or
broader or both) are probed to see if they might create a signiﬁcant
competitive advantage for a challenger. The top diagram, for example,
represents the situation in automobiles in the 1970’s. General Motors (GM)
competed with a broadly targeted strategy involving a full range of models.
While GM competed internationally as well as in the U.S., its strategy was
essentially country-centered and global coordination was minimal. Toyota
and Nissan chose to focus instead on small cars, and employed coordinated
global strategies. They gained a substantial competitive advantage over GM
in the process.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 15–2. Alternate Scope of Leader and Challenger Strategies
Figure 15–3 uses the scope diagram to illustrate the pattern of
competition in the U.S. newspaper industry. The traditional strategy in the
industry has been to serve a single city with a broad range of news, even
though a number of city papers might be part of the same chain. The Wall
Street Journal and to a lesser extent the New York Times have adopted
national strategies aimed at segments of the market. The Wall Street Journal
has recently embarked on a partial global strategy involving European and
Asian editions. At the same time, USA Today is an attempt to sell a broad-
based daily newspaper nationwide, appealing to national advertisers. Both
USA Today and the Wall Street Journal’s strategies have been made possible
by modern communications and computer typesetting and printing


---PAGE BREAK---

technology. In the newspaper industry, then, redeﬁning scope has been a
vital element in gaining competitive position.
Figure 15–3. Alternative Scope in Newspapers
Many of the examples of redeﬁnition that have been described illustrate
how redeﬁnition and reconﬁguration usually go together. The Wall Street
Journal would not have been so successful if it had not adapted its value
chain to a national and then global strategy. Thus a ﬁrm must view
redeﬁnition and reconﬁguration as complementary ways to attack an
industry leader.
Pure Spending
The ﬁnal and riskiest way to attack a leader is through pure spending,
without reconﬁguration or redeﬁnition. Pure spending involves investment
to buy market share, cumulative volume, or brand identiﬁcation through low
pricing, heavy advertising, and so on. By making sufﬁcient investment, a
challenger seeks to gain enough market share, volume, or reputation to take
the lead in relative cost position or differentiation. The challenger does not
do anything differently or better than the leader, but simply overwhelms the
leader with resources or with a greater willingness to invest.


---PAGE BREAK---

This approach to offsetting a leader’s advantage is often costly and
frequently fails. Leaders typically have sufﬁcient ﬁnancial resources to
counteract such a strategy, when coupled with their advantages in cost or
differentiation. Leaders also are usually commited enough to be willing to
spend heavily to defend position. A particularly vivid example of the risks
of pure spending is the diversiﬁcation of oil companies into fertilizer and
chemicals. Despite enormous ﬁnancial resources, their lack of a competitive
advantage gained through reconﬁguration or redeﬁnition has led to a
generally dismal track record.
The success of pure spending rests on superior access to ﬁnancial
resources by the challenger, or on unwillingness by the leader to invest in
the industry. Even a well-ﬁnanced leader may be complacent, have a higher
hurdle rate, have other priorities, or be under corporate pressure to generate
cash. Pure spending has proven most successful in industries where leaders
are small and undercapitalized. These leaders may not be able to afford to
mount sufﬁcient retaliation to discourage the challenger, despite possessing
a competitive advantage.
Pure spending, by itself, remains the least preferred approach for
attacking leaders. However, superior willingness to invest is often an
important supplement to strategies based on reconﬁguration or redeﬁnition.
In cans, for example, Crown Cork invested heavily while American and
Continental were harvesting, accelerating the process by which Crown
gained a cost advantage through having more modern equipment.
Alliances To Attack Leaders
A challenger may need to form an alliance to obtain the necessary
resources, technology, market access, or other strengths to attack an
industry leader. Alliances can be a means of achieving reconﬁguration,
redeﬁnition or pure spending, though in-and-of-themselves they are no
guarantee of success. Alliances of various types have played important roles
in many successful attacks against leaders. The two broad forms of alliances
are the following:


---PAGE BREAK---

• Acquisition. A ﬁrm either acquires another ﬁrm (or ﬁrms) or is itself
acquired.
•  Coalitions. A ﬁrm joins forces with another ﬁrm without outright
merger, through such means as licensing, joint ventures, and supply
agreements.5
Acquisitions provide a way to broaden a ﬁrm’s scope through adding
positions in new segments, positions in new geographic areas, greater
integration, or a beachhead in a new related industry. IVECO, which
merged a number of European truck builders, has produced a greatly
strengthened competitor. Acquisitions can also play a key role in
reconﬁguration or pure spending strategies. Acquisitions can allow two
organizations to combine resources and skills in such a way that
reconﬁguration or pure spending is possible.
Coalitions also bring together skills and resources of ﬁrms in ways that
may allow reconﬁguration, redeﬁnition, or pure spending. Japanese TV set
producers licensed RCA’s color TV technology, providing an important
starting point for their own product and process innovations, for example.
Similarly, the coalition that led to Airbus Industries has made a world-class
competitor out of a group of struggling national ﬁrms. Coalitions are also
frequently pursued in tandem with a ﬁrm’s own activities to broaden scope.
In the valve industry, for example, WKM sells only in the U.S. and uses
licensees elsewhere in the world.
Coalitions can also play a more subtle role in attacking leaders.
Challengers sometimes form coalitions with leaders that later provide the
basis for attacking the leader, as discussed in Chapter 5. Licensing
technology from a leader, or joint ventures in marketing or manufacturing,
may allow a challenger to learn a leader’s strengths, making it possible to
leapfrog. A number of Japanese ﬁrms have licensed foreign technology
from leaders which they later improved.
Acquisitions and coalitions are not without their problems, however.
Acquisitions are difﬁcult to integrate, and coordination among coalition
partners can prove troublesome. In copiers, for example, Canon has
beneﬁtted from the problems Xerox has had in coordinating with its joint
venture partners Rank Xerox and, through Rank Xerox, Fuji Xerox.


---PAGE BREAK---

Canon’s greater global coordination leads to some of its competitive
advantages.
Impediments to Leader Retaliation
A successful challenger must also discover or create impediments to
leader retaliation. This serves to blunt the natural advantages of the leader
and reduces the cost of mounting an attack. A variety of factors can inhibit
a leader’s retaliation to a challenger:6
Mixed Motives. If a challenger’s strategy creates mixed motives for a
leader, it will inhibit the leader’s ability to retaliate. A leader that must
undermine its past strategy to match or respond to the challenger faces
mixed motives. A leader that has built its competitive advantage on service,
for example, will invalidate its hard-won reputation by responding to a
challenger’s strategy that makes service unnecessary. The leader may
choose instead to maintain its past strategy and suffer a market share loss.
Another case is provided by the introduction of the low-priced, throw-away
pen by BIC Corporation, which created mixed motives for Gillette’s
Papermate division. Papermate had patiently developed a brand image of
quality. Matching the BIC strategy would undermine this image, and
Papermate ultimately had to introduce an entirely new brand (Write
Brothers) to counter BIC.
Any interrelationships between the leader and other business units in its
parent company may also serve as the basis for mixed motives, because
interrelationships can involve a cost of inﬂexibility (Chapter 9).
Interrelationships can constrain the way a leader can respond without
hurting its sister business units. Mixed motives can also arise when a leader
is employing a bundled strategy, as described in Chapter 12. A leader may
allow a challenger to gain a modest share rather than unbundle and thereby
cause the entire industry to unbundle.
High Leader Response Costs. A leader may refrain from retaliation if the
challenger’s strategy inﬂicts high response costs on the leader. A leader’s
large market share may inhibit it from costly retaliatory actions such as
across-the-board price cuts and warranty increases, for example. Response


---PAGE BREAK---

costs can also be high when a leader has inappropriate or outdated facilities,
equipment, or labor contracts. Chapter 14 has discussed how the cost of
defensive tactics can be assessed.
Different Financial Priorities. A leader with different ﬁnancial priorities
may not respond to a challenger’s attack. A leader emphasizing short-term
proﬁts, for example, will give up share to a challenger willing to forgo
them. Similarly, a leader desiring high cash ﬂow may not retaliate if
retaliation demands heavy reinvestment. Tampax provides an example of a
leader whose different ﬁnancial priorities invited attack. Maintaining
extraordinary returns in feminine hygiene products seems to have become a
preoccupation inside Tampax, and caused it to respond very little to
repeated attacks until recently. Differences in ﬁnancial priorities also
underlie the success of many foreign ﬁrms against U.S. leaders.
Portfolio Constraints. A leader may not retaliate if its commitment or
attention is directed to other industries. Corporate parents can constrain a
business unit’s resources or dictate its goals. For example, a leader treated
as a cash generator by its parent company may not get the resources to fend
off a challenger’s attack. Similarly, a leader actively pursuing diversiﬁcation
may be diverted from closely monitoring and defending its core industry.
Crown Cork and Seal’s success against American Can and Continental Can,
for example, is partly due to these two leaders’ attempts to diversify into
other forms of packaging.
Regulatory Pressure. A leader may not retaliate if it believes itself to be
constrained from taking actions because of regulatory pressure. Antitrust
scrutiny, safety standards, pollution regulations, and many other types of
regulation can constrain leader responses. Some observers believe that
pressures on the franchise bottler system emanating from Washington
distracted Coca-Cola from responding to Pepsi’s challenge, and that
regulatory fears are inhibiting ATT as it faces new competition today.
Blind Spots. A leader can suffer from faulty assumptions, or blind spots,
in interpreting industry conditions. If a leader has false perceptions of the
true needs of buyers or the signiﬁcance of an industry change, for example,


---PAGE BREAK---

a challenger may gain position by moving before the leader does. Moreover,
the leader may well perceive the actions of the challenger as inappropriate
and nonthreatening, until the challenger has gained enough market position
to become established.
Blind spots have been important to the success of many challengers.
Harley Davidson misperceived the need for a small motorcycle and watched
while Honda became established. Xerox seems to have misunderstood the
importance of small copiers, and Zenith clung to handcrafted TV sets
despite improvements in design and automated production technology.
Careful analysis of competitor assumptions can reveal such blind spots.
Incorrect Pricing. A leader may set prices based on average cost, rather
than on the cost of delivering a given product to a given buyer. If a
challenger targets the overpriced products/buyers and offers lower prices,
the leader may well be slow to recognize its true costs and be unwilling to
reduce its gross margins. Leaders often respond to such strategies by
retreating from one segment after another until the challenger emerges as
the leader.
Part of a Gentlemen’s Game. A leader may respond slowly if rivalry in
its industry has been a gentlemen’s game. A leader in such industries often
feels constrained from retaliating against a challenger for fear of upsetting
its relationship with other rivals. Coca-Cola’s long history as a statesman in
the soft drink industry, where ﬁrms followed established rules, seems to
have contributed to its less-than-vigorous retaliation against Pepsi until
recently.
The impediments to leader retaliation result from a variety of different
underlying causes. Some impediments rest on tangible factors such as
mixed motives or resource allocation priorities, while others rest on
perceptual errors by the leader, as in the case of blind spots and incorrect
pricing. A challenger’s odds of success are greatest when tangible
impediments to leader retaliation exist. Multiple impediments compound
the leader’s problem. In responding to Timex, for example, Swiss watch
ﬁrms had a blind spot about the saleability of Timex’s disposable, everyday
watch. They also had high response costs in matching Timex’s automated


---PAGE BREAK---

facilities given the labor intensity of Swiss watch factories, as well as mixed
motives in alienating jewelers if they followed Timex into the drug store
channel.
Reconﬁguration 
and 
redeﬁnition 
strategies 
frequently 
exploit
impediments to leader retaliation. They often create mixed motives, high
response costs, or are incorrectly perceived by leaders. One of the
difﬁculties with the pure spending strategy, however, is that it is less likely
to be associated with impediments to leader retaliation than the other two
avenues of attack. Pure spending works best where a leader has different
ﬁnancial priorities and is unwilling to match the challenger’s investment.
Signals of Leader Vulnerability
The preceding discussion suggests a variety of signals that can indicate
that a leader is vulnerable. These fall into two groups—industry signals and
signals based on leader traits.
Industry Signals
Structural change provides perhaps the strongest signal that an industry
leader might be vulnerable. Structural change emanating from outside an
industry is a particularly strong indication of leader vulnerability, since
entrenched leaders often misinterpret it.
Some important industry signals of leader vulnerability include:
Discontinuous Technological Change. Discontinuous technological
change raises the possibility that a leader’s competitive advantage can be
circumvented, as discussed in Chapter 5. In tires, for example, the radial tire
provided the discontinuity that allowed Michelin to challenge Goodyear and
Firestone. In typewriters, electronics proved the undoing of Underwood and
is threatening SCM. It is more likely that the leader will be favorably
positioned to respond to continuous technological change than the
challenger, because of its scale economies or cumulative learning.


---PAGE BREAK---

Buyer Changes. Any changes in the buyer’s value chain, for whatever
reason, may signal new opportunities for differentiation, new channels,
unbundling, or other opportunities. An increasing number of women in the
workforce, for example, created opportunities to challenge leaders in many
industries producing women’s or household products. New buyer segments
are also a sign of opportunity because the leader may not be well placed to
serve them.
Changing Channels. The emergence of new channels provides a
potential opportunity to attack a leader dominant in existing channels. The
shift of sales of many consumer goods toward supermarkets, for example,
has created the conditions for attacking a number of leaders.
Shifting Input Costs or Quality. Shifts in the quality or cost of signiﬁcant
inputs may signal an opportunity for a challenger to gain a cost advantage
through a new production process, locking up new sources of raw materials,
or reengineering product designs to reduce or alter material content. The
dramatic rise in power costs, for example, is providing opportunities for
repositioning in aluminum smelting.
Gentlemen’s Game. As discussed earlier, an industry with a long history
of stability may signal that a leader has played the role of statesman and
may retaliate slowly.
Leader Signals
The following traits of industry leaders are signs of possible
vulnerability:
Stuck in the Middle. A leader that has become stuck in the middle
(lacking cost leadership or differentiation vis-à-vis other incumbents)
provides an inviting target. The challenger may ﬁnd it easy to meet the three
conditions outlined at the beginning of this chapter.
Unhappy Buyers. A leader with unhappy buyers is often vulnerable.
Unhappy buyers suggest that the leader has exercised its bargaining power


---PAGE BREAK---

or that leader personnel have developed an attitude of arrogance based on
past success. Unhappy buyers may actively encourage and support a
challenger.
Pioneer of Current Industry Technology. A leader who pioneered the
current generation of industry technology may be reluctant to embrace the
next one and may also be inﬂexible because of its investment in the current
technology. Ford seems to have suffered from this problem in the early
years of the auto industry.
Very High Proﬁtability. A leader making extraordinary proﬁts may
provide an umbrella for a challenger, if high proﬁts more than offset the
costs of attack. Very proﬁtable leaders can also be reluctant to diminish
their proﬁts to retaliate. Moreover, extraordinary returns may also signal
that a leader might yield share in less proﬁtable parts of the product line,
providing opportunities for focus by challengers.
History of Regulatory Problems. A leader with a history of regulatory
problems, such as antitrust, may be actually constrained from vigorous
retaliation or believe itself to be.
Weak Performer in the Parent Company Portfolio. A leader perceived as
a weak performer by its parent company may well not get the capital to
keep up with the latest technological change, or have sufﬁcient discretion
over proﬁtability to retaliate vigorously against challengers.
Attacking Leaders and Industry Structure
A ﬁnal test for attacking a leader is to weigh the effect on overall
industry structure. A challenger’s attack on a leader is unwise if it destroys
industry structure. Challengers must ﬁnd a new way of competing
compared to the leader’s to succeed. However, the new way of competing,
in some cases, may undercut possibilities for differentiation, lower entry
barriers, or have other adverse structural effects as described in Chapter 1.
A closely related risk is where a challenger gains market share but does not
gain a clear advantage over the leader, and the leader and the challenger are


---PAGE BREAK---

thus relatively balanced in competitive position. This may guarantee a long
period of instability in the industry. The resulting war can be protracted and
expensive for both sides, creating a situation where no ﬁrm has any
competitive advantage.
It is also important to recognize that some leaders are “good” leaders, as
was discussed in Chapter 6. Attacking a good leader may worsen, not
improve, a challenger’s proﬁtability if the umbrella provided by the good
leader is lost in the process. In such cases a challenger should refrain from
attacking the leader at all. Instead, it should choose another industry as a
vehicle for growth.


---PAGE BREAK---

About the Author
MICHAEL E. PORTER, one of the world’s leading authorities on competitive
strategy and international competitiveness, is the C. Roland Christensen
Professor of Business Administration at the Harvard Business School. In
1983, Professor Porter was appointed to President Reagan’s Commission on
Industrial Competitiveness, the initiative that triggered the competitiveness
debate in America. He serves as an advisor to heads of state, governors,
mayors, and CEOs throughout the world. The recipient of the Wells Prize in
Economics, the Adam Smith Award, three McKinsey Awards, and honorary
doctorates from the Stockholm School of Economics and six other
universities, Porter is the author of fourteen books, among them
Competitive Strategy, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, and Cases in
Competitive Strategy, all published by The Free Press. He lives in
Brookline, Massachusetts.


---PAGE BREAK---

Books by Michael E. Porter
The Competitive Advantage of Nations (1990)
Cases in Competitive Strategy (1982)
Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors
(1980)
Competition in the Open Economy (with R.E. Caves and A.M. Spence)
(1980)
Interbrand Choice, Strategy and Bilateral Market Power (1976)


---PAGE BREAK---

We hope you enjoyed reading this Free Press eBook.
Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books from
Free Press and Simon & Schuster.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com


---PAGE BREAK---

1 The literature on re-engineering employs the term processes. Sometimes it is a synonym for
activities. Sometimes it refers to activities or sets of activities that cut across organizational units. In
any case, however, the essential notion is the same—both strategic and operational issues are best
understood at the activity level.
2 Adam Brandenburger and Barry Nalebuff, in Co-opetition (Currency/Doubleday, New York, 1996),
have written a fascinating book that explores the role of complements more deeply.
3 These notions were developed further in M. E. Porter, “From Competitive Advantage to Corporate
Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, May-June 1987.
4 M.E. Porter (ed.), Competition in Global Industries, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 1986.
5 M.E. Porter, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, The Free Press, New York, 1990. Several
articles, including a recent one, have combined the role of location and the advantages of a global
network into an integrated view of competing across nations or other locations. See M.E. Porter,
“Competing Across Locations: Enhancing Competitive Advantage through a Global Strategy” in
Michael Porter on Competition, Harvard Business School Press, forthcoming.
6 The ideas were ﬁrst described in M.E. Porter, “What is Strategy?,” Harvard Business Review,
November-December 1996.


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1Many strategic planning concepts have ignored industry attractiveness and stressed the pursuit of
market share, often a recipe for pyrrhic victories. The winner in a ﬁght for share in an unattractive
industry may not be proﬁtable, and the ﬁght itself may make industry structure worse or erode the
winner’s proﬁtability. Other planning concepts associate stalemates, or inability to get ahead of
competitors, with unattractive proﬁts. In fact, stalemates can be quite proﬁtable in attractive
industries.
2These concepts apply equally to products and services. I will use the term “product” in the generic
sense throughout this book to refer to both product and service industries.
3Industry structure is discussed in detail in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 1.
4Generic products pose the same risks to many consumer good industries.
5Without a sustainable competitive advantage, above-average performance is usually a sign of
harvesting.
6Parity implies either an identical product offering to competitors, or a different combination of
product attributes that is equally preferred by buyers.
7While the cost leader will be the most proﬁtable, it is not necessary to be the cost leader to sustain
above-average returns in commodity industries where there are limited opportunities to build
efﬁcient capacity. A ﬁrm that is in the lowest quartile of costs though not the cost leader will usually
still be an above-average performer. Such a situation exists in the aluminum industry, where the
ability to add low-cost capacity is limited by access to low-cost power, bauxite, and infrastructure.
8Overall differentiation and differentiation focus are perhaps the most often confused strategies in
practice. The difference is that the overall differentiator bases its strategy on widely valued
attributes (e.g., IBM in computers), while the differentiation focuser looks for segments with special
needs and meets them better (e.g., Cray Research in computers).
9This example is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
10Competitive Strategy, Chapter 8, describes the processes that drive industry structural change.
11A more detailed review of the differing skills required by each generic strategy is given in
Competitive Strategy, Chapter 2, pp. 40–41.


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1The business system concept, developed by McKinsey and Company, captures the idea that a ﬁrm is
a series of functions (e.g., R&D, manufacturing, marketing, channels), and that analyzing how each
is performed relative to competitors can provide useful insights. McKinsey also stresses the power
of redeﬁning the business system to gain competitive advantage, an important idea. The business
system concept addresses broad functions rather than activities, however, and does not distinguish
among types of activities or show how they are related. The concept is also not linked speciﬁcally to
competitive advantage nor to competitive scope. The most complete descriptions of the business
system concept are Gluck (1980) and Bauron (1981). See also Bower (1973).
2The notion of a strategic business unit as the relevant entity for strategy formulation is well
accepted, and grows out of work by many scholars and consultants. Business units are often poorly
deﬁned, however, a problem exposed by value chain analysis to which I will return below.
3Economists have characterized the ﬁrm as having a production function that deﬁnes how inputs are
converted into outputs. The value chain is a theory of the ﬁrm that views the ﬁrm as being a
collection of discrete but related production functions, if production functions are deﬁned as
activities. The value chain formulation focuses on how these activities create value and what
determines their cost, giving the ﬁrm considerable latitude in determining how activities are
conﬁgured and combined.
4There may also be infrastructure activities at the group or sector level.
5For a discussion of some of the structural issues see Competitive Strategy, Chapters 1 and 6.
6Unlike a ﬁrm, which can measure value in terms of price or proﬁt, a consumer’s measure of value is
complex and relates to the satisfaction of needs. See Chapter 4.
7The same principles that determine a ﬁrm’s differentiation also can be used to analyze the threat of
substitution, as I discuss in Chapter 8.
8The term scope of the ﬁrm is used in economic theory to reﬂect the boundary between the activities
a ﬁrm performs internally and those it obtains in market transactions—e.g., vertical integration (see,
for example, Coase [1937, 1972]). Some recent work has begun to examine the extent of a ﬁrm’s
diversiﬁcation as an issue in scope (see Teece [1980]). Competitive scope is used here to refer to a
broader conception of the scope of a ﬁrm’s activities, encompassing industry segment coverage,
integration, geographic markets served, and coordinated competition in related industries.
9Interrelationships among value chains serving different segments, geographic areas and related
industries are analytically the same. See Chapters 7 and 9.
10See Porter (1985).
11Sorter, op. cit. See also Porter, Fuller, and Rawlinson (1984).
12For the seminal work see Lawrence and Lorsch (1967).


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1Including when a competitor shares the activity with related business units and the ﬁrm does not.
See Chapter 9.
2If assets are assigned by some measure of asset value, a capital charge will still be required to
evaluate any tradeoffs with operating costs that are present.
3Scale is not the same as market share. Depending on the relevant measure of scale, the appropriate
deﬁnition of market share that will serve as a proxy for scale will differ markedly.
4The term “experience” is often used to describe cost reduction over time, reﬂecting the wide
possibilities for learning. The “experience curve” mixes both learning and economies of scale,
however, which are very different cost drivers. I use the term learning to encompass all types of cost
reduction that result from improving know-how and procedures independent of scale.
5A 15 percent reduction in costs with a doubling of cumulative volume represents the median of a
large number of academic studies. This average masks a wide variation in learning rates among
activities, however. For an insightful treatment of learning, see Pankaj Ghemawat (1984).
6Even if learning cannot be kept proprietary, however, there may be ﬁrst-mover advantages to
pioneering certain types of learning. See below and Chapter 5.
7The popular measure of the rate of learning, cumulative ﬁrm volume, has the beneﬁt of simplicity.
However, this measure obscures differential rates of learning in value activities and is not an
appropriate proxy for the rate of learning in many activities.
8I have described the relationship between integration and competitive advantage in detail in
Competitive Strategy, Chapter 14.
9Bundling of complementary products is discussed in detail in Chapter 12.
10For a description of the industry structural factors see Chapter 1 and Competitive Strategy, Chapter
6.
11The same principles apply to assessing the costs of potential competitors.
12The use of competitors to reduce volume ﬂuctuation as well as for other strategic purposes is
discussed in Chapter 6.
13Chapter 5 describes in some detail how technology can affect competition.
14For a general description of Iowa Beef, see Stuart (1981).
15See Chapter 14, which discusses defensive strategy.
16Deliberate cross subsidy can be strategically justiﬁed in some industries. See Chapter 12.
17Opportunities for exploiting cross subsidy to attack market leaders will be discussed in Chapter 15.


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1Hereafter I will use the term price premium to refer to all of these beneﬁts of differentiation.
2The stream of research in demand theory pioneered by Lancaster sees a product as a bundle of
attributes that the buyer desires. See Lancaster (1979) for a recent summary. This chapter shows
how valuable attributes grow out of a buyer’s value chain, how product attributes actually create
buyer value, and how valuable attributes relate to the activities performed by a ﬁrm.
3In identifying new or better products, the literature in marketing tends to focus on the physical
product and assume the attributes of the product that are desired are known (for a survey see
Shocker and Srinivasan [1979]). I focus here on what makes attributes valuable to buyers, and how
the ﬁrm’s total activities can create value.
4This same analysis determines the relative value of a substitute product, discussed in Chapter 8. See
Chapter 8 for further examples of how ﬁrms actually lower buyer costs or raise buyer performance.
5Lowering buyer risk of failure is equivalent to lowering buyer cost.
6The ways to lower the buyer’s costs are discussed further in Chapter 8, in the parallel case of one
product substituting for another. Forbis and Mehta (1979) also contains a useful discussion of some
of the issues in lowering buyer cost.
7Such a strategy presupposes that the ﬁrm can perform such activities more cheaply than the buyer
can.
8A persistent price in excess of buyer value is usually possible only when a ﬁrm and its product’s
effect on buyer cost or performance are very intangible and hard to measure.
9For a description see Steinway and Sons (1981).
10For an interesting discussion of this issue with further examples, see Levitt (1981).
11Even intangible use criteria such as styling can often be quantiﬁed—e.g., ratings in industry surveys.
12Some quantitative techniques for ranking product attributes have been developed in the marketing
literature, though they are based principally on the use of competitive product sales data and
customer polling and not on calculating value directly. For a survey, see Shocker and Srinivasan
(1979).
13See Competitive Strategy, Chapters 1 and 6, for descriptions of the sources of switching costs.
Switching costs are also discussed in Chapter 8.


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1Hence the label “technology development” in the generic value chain instead of the more limited
phrase “research and development.”
2See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 13, and Porter (1985).
3The same ideas can be generalized to evaluate pioneering of any kind, such as pioneering in
marketing or in the approach to procurement.
4Some of these advantages also accrue to other early movers besides the ﬁrst.
5The costs of pioneering are discussed in the context of an emerging industry in Competitive Strategy,
Chapter 10.
6Another possible form of coalition is joint technology development with another ﬁrm. Joint
development involves many of the same issues as licensing.
7See Abernathy and Utterback (1978).
8Abernathy, Clark, and Kantrow (1983).
9See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 8, for a broader discussion of industry evolution and its causes.
1Price discrimination is the sale of identical products to different buyers at different prices.
2I will have more to say about this below. The vulnerabilities of leaders resulting from this and other
practices are discussed in Chapter 14.
3In the particular case of rate-of-return regulation, allowable rates are often determined by average
costs of competitors. Hence having competitors may allow an efﬁcient producer to be more
proﬁtable.
4For further examples of the effect of antitrust considerations on leader behavior, see Bloom and
Kotler (1975).
5Strategies such as this that link complementary products are described more fully in Chapter 12.
6The problems of launching an emerging industry are discussed in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 10.
7Chapter 15 describes how market leaders can be successfully attacked with focus strategies.
8The effect of product proliferation in breakfast cereals on entry is analyzed by Schmalensee (1978).
9Competitor analysis is described in detail in Competitive Strategy, Chapters 3 through 5.
10See Chapter 14 for a fuller discussion of defensive strategy.
11See Chapter 14.
12The undesirability of a 100 percent share is also recognized by Bloom and Kotler (1975), based on
valid reasons. Bloom and Kotler cite the antitrust problems of high share, the possible effect of high
share in attracting entry, and risks faced by high-share companies of the attack by consumerist or
public interest organizations.
13For an empirical study supporting some of these factors, see Caves, Fortunato, and Ghemawat
(1981).
14Industry growth interacts with scale economies to determine the optimal share. In a rapid-growth
industry, scale economies yield less of an entry barrier and cost advantage than in a slow-growth
industry.
15See Bloom and Kotler (1975).
16Evidence from examining a cross section of industries suggests that a signiﬁcant difference in share
among competitors is associated with greater stability. Buzzell’s (1981) statistical test suggested
that stable market share patterns often follow a semilogarithmic distribution, where each
competitor’s share is a constant proportion of the next higher-ranking ﬁrm’s. Boston Consulting
Group (1976) has also hypothesized that a stable market share distribution will have only three
signiﬁcant competitors with market shares in the proportion 4:2:1. This is a special case of the


---PAGE BREAK---

semilogarithmic distribution. Such generalizations can be misleading, however, because they do not
reﬂect other industry and competitor characteristics besides share. BCG’s hypothesis, for example,
will not hold in all industries, but is most likely to hold in commodity industries where there are bad
competitors.


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1Focus strategies are described in Chapter 1.
2Throughout this book the term “product” has been used to describe both products and services. In
most industries producing products there are some services that are part of the offering, and these
are important to segmentation. The principles of analyzing both products and services for
segmentation purposes are the same.
3Chapter 12 describes the strategic issues in bundling together physically distinct products and selling
them as a package, something that many companies do without knowing it.
4As we will see, industry segmentation ﬂows from the intrinsic characteristics of an industry’s
products and buyers, irrespective of ﬁrms’ existing strategies. Strategic groups (Competitive
Strategy, Chapter 7) are the result of differences in ﬁrms’ strategies, one dimension of which may
be the different segments they serve. Thus industry segmentation is a building block for analyzing
strategic groups.
5The threat of substitution and the threat of entry tend to be greater for segments than for an industry
as a whole, because other product varieties are often substitutes for a product variety and
competitors operating in other segments are often well-placed potential entrants to a segment.
6Geographic buyer location reﬂects the importance of geographic scope, deﬁned in Chapter 2. For
practical reasons, scope within the industry and geographic scope are best treated together in
segmentation.
7Chapter 12 describes the strategic issues involved in bundling in some detail.
8For a good survey, see Moriarty (1983). Bonoma and Shapiro (1984) present a very useful analysis
of industrial market segmentation and its implications for marketing strategy.
9Marketers have proposed a number of other related ways of segmenting consumers, such as
personality and loyalty. For a survey, see Kotler (1980).
10The strength of interrelationships within an industry and between industries determine the
boundaries of strategically distinct industries.
11It may also be illuminating to distinguish among strong and weak positions in each segment.
12There is no need for strategies that combine segments to be horizontal or vertical on the
segmentation matrix. However, focus strategies are often horizontal or vertical because product,
buyer, channel, or geographic focus strategies are common.


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1See Levitt (1960) for the classic statement of the need to think functionally.
2Chapter 12 describes the strategic issues raised by complementary products in more detail.
Differential cost and quality of complementary products are rarely issues in differentiation among
brands.
3“General Cinema Corporation,” 1976.
4The costs of switching suppliers are described in Competitive Strategy, Chapters 1 and 6.
5The discussion of industry evolution in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 8, provides tools for
forecasting structural changes in the substitute and threatened industries; the analysis of emerging
industries in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 10, is also often applicable to substitute industries
because they are frequently new industries.
6Margins can be negative, and sometimes are for a substitute that is beginning its penetration.
7Chapter 8 in Competitive Strategy describes how the product life cycle is a poor generalization about
industry structural change. The S-shaped path of sales growth, though by no means universal, is
among the most commonly occurring predictions that grow out of life cycle theory.
8The path of substitution is analogous to the diffusion of an innovation. Diffusion research has
emphasized the information and attitudinal factors that affect the diffusion process. See Robertson
(1971) for a survey.
9Falling cost of the substitute, like most of these reasons for increasing penetration, should not be
treated as inevitable as noted earlier.
10Diffusion models have been widely used in forecasting the growth of new brands and in forecasting
the rate of diffusion of technology. Important diffusion models are those of Mansﬁeld (1961), Bass
(1969), and Fisher and Pry (1971). The logistic model described here is similar to Fisher and Pry’s.
11The logistic function produces an inﬂection point of the S-curve at 50 percent substitution. A related
function, known as the Gompertz function, has its inﬂection point at 37 percent penetration. While
both functions have received empirical support, the logistic function is easier to use in practice. For
a survey of diffusion models, see Mahajan and Muller (1979).
12Penetration rates must be adjusted if there were capacity constraints in supplying the substitute.
13Logistic curves have often been misused by both managers and their advisors. Decisions have been
made with too little diagnosis of the underlying economics of substitution.
14The strategic role of complementary goods is discussed in more detail in Chapter 12.
15These concepts are important in declining industries. See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 12, which
also discusses harvest strategies.
16See Chapter 9.
17For a discussion, see World Business Weekly (1981).
1In a recent article, Haspeslagh (1982) found evidence that portfolio planning techniques were in use
in someway by over 300 of the Fortune 1000.
2Recent work on stock market valuation has identiﬁed a conglomerate discount, where unrelated
business units in a ﬁrm are worth less than if they were stand-alone units. Without a horizontal
strategy that actually exploits interrelationships, a conglomerate discount is often justiﬁed.
3For a treatment of geographic interrelationships, see Porter (1985).
4Some of the same forces are leading to the globalization of industries.
5While the availability of cheap computing power may be reducing the need to share computers in
some applications, a stronger trend seems to be for the technology to spawn new opportunities for
sharing.


---PAGE BREAK---

6John R. Wells (1984) has done an important study on interrelationships that provides evidence of
how portfolio membership has affected business units in a sample of diversiﬁed ﬁrms.
7Economists have begun to use the term “economies of scope” to refer to economies available to
multiproduct ﬁrms (see Baumol, Panzar, and Willig, 1982). The sources of economies of scope have
not been operationalized, nor have the conditions that nullify them.
8Sharing can increase the rate of learning in an activity by increasing its throughput. Intangible
interrelationships are also a form of learning, but one in which knowledge gained in one business
unit is transferred to another though each business unit has separate activities.
9Terms such as shared experience or shared resources are sometimes used to reﬂect the possibility
that activities can be shared. Such terms are not well deﬁned, however; nor do they grow out of a
framework that speciﬁes the potential competitive advantages of sharing and its costs.
10The important scale differences among business units are those in the value activity being shared,
which is not necessarily the same as the overall scale of the business unit. A small business unit
may utilize logistics very intensively, for example.
11The cost of coordination is clearly dependent on a ﬁrm’s organizational practices. See Chapter 11.
12See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 1, for a discussion of exit barriers.
13For a summary discussion of the ways of gaining competitive position in an industry see Chapter 15.
14See Wells (1984).
15John R. Wells’s (1984) study contains important work on intangible interrelationships that provides
further insight into when and how they arise.
16There may be a ﬁne line in some cases between transferring know-how and sharing technology
development. The basis for separating tangible and intangible interrelationships is whether an
activity is shared in some way on an ongoing basis, or whether know-how is transferred between
essentially separate activities.
17The analysis of multipoint competitors in both related and unrelated industries has strong parallels to
the analysis of competitors in local or regional industries, as well as to competitive analysis in
global competition. In a regional industry such as airlines, for example, ﬁrms compete with each
other in a number of overlapping routes. Internationally, ﬁrms often compete in a number of country
markets. The principles described here can be applied in all of these settings (see Porter 1985).
18For a deﬁnition and discussion of focal points, see Thomas Schelling (1960) and Competitive
Strategy, Chapter 5.


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1Other examples of coordinated pricing are discussed in Chapter 12.
2See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 16, for the basic strategic logic of entry into a new business.


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1The literature on organizational behavior contains some useful insights into the problems of
achieving interrelationships among business units, but little research that treats the subject directly.
Most literature in organizational behavior examines the organizational problems of coordination
within business units, or how to divisionalize. Lorsch and Allen (1973) and Galbraith (1973)
contain the most useful ideas for cross-business unit coordination, but have not treated
interrelationships as a major theme.
2Thus this book on strategy must contain an unexpected chapter on organization.
3If a diversiﬁed ﬁrm does not have a well functioning decentralized organization, in fact, it may need
to decentralize further before it begins to overlay a horizontal organization across its business units.
4In economists’ terms, the perceived transaction costs of dealing externally are lower than those of
dealing internally.
5For a discussion of the Brunswick example see Stengrevics (1981).
6Entrepreneurship is viewed as so important in some ﬁrms that business units are even encouraged to
compete among themselves.
7Leading works include Lorsch and Allen (1973), Galbraith (1973), Lawrence and Lorsch (1967),
and Kotter (1982).
8The sector executive’s role is analogous to the role of the group executive and equally important to
horizontal strategy.
9There has been little research on the role of the group executive, surprising given the prevalence of
group structures. Stengrevics’ (1981) work is the only known comprehensive study, and provides
many useful insights into the group executive’s role and job satisfaction.
10For a supporting view, see Stengrevics (forthcoming).
11Galbraith (1973) provides a useful description of a number of such “lateral” organizations and
conditions their success. His and other discussions are primarily oriented to within business unit
rather than cross-business unit efforts, however.
12Eccles (1985) provides an excellent discussion of transfer pricing that reﬂects many of these issues.
13See Stengrevics (1981). No transfer pricing scheme is ever perfect, but arms-length schemes are
almost always ﬂawed where there are signiﬁcant interrelationships.
14Lorsch and Allen (1973) provide an illustration of this role of incentives in a vertically integrated
ﬁrm.
15For a study supporting the need for subjective incentives when interrelationships are high, see Gupta
and Govindarajan (1983).
16It may be valuable, for example, to switch business managers or other executives in two business
units involved in an interrelationship.
17Acquiring a toehold in an industry through a smaller acquisition, and then building it, resembles
internal development more than acquisition in this respect.
18American Express Company, Annual Report, 1982.
19This new organizational form is more complex than Williamson’s (1973) M-form, which is
distinguished by a pattern of top management control of divisions in which top management is not
involved in operating affairs. The importance of interrelationships suggests that divisionalization in
its traditional sense is no longer appropriate in many ﬁrms.
1Signaling criteria are described in Chapter 4.
2The cost of complements is hence part of the comparison between a product and substitutes. See
Chapter 8.


---PAGE BREAK---

3For a discussion of quasi-integration, see Competitive Strategy, Chapter 14.
4For a discussion of the problems of emerging industries, including the role of complementary
products, see Competitive Strategy, Chapter 10.
5For a demonstration of this in the case of a monopolist, see Adams and Yellen (1976).
6Unbundling is one important variant of the focus strategy which involves performing fewer
functions for the buyer. See Chapter 7.
7See Chapter 9.
8Chapter 5 discusses how the pattern of technological change in an industry evolves over time,
important to these changes.
9Protecting the bundle is sometimes part of defensive strategy. See Chapter 14.
10This is one of a series of reasons why having competitors can be beneﬁcial (see Chapter 6).


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1A survey in 1979 estimated that between 8 and 22 percent of the Fortune 1000 had made some use
of scenarios. The users were concentrated in process industries and aerospace ﬁrms (Klein and
Linneman [1979]). A more recent survey of European companies by Malaska et al. (1983) showed a
higher percentage of users. However, in interpreting data such as these, it is important to recognize
that the deﬁnition of scenarios varies widely and that the way scenarios are used can and does vary
widely.
2The approach to scenario planning pioneered by Shell is described in “Shell’s Multiple Scenario
Planning” (1980), Mandell (1982), and Wack (1984).
3The evolutionary forces are discussed in detail in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 8.
4See Competitive Strategy, Chapters 3–5 for a description of competitor analysis techniques.
Competitive Strategy, Chapter 7, describes strategic mapping.
5For example, see Hamilton (1981).
6For a fascinating discussion of the process of changing management thinking at Royal Dutch Shell
through scenarios see Wack (1984).


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1A ﬁrm may enter an industry without a sequenced entry strategy in mind, but initial success may
lead to sequencing nonetheless. See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 16, for a discussion of the
motivations for a sequenced entry strategy.
2Shrinkage barriers, discussed in Chapter 6, are barriers to reducing sales volume. They are closely
related to exit barriers.
3Postponing of risk is one of the important motivations for a sequenced entry strategy.
4Much research by economists on entry does not recognize that entry is an extended investment
process, and hence concludes that many entry-deterring investments are irrational once an initial
entry investment has been made. For example, see A. Dixit (1980). An example would be a ﬁrm
that attempts to deter entry by building excess capacity as a threat to potential entrants that a price
war will be triggered if they enter. Once the entrant has come into the industry, however, it has been
argued that it is no longer rational to carry out the threat. This, of course, makes excess capacity less
effective as a threat in the ﬁrst place.
The ﬂaw in the argument is that the commencing of entry does not mean that resources have
been fully committed to the industry, or that the entrant should be viewed as an incumbent. Thus a
price war during the entering or sequencing phases may well be effective if it causes the entrant to
conclude that its ultimate target strategy cannot be achieved at acceptable cost. Entry may thus be
terminated or a less ambitious target set, an outcome that has occurred in many industries such as
video games and semiconductors. Entry deterrence also rests heavily on shaping potential
competitor assumptions, and thus on the lack of complete information by potential competitors.
5New brands and new positionings can be offensive opportunities. I focus here on situations where
they are not attractive enough to be offensive opportunities, but yet have high defensive value
because they block a likely avenue of attack.
6Some conditions for achieving credible commitment to retaliate are described in Competitive
Strategy, Chapter 5.
7At the industry level, this balance is reﬂected in the concept of the entry-deterring price discussed in
Competitive Strategy, Chapter 1.
8See Competitive Strategy Chapters 8 and 16, for further discussion of potential entrants and how
they can change.


---PAGE BREAK---

 
1Yip’s (1982) discussion of how ﬁrms can ﬁnd “gateways” to entry shows how leaders can be
vulnerable. Yip describes how innovations in technology development and marketing can allow
entrants to overcome incumbents.
2Sequenced entry strategies are described in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 16. Sequenced
repositioning employs the same principles.
3See Competitive Strategy, Chapter 14.
4The competitive advantages of a global strategy and the circumstances where global strategies are
appropriate are discussed in Competitive Strategy, Chapter 13, and in Porter (1985).
5See the chapter on coalitions in Porter (1985).
6Diagnosing impediments requires a competitor analysis of the leader. See Competitive Strategy,
Chapter 3, for a framework plus a discussion of concepts such as mixed motives and blind spots
employed here.


---PAGE BREAK---

Bibliography
ABERNATHY, WILLIAM J., AND JAMES M. UTTERBACK. “Patterns of Industrial
Innovation,” Technology Review, Vol. 80, No. 7 (June-July 1978).
ABERNATHY, WILLIAM J., KIM B. CLARK, AND ALAN M. KANTROW. Industrial
Renaissance. New York: Basic Books, 1983.
ADAMS, WILLIAM J., AND JANET L. YELLEN. “Commodity Bundling and the
Burden of Monopoly,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. SC (August
1976), pp. 475–498.
AMERICAN EXPRESS COMPANY, 1982 Annual Report.
BASS, FRANK M. “A New Product Growth Model for Consumer Durables,”
Management Science, Vol. 15 (January 1969), pp. 215–227.
BAUMOL, WILLIAM J., JOHN C. PANZAR, AND ROBERT D. WILLIG, with
contributions by Elizabeth E. Bailey, Dietrich Fischer, and Herman C.
Quirmbach, Contestable Markets and The Theory of Industry Structure,
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1982.
BLOOM, PAUL N., AND PHILIP KOTLER. “Strategies for High Market Share
Companies,” Harvard Business Review (November-December 1975), pp.
62–72.
BONOMA, THOMAS V., AND BENSON P. SHAPIRO. Segmenting the Industrial
Market. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1983.
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUP. “The Rule of Three and Four,” Perspectives
No. 187 (1976).
BOWER, JOSEPH, L., “Simple Economic Tools For Strategic Analysis,”
Harvard Business School Case Study, No. 9–373–094.
BUARON, ROBERTO, “New-Game Stategies,” The McKinsey Quarterly
(Spring, 1981), pp. 24–40.


---PAGE BREAK---

BUZZELL, ROBERT D. “Are There Natural Market Structures,” Journal of
Marketing (Winter 1981), pp. 42–51.
CAVES, RICHARD E., M. FORTUNATO, AND PANKAJ GHEMAWAT. “The Decline
of Monopoly, 1905–1929,” Discussion Paper 830, Harvard Institute of
Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., June 1981.
COASE, RONALD H., “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica (November
1937), pp. 386–405.
COASE, RONALD H., “Industrial Organization: A Proposal for Research,” in
V. R. Fuchs, ed., Policy Issues and Research in Industrial Organization,
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972.
DIXIT, AVINASH K., “The Role of Investment in Entry-Deterrence,”
Economic Journal (March 1980), pp. 95–106.
DIXIT, AVINASH K., AND VICTOR NORMAN. Theory of International Trade: A
Dual, General Equilibrium Approach, J. Nisbet: Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press, 1980.
ECCLES, ROBERT G. The Transfer Pricing Problem: A Theory for Practice,
Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1985.
FISHER, JOHN C., AND ROBERT H. PRY. “A Simple Substitution Model of
Technological Change,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
Vol. 2 (May 1971), pp. 75–88.
FORBIS, JOHN L. AND NITIN T. MEHTA, “Economic Value to the Customer,”
McKinsey and Company Staff Paper (February 1979).
GALBRAITH, JAY. Designing Complex Organizations, Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1973.
“GENERAL CINEMA CORPORATION,” Harvard Business School Case Services
9–377–084, 1976.
GHEMAWAT, PANKAJ. “Building Strategy on the Experience Curve,” Harvard
Business Review, forthcoming.
GLUCK, FREDERICK W., “Strategic Choice and Resource Allocation,” The
McKinsey Quarterly (Winter 1980), pp. 22–23.
GUPTA, ANIL K., AND VIJAYARAGHAVAN GOVINDARAJAN. “Resource Sharing
Among SBU’s: Strategic Antecedents and Administrative Implications,”
Working Paper, Boston University, December 1983.
HAMILTON, RONALD H. “Scenarios in Corporate Planning,” Journal of
Business Strategy, No. 2 (Summer 1981), pp. 82–87.


---PAGE BREAK---

HASPESLAGH, PHILLIPE. “Portfolio Planning: Uses and Limits,” Harvard
Business Review, No. 1 (January-February 1982), pp. 58–73.
KLEIN, HAROLD E., AND ROBERT E. LINNEMAN. “The Use of Scenarios in
Corporate Planning: Eight Case Histories,” Long Range Planning, No. 14
(October 1981), pp. 69–77.
KOTLER, PHILIP. Marketing Management: Analysis, Planning and Control,
4th ed., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1980.
KOTTER, JOHN P. The General Manager, New York: The Free Press, 1982.
LAWRENCE, PAUL R., AND JAY W. LORSCH. Organization and Environment:
Managing Differentiation and Integration, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University, 1967.
LEVITT, 
THEODORE. 
“Marketing 
Intangible 
Products 
and 
Product
Intangibles,” Harvard Business Review, No. 3 (May-June 1981), pp. 94–
102.
LEVITT, THEODORE. “Marketing Myopia,” Harvard Business Review (July-
August 1960), pp. 26–37.
LORSCH, JAY W., AND STEPHEN A. ALLEN. Managing Diversity and
Interdependence: An Organizational Study of Multidimensional Firms.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration,
Division of Research, 1973.
MAHAJAN, VIJAY, AND EITAN MULLER. “Innovation Diffusion and New
Product Growth Models in Marketing,” Journal of Marketing, Vol. 43
(October 1979), pp. 55–68.
MALASKA, PENTTI, MARTTI MALMIVIRTA, TARJA MERISTO, AND STEN-OLOF
HANSEN. “Multiple Scenarios in Strategic Management: The First
European Survey” Working Paper, Turku School of Economics and
Business Administration. Turku, Finland, 1983.
MANDELL, THOMAS F. “Scenarios and Corporate Strategy,” Planning in
Uncertain Times. Business Intelligence Program, SRI International,
November 1982.
MANSFIELD, EDWIN “Technological Change and the Rate of Imitation,”
Econometrica, Vol. 29, No. 4 (October 1961), pp. 741–766.
MORIARTY, ROWLAND T. Industrial Buying Behavior: Concepts, Issues and
Applications, Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1983.
PORTER, MICHAEL E. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing
Industries and Competitors, New York: The Free Press, 1980.


---PAGE BREAK---

PORTER, MICHAEL E., ed., Competition in Global Industries, Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration, 1985,
forthcoming.
ROBERTSON, THOMAS S. Innovation Behavior and Communication. New
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1971.
SALOP, STEVEN C. “Strategic Entry Deterrence,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 69 (May 1979), pp. 335–338.
SCHAMLENSEE, RICHARD. “Entry Deterrence in the Ready-to-Eat Breakfast
Cereal Industry,” Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 9, No. 2 (Autumn
1980), pp. 305–327.
SCHELLING, THOMAS C., The Strategy of Conﬂict, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1960.
“SHELL’S MULTIPLE SCENARIO PLANNING,” World Business Weekly, April 7,
1980.
SCHOCKER, ALLAN D., AND V. SRINIVASAN, “Multiattribute Approaches for
Product Concept Evaluation and Generation: A Critical Review, Journal
of Marketing Research, XVI (May 1979), pp. 159–180.
STENGREVICS, JOHN M. “The Group Executive: A Study in General
Management,” Doctoral Dissertation, Harvard Graduate School of
Business Administration, 1981.
STENGREVICS, JOHN M. “Making Cluster Strategies Work,” Journal of
Business Strategy, forthcoming.
STUART, ALEXANDER. “Meat Packers in Stampede,” Fortune, June 29, 1981,
pp. 67–71.
TEECE, DAVID J., “Economies of Scope and the Scope of the Enterprise,”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Vol. 1 (1980), pp. 223–
247.
WACK, PIERRE A. “Learning to Design Planning Scenarios: The Experience
of Royal Dutch Shell,” Working Paper, Harvard Graduate School of
Business Administration, 1984.
WELLS, JOHN R. “In Search of Synergy: Strategies for Related
Diversiﬁcation,” Doctoral Dissertation, Harvard Graduate School of
Business Administration, 1984.
WILLIAMSON, OLIVER E. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust
Implications, The Free Press: New York, 1975.
World Business Weekly, September 21, 1981, p. 36.


---PAGE BREAK---

YIP, GEORGE, Barriers to Entry: A Corporate Strategy Perspective.
Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1982.


---PAGE BREAK---

Index
Abernathy, William J., 194
Acquisition, 529, 530
Adams, William J., 428n
ADIDAS, 513, 524
Administrative technology, 168, 169
ADP, 173
Aging, 96
Air parcel delivery industry, 109, 171, 270, 517
Airborne, 109
Aircraft engine industry, 282
Aircraft industry, 194, 197
Airline industry, 36, 65, 80–81, 84, 96, 97, 107–10, 517
Allen, Stephen A., 383n, 395n, 405n
Alliances to attack leaders, 529–30; see also Coalitions
Allied Chemical Company, 110
Alternative technologies, 492
Aluminum industry, 7–8, 113, 170, 220, 293, 305
American Airlines, 169
American Can Company, 179, 529, 532
American Express Company, 138, 322, 374–375, 390, 410–412
American Greetings Corporation, 155
American Hospital Supply, 78, 126, 135–136, 320–321, 388
American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T), 192, 323
Ampex, 189
Ancillary products or services, 240, 288
Anheuser-Busch, 505


---PAGE BREAK---

Antitrust, 206
Archer-Daniels-Midland (ADM), 516, 522
Arm & Hammer, 145, 248, 311
Arthur Andersen & Company, 43
Assets
   assignment of, 65–67
   cost drivers and utilization of, 84, 85
   distribution of, 67–70
   purchased: see Purchased input costs
Assumptions, competitor, 213, 499–500
Attack strategy: see Offensive strategy
Attacks, defense against: see Defensive strategy
Automation, facilitation of, 105
Automobile industry, 9, 22–23, 250, 263–264, 525–527
Automobile rentals industry, 127
Autonomy, resistance to, 386–388
Avon, 248
Ayco Corporation, 411
Baby food industry, 80, 126, 208–209, 215
Backward integration: see Integration
Baker International, 10
Ballpoint pen industry, 297, 531
Bargaining power, 4–7, 9, 10
   competitor improvement of, 206
   industry structure and, 58
   purchasing policies and, 106–107
   segmentation and, 234–236, 256
   technology and, 173
Barnes and Noble, 23
Barnes-Hind/Hydrocurve, 520
Bass, Frank M., 302n
Bausch and Lomb, 105, 227
Beachheads, diversiﬁcation through, 378–380
Beaird-Poulan, 225, 350, 451, 466, 467
Beatrice Foods, 388


---PAGE BREAK---

Beech-Nut, 208–209, 215
Beef packing industry, 109, 110
Beer industry, 236, 306, 507
Bekins, 137
BIC Corporation, 297, 531
Bicycle industry, 236
Black and Decker, 129, 377, 451
Blind spots, 532
Blocking positions, 496
Bloom, Paul N., 206n, 221n, 222n
Bond rating service industry, 9
Bonoma, Thomas V., 241n
Book value, 66
Boots Company, 506
Borden, Inc., 320
Boston Consulting Group, 223n
Bowmar Company, 189
Breadth of activities, 121, 123
Brokers, 245
Brooks Brothers, 120
Brother Company, 377
Brunswick Company, 390
Bundling, 240, 425–436
   as channel blocking tactic, 490
   deﬁned, 417
   of information with product, 154–155
   new segments and, 247
Burlington Industries, 26
Business deﬁnition, competitive scope and, 58, 272
Business system concept, 36n
Business units, interrelationships among: see Interrelationships among
business units
Buyer cherry-picking, 439
Buyer cost
   effects of substitutes on, 280–285
   lowering, 131–132, 135–137


---PAGE BREAK---

Buyer demographics, 243–244
Buyer location
   deﬁned, 238
   identiﬁcation of, 246–247
   in segmentation matrices, 249–254
   substitution and, 290
Buyer needs
   ﬁrst movers and, 190
   industry structure and, 8–11
   technological evolution and, 196
Buyer perception of value, 138–140
   complementary products and, 419
   substitution and, 285–286, 295–296
Buyer performance
   complementary products and, 418–419
   raising, 132, 137–138
   substitution and, 283–285
Buyer power, 4–7, 9, 58, 173, 234–236, 256; see also Bargaining power
Buyer propensity to substitute, 288–289, 296
Buyer purchase criteria, 141–149
Buyer segments, 161, 162
Buyer types
   bundling and, 429
   deﬁned, 238
   identiﬁcation of, 241–244
   in segmentation matrices, 249–254
   structural differences and, 235–237
   substitution and, 290, 291
   value chain differences and, 236–237
Buyer value, 130–149
   buyer perception of value: see Buyer perception of value
   buyer’s value chain and, 34, 52–53, 130–135, 280–286, 534
   defensive tactics and, 500
   purchase criteria and, 141–149
   raising buyer performance and, 132, 137–138
   substitution and, 279–286, 294–295


---PAGE BREAK---

   value chain and, 132–135
Buyer’s value chain, 34, 52–53, 130–135, 280–286, 534
Buzzell, Robert D., 223n
Cable television industry, 5
Camera industry, 207, 301
Campbell’s Soup, 188
Can industry, 305, 529, 532
Canon, Inc., 76, 105, 116–117, 262, 355, 520, 524, 530
Capacity utilization
   asset utilization and, 85
   control of, 102
   inﬂuence on costs, 74–75
   sharing and, 328–329
Cargill Company, 516, 522
Castle and Cooke, 399
Castrol, 505, 525
Caterpillar Tractor, 14, 123, 153
Caves, Richard E., 222n
Centralization, partial, 398–399
Century 21, 270
Cessna Aircraft, 431
Chain saw industry, 450–472
Channels: see Distribution channels
Charmin Paper, 484
Chemical industry, 194
Chocolate manufacturing industry, 41, 77
Church & Dwight, 110
Citicorp, 123, 322, 406
Clark, Kim B., 194n
Coal industry, 313
Coalitions, 529–530
   attacking leaders by forming, 529–530
   competitive scope and, 57–58
   complementary products and, 421–422, 430
   deﬁned, 34


---PAGE BREAK---

   entry barriers and, 494
   increasing expected retaliation with, 497
   inﬂuencing patterns of competitors with, 219–220
   licensing of technology as, 191–193, 219
Coase, Ronald H., 53n
Coca-Cola, 16, 123, 188, 218, 514–516, 532, 533
Committees, interrelationship, 400–401
Commodore, 219
Competitive position, 1–4; see also Generic competitive strategies
Competitive scope; see also Industry segmentation; Substitution;
Interrelationships among Business Units
   attacking leaders through redeﬁnition of, 518
   deﬁned, 53n
   value chain and, 53–59
Competitive strategy
   competitive position and, 1–4; see also Generic competitive strategies
   corporate: see Interrelationships among business units
   defensive: see Defensive strategy
   deﬁned, 1
   industry attractiveness and, 1–11, 234, 235
   competitive forces determining proﬁtability, 4–7, 9–10
   industry structure and: see Industry structure
   technological change and, 176
   offensive: see Offensive strategy
   technology: see Technology strategy
Competitor assumptions, management of, 213, 499–500
Competitor cost determination, 98–99
Competitor interrelationships, 325, 353–363
Competitor selection, 201–228
Competitor value chains, 97–98, 101–102
Complementary products, 416–442
   bundling, 240, 425–436
   control over complementary products, 417–425
   cross subsidization, 436–441
   deﬁned, 416
   substitution and, 284, 309, 439, 440


---PAGE BREAK---

Computer industry, 95, 217; See also Personal computer industry
Computer-aided design, 166
Conﬂict resolution processes, horizontal: see Horizontal conﬂict resolution
processes
Conformance, 142, 143
Conglomerate discount, 319n
Consolidated Foods, 388, 506
Construction equipment industry, 14, 18
Consulting industry, 139
Consumer goods buyers, 243–244
Consumer goods industry, 188
Contact lens industry, 105, 227
Continental Group, 179, 529, 532
Continental Illinois Bank, 26
Continuous vs. discontinuous technological evolution, 197
Cooper Vision, 520
Coordination
   of activities, 48–49, 76, 128–129
   cost of, 259, 331–332, 334–335, 385
   of strategies, 372–373
Copier manufacturing industry, 76, 125, 137, 207, 217, 245, 262, 269, 355,
515, 530
Corn wet milling industry, 516
Corporate interrelationship champions, 401–402
Corporate risk analysis, 480
Corporate role in facilitating interrelationships, 408
Corporate strategy: see Interrelationships among business units
Cosmetics industry, 14, 139, 248
Cost advantage, 11, 33, 62–118
   complementary products and, 419–421, 425, 426–427, 430
   differentiation and, 158–160
   implementation and, 113, 115
   sharing and, 326, 328–331
   strategy
   cost leadership strategy: see Cost leadership strategy
   focus strategy, 111–112


---PAGE BREAK---

   sustainability of, 112–114
   technology and, 169–171, 181–184
   value chain and, 97–99
Cost analysis, 62–63
   steps in, 118
   value chain and, 64–70
   assigning costs and assets, 65–67
   cost behavior: see Cost behavior; Cost drivers
Cost behavior, 70–97
   cost drivers: see Cost drivers
   cost dynamics, 95–97
   purchased input costs, 88–93
   segment, 93–95
Cost drivers, 65, 70–88, 98–106
   control of, 99–106, 156
   differentiation and, 128–129, 155
   sustainability of, 112–114
   technology and, 84, 169–172
Cost dynamics, 95–97
Cost focus strategy, 11, 15, 178
Cost leadership strategy, 11–14, 62
   culture and, 24
   differentiation and, 13, 98, 117–118
   implementation of, 113, 115
   organizational structure and, 23
   pitfalls in, 115–118
   procurement practices and, 106–107
   risks of, 21
   sustainability of, 20–22
   technology strategy and, 177, 178
   value chain reconﬁguration, 107–111
Cost reduction: see Cost leadership strategy
Cost umbrella, 205–206
Countries, segmentation of, 246
CPC International, 516
Cray Research, 121, 217


---PAGE BREAK---

Creativity, industry scenarios and, 480–481
Credibility, 213, 502
Crisco, 188
Cross subsidization, 436–441
Crown Cork and Seal, 18–19, 105, 121, 123, 179, 521, 529, 532
CT scanner industry, 217–218
Culture, 24, 390
CVS, 23
Daimler Benz, 507
Data base publishing industry, 4
Decentralization, 318, 383–385, 391–392, 414–415
Defensive strategy, 219–220, 482–512
Deintegration, 79, 103–104
Delivered cost of substitutes, 280–281
Demand
   competitor absorption of ﬂuctuations of, 203
   competitors and increase in, 207
   substitution and, 296–297
   supply and, 10–11
Demand uncertainty
   ﬁrst movers and, 190
   technological evolution and, 195
Dematurity concept, 194
Demographics, 243–244
Deterrence, 504–508
Diagnosis of “good” competitors, 216–218
Diesel locomotives industry, 128
Differentiation, 11, 33, 59, 119–163
   buyer value and: see Buyer value
   competitor enhancement of, 203–204
   complementary products and, 418–419, 425, 427–428, 430
   cost leadership and, 13, 99, 117–118
   cost of, 127–130, 150, 155–156, 161, 163
   optimal market conﬁguration and, 222–223
   sharing and, 326, 330–331


---PAGE BREAK---

   steps in, 162–163
   strategy: see Differentiation strategy
   sustainability of, 20–22, 158–160
   technology and, 169–171, 181–184, 195
   value chain and, 120–127
   uniqueness drivers and: see Uniqueness drivers
Differentiation focus strategy, 11, 15, 178
Differentiation strategy, 11, 12, 14, 17–22, 27, 81–82, 150–163
   technology strategy and, 177, 178
Diffusion models, 302–306
Digital Equipment Corporation, 189
Direct mail, 245
Direct selling, 245
Discontinuous technological change, 190, 197, 534
Discounts, 490
Discretionary policies
   cost advantage and, 80–82, 84, 85, 87, 92, 104–105, 112
   differentiation and, 124–125
   scale and, 87
Diseconomies of scale, 70, 71; see also scale
Disinvestment, 512
Distribution channels
   blocking access to, 489–490
   changing, 534
   competitors and crowding of, 211–212
   differentiation and, 123, 143
   ﬁrst movers and, 187
   focus on, 524
   linkages with, 51–52, 77–78, 125
   reconﬁguration of, 110–111, 522
   segments and, 238, 245, 249–254, 290
Diversiﬁcation mode, interrelationships and, 408–409
Diversiﬁcation strategy, 320, 374–380
Dixit, A., 485
Dow Chemical Corporation, 494–495
Downstream channels: see Distribution channels


---PAGE BREAK---

Downstream substitution, 277–278
Dr Pepper, 143, 218
DuPont de Nemours, E.I., & Company, 186, 323, 406, 409, 414
Durable manufacturing industry, 84, 86
Eastman Kodak Company, 131–132, 136–137, 183, 186, 188, 206, 207,
217, 262, 269, 301, 409, 419, 440, 441, 506, 515
Eaton Corporation, 82
Eccles, Robert G., 404n
Economies of scale, 70–72; see also Scale
Economies of scope, 328n
Electric utilities industry, 41
Elevator industry, 282
Elscint Company, 217–218
Emerson Electric Company, 24, 78, 225, 322, 324, 350, 388, 451, 466
Emery Airfreight, 109, 517
Entrepreneurship, interrelationships and, 391
Entry
   of new competitors, 4–7, 9, 10, 59, 234–236, 256
   process of, 483–487
Entry barriers
   bundling and, 428–429
   competitors and, 210–212, 219
   cross subsidization and, 438, 440–441
   knowledge about, 504–505
   structural, raising, 487–494
   technology and, 173
Estée Lauder, 123
Exclusive outlets, 245
Exit barriers, 175, 485
Experience curve, 63, 73n
Expertise, transference of: see Intangible interrelationships
Failure risk, substitution and, 287
Farm equipment industry, 507
Fastener industry, 137


---PAGE BREAK---

Federal Express, 109, 111, 113, 121, 158, 171, 270, 517
Fiberglass industry, 82
Financial interrelationships, 348–350
Fireman’s Fund, 410
Firm infrastructure, 37, 43, 168
First-mover advantages, 79–80, 104, 172, 186–189
   differentiation and, 158
   industry scenario strategies and, 476
   substitution and, 309–310
   types of, 186–188
First-mover disadvantages, 189–191
Fisher, John C., 302n
Focal points, 357, 358
Focus strategy, 11, 12, 264–271
   characteristics of, 15–16
   choice of focus, 264–266
   combined with other generic strategies, 17–18
   compromise of, 17
   cost advantage and, 111–112
   feasibility of, 266
   against leaders, 523–524
   pitfalls in, 269–271
   risks of, 21
   sustainability of, 20–22, 266–269
   technology strategy and, 177, 178
Folger’s Coffee, 211, 514
Followership, technological, 181–191
Food distribution industry, 246
Forbis, John L., 135n
Ford, Henry, 22
Fortunato, M., 222n
Freightliner, 507
French’s Mustard, 507
Fuji Xerox, 262, 530
Fujitsu, 217


---PAGE BREAK---

Galbraith, Jay, 383n, 395n, 400
Gallo, 110–111, 113, 114, 515, 519
General Electric Company, 184, 217–218, 322, 323, 406, 409, 414
General Foods Corporation, 211, 333–334, 396, 398–399, 487–488, 508,
514
General merchandising industry, 23
General Motors Corporation, 23, 156, 401, 526
Generic competitive strategies, 11–26; see also Cost leadership strategy;
Differentiation strategy; Focus strategy
   industry evolution and, 22–23
   optimal market conﬁguration and, 223
   substitution and, 289
   technology strategy and, 177–181
Generic products, 7, 8
Gentleman’s game, 533, 534
Geographic interrelationships, 320
Geographic location: see Location
Geographic redeﬁnition, 525
Geographic scope, 56
Georgia-Paciﬁc, 356
Gerber, 80
Ghemawat, Pankaj, 73n
Gillette, 440, 531
Global scale, 72
Gluck, Frederick W., 36n
Goals
   of business units, 373
   competitor, 214
Gompert function, 303n
Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, 188
Gould Corporation, 321
Govindarajan, Vijayaraghavan, 405n
Grain trading industry, 5
Grey Poupon, 124, 507, 521
Group executives, role of, 397–398
Grouping business units, 395–397


---PAGE BREAK---

Gupta, Anil K., 405n
Halliburton Company, 227
Hamilton, Ronald H., 471n
Hammermill Paper, 15
Hanes Corporation, 158, 160, 245
Harley Davidson, 532
Harris Corporation, 347
Harvesting, 310, 311
Haspeslagh, Phillipe, 317n
Hathaway Company, 123
Hattori, K., 261
Heineken Beer, 154
Heinz, H.J., Company, 24, 208, 324, 506
Herman’s, 23
Hertz Corporation, 127
Hewlett-Packard, 24, 388, 415
Hiring, ﬁrmwide role in, 406
Homelite, 450, 461, 467
Honda, 184
Horizontal conﬂict resolution processes, 394, 407
Horizontal human resource practices, 405–407
Horizontal organization, 375, 393–415
   categories of: see Horizontal conﬂict resolution processes; Horizontal
human resource practices; Horizontal structure; Horizontal systems
Horizontal strategy, 365–382
   horizontal organization and: see Horizontal organization
   redeﬁnition and, 525–526
Horizontal structure, 394–402
Horizontal systems, 402–405
Hosiery industry, 245
Hotel/motel industry, 248
Hughes Tool Company, 10
Human resource management, 37, 42–43
   horizontal: see Horizontal human resource practices
   technology and, 166, 168


---PAGE BREAK---

IBM Corporation, 189, 192, 203–204, 206, 207, 217, 219, 262, 301, 323,
409, 414, 425, 435, 515, 516, 525–526
Image, 210, 508
Imitation, 188, 191, 195, 268–269
Implementation, cost advantage and, 113, 115
Incentive systems, resistance to interrelationships and, 388–389
Incentives, horizontal, 404–405
Incremental cost improvements, 117
Indirect activities, 16, 44, 49
Industrial buyers, 241–243
Industry attractiveness, 1–11, 234, 235
   industry structure and: see Industry structure
   diversiﬁcation strategy and, 375–376
   segmentation and, 256–257
   technological change and, 176
Industry deﬁnition, 272
Industry demand, 95
   competitors and increase in, 207
   substitution and, 296–297
Industry evolution
   bundling and, 432–435
   complementary products and, 422–423
   cross subsidization strategy and, 439–440
   construction of industry scenarios and, 451–453
   generic strategies and, 22–23
Industry scenarios, 445–481
Industry scope, 56–57
Industry segmentation, 231–272
   bundling and, 433
   substitution and, 234–236, 269, 276–277, 289–291, 301–302, 307, 311
Industry stability, 223, 225–226
Industry structure, 5–11
   attacking leaders and, 535–536
   bases for segmentation, 234–237
   buyer needs and, 8–11
   change in, 7–8, 22–23


---PAGE BREAK---

   competitive forces determining proﬁtability and, 4–7, 9, 10
   competitor improvement of, 207–209
   construction of industry scenarios and, 451–458
   optimal market conﬁguration and, 222–224
   substitution and, 292, 297
   technology and, 172–176, 192
   value chain and, 58–59
Inﬂation, relative, 96
Information
   bundling with product, 155
   purchasing, 89–91
   technology, 168, 321–322
Infrastructure interrelationships, 337–339, 348–350
Innovation: see Technological change
Input costs of competitors, raising, 493–494
Institutional factors
   cost advantage and
   control of, 105–106
   inﬂuence on cost, 83–84
   location and, 87
   purchased input costs and, 92
   differentiation and, 127
   substitution and, 295
Insulation industry, 236
Intangible interrelationships, 78, 350–353
   competitive advantage and, 351–353, 372
   deﬁned, 324
   diversiﬁcation strategy and, 378–380
   horizontal strategy and, 368, 371, 373–375, 378–380
   identiﬁcation of, 351, 371
   negative leverage from, 381–382
Integration, 55–56, 59
   buyer type identiﬁcation and, 242
   cost advantage and
   asset utilization and, 85
   backward integration, 276, 308–309


---PAGE BREAK---

   control of, 103–104
   inﬂuence on costs, 79
   purchased input costs and, 92
   scale and, 87
   sustainability of, 112–113
   cross subsidization and, 439
   differentiation and
   cost of differentiation and, 127–129
   inﬂuence on uniqueness, 127
   as offensive strategy, 524
   substitution and, 308–309
Intel, 136, 219
Interrelationships among business units, 56–57, 317–415
   complementary products: see Complementary products
   cost advantage and
   control of, 103–104
   inﬂuence on costs, 78
   purchased input costs and, 92
   sustainability of, 112
   defensive strategy and, 494, 506
   differentiation and
   cost of differentiation and, 129
   inﬂuence on uniqueness, 126
   sustainability of, 158
   geographic, 320
   horizontal organization and: see Horizontal organization
   horizontal strategy and: see Horizontal strategy
   mixed motives and, 531
   segment, 258–264, 319–320
   technology and, 170, 175, 184, 321–322
Investments, defensive, 511–512
Investors Diversiﬁed Services (IDS), 411
Iowa Beef Packers, 105, 109, 110, 113, 520
IU International, 320
Ivory soap, 188


---PAGE BREAK---

James, Fred S., Company, 409
Japanese ﬁrms, 49, 106, 110, 113, 116–117, 125, 170, 184, 185, 189, 211,
212, 414
Johns Manville Corporation, 124, 490
Johnson & Johnson, 227, 248, 320–321, 322, 356, 362–363, 388
Joint technology development, 191 n
Joint ventures, 7–8, 309; see also Coalitions
K Mart, 23, 245
Kantrow, Alan M., 194n
Kimberly Clark Corporation, 322, 356, 360–361
Klein, Harold E., 447n
Know-how
   proprietary, investment for protection of, 492–493
   transference of: see Intangible interrelationships
Kotler, Philip, 206n, 221n, 222n, 244n
Kotter, John P., 395n
Kyocera Company, 208
La Quinta, 111, 248, 523
Laker Airways, 17
Lancaster, 120n
Lawrence, Paul R., 395n
Leaders, attacks on: see Offensive strategy
Leadership, market, 216–218
Leadership, technological: see Innovation
Leapfrogging, 498
Learning
   bundling and, 426–427
   cost advantage and
   asset utilization and, 85
   control of, 101–102
   inﬂuence on costs, 73–75
   measures of, 74, 75
   sustainability of, 112
   timing and, 80


---PAGE BREAK---

   different rates of, 95–96
   differentiation and
   cost of differentiation and, 129
   inﬂuence on uniqueness, 126
   sustainability of, 158
   sharing and, 328–330
   technology and, 195, 196
Learning curve, proprietary, 187
Legal services industry, 139
Levitt, Theodore, 145n, 274 n
Licensing, technology, 191–193, 219
Life Savers, 188
Lift truck industry, 525
Liggett Group, 8
Lilly, Eli, Company, 95
Lincoln Electric Company, 105
Linkages within value chain
   characteristics of, 48–50
   cost advantage and, 76, 85, 87, 92, 103, 112, 116–117
   differentiation and, 125, 158
   substitution and, 275
   technology and, 168–169, 196
Linneman, Robert E., 447n
Lipton, 188
Liquid ﬁltration industry, 154
Litigation, 498
Local scale, 72
Location, activity
   cost advantage and, 82–83, 87, 92, 105, 113
   differentiation and, 126
Location, buyer: see Buyer location
Loehmann’s, 248
Logistic function, 302–306
Logistics
   changes in, 520–521
   deﬁned, 37, 39–40


---PAGE BREAK---

Lone Star, 97
Lord & Taylor, 341
Lorsch, Jay W., 383n, 395n, 405n
Loss leadership: see Cross subsidization
Mack Trucks, 507
Macroscenarios, 446–447, 479
Magnavox, 192
Mahajan, Vijay, 303n
Malaska, Pentti, 447n
Mandell, Thomas F., 447n
Mansﬁeld, Edwin, 302n
Margin, 38
Market conﬁguration, optimal, 221–226
Market focus committees, 400
Market interrelationships, 337, 338, 340–344; see also Complementary
products
Market segmentation, 231–232
Market share, 19, 72n, 203, 227
   optimal, 221–226
   raising penalty of losing, 496–497
   vs. sharing, 328
Market signaling, 495–496
Marketing costs, complementary products and, 420–421
Marks and Spencer, 107
Matching interrelationships, 335–336
Matsushita, 116–117, 355, 377, 389, 506, 526
Mauna Loa, 307
Maxwell House Coffee, 211, 487–488, 508, 514
McCulloch Company, 450, 451, 461, 466, 467
McGraw-Hill, 323, 399–401
McDonald’s Corporation, 146
MCI, 109
McKesson Company, 521
McKinsey and Company, 36n
Mead Company, 268


---PAGE BREAK---

Medical equipment industry, 9, 525
Mehta, Nitin T., 135n
Mercedes-Benz, 268
Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner & Smith, 322, 435, 526
Metal container industry, 18–19
Michelin, 186, 493, 534
Military aircraft industry, 194
Miller Beer, 305, 324, 350, 505, 507
Mineral industry, 194
Minolta, 262
Mixed motives of leaders, 531
Mobility barriers
   complementary products and
   bundling strategy, 428–429
   control strategy, 421
   knowledge about, 504–505
   structural, raising, 487–494
Monarch, 56
Moriarty, Rowland T., 241n
Morton-Norwich, 276
Motor oil industry, 505, 525
Motorcycle industry, 525
Moving industry, 137
Muller, Eitan, 303n
Multipoint competitors, 322, 325, 353–361
Mushroom industry, 218
Mustard industry, 507
Napco, 136
National Semiconductor, 105
NEC Corporation, 185, 403, 408, 412–413
Neiman-Marcus, 341
New York Times, The, 527
Newspaper industry, 527–528
NIKE, 513, 524
Nissan, 526


---PAGE BREAK---

Northwest Airlines, 13
Nucor, 97
ODECO, 80
Off-price retailers, 248
Offensive strategy, 513–536
   competitor interrelationships and, 373
   substitution and, 307–310
Ofﬁce equipment industry, 296
Ofﬁce technology, 168, 169
Oil ﬁeld services and equipment industry, 9, 10, 249–253
Oil well completion and stimulation services industry, 227
One-stop shopping, bundling and, 428
Operating costs
   assignment of, 65–67
   cost drivers and: see Cost drivers
   distribution of, 67–70
Order pattern, 243
Order processing, 521
Order size, 243
Ore-Ida, 521, 522
Organizational structure
   generic strategies and, 23–25
   value chain and, 59–61
Owens-Corning Fiberglass Corporation, 82
PACCAR, 138
Pall Corporation, 154–155
Paper products industry, 268, 355, 356, 360–361, 484
Partagas cigars, 155
Partial centralization, 398–399
People Express Airlines, 36, 65, 80, 96, 97, 105, 107–108, 111, 429, 517
PepsiCo, 16, 23, 123, 218
Perdue chickens, 121
Perkin-Elmer, 404
Personal computer industry, 5, 189, 207, 301, 507, 525–526


---PAGE BREAK---

Personnel rotation among business units, 406
Pharmaceutical industry, 4
Philco Corporation, 190
Philip Morris, 324, 350, 352, 505, 507
Piano industry, 144
Pioneering costs, 189–190
Portable cassette player industry, 175–176, 297
Porter, Michael E., 320n, 354n, 530n
Portfolio management, 317, 319, 381, 384, 532
Postage meter industry, 5
Predetermined elements of industry structure, 451, 456
Preemption in positioning, 187
Price cutting, response to, 510–511
Price discrimination, 205n, 428
Price premium, 131, 139–140, 160
Price sensitivity
   bundling and, 433
   cross subsidization and, 437–438
Pricing
   competitor, 213
   complementary products and, 419–420
   cross subsidization: see Cross subsidization
   defensive, 489, 511
   incorrect, by leaders, 532–533
   transfer, 404
Primary activities, 38, 39–40, 43–45, 48–50, 166, 246–247
Process technological change, 177–179
Procter & Gamble Company (P&G), 157, 186, 211, 226, 322, 326, 328,
336, 356, 360–363, 379, 409, 414, 484, 498, 499, 508, 514, 516, 520
Procurement, 37, 41
   cost leadership strategy and, 106–107
   technology and, 166, 168
Procurement interrelationships, 337–339, 346–347, 377
Product design, low-cost, 105, 520
Product life cycle, 194–196
Product line expansion, 490


---PAGE BREAK---

Product technological change, 177–179
Production interrelationships, 337, 338, 340, 342, 345–346, 376–377
Professional services industry, 144
Promotion from within, 406–407
Prudential-Bache Securities, 322
Pry, Robert H., 302n
Psychographics, buyer type identiﬁcation and, 244
Pulsar, 261, 489
Purchase criteria, 141–149
   change in, 157
   unrecognized, 157
   value activation and, 150, 151
Purchase occasion, buyer type identiﬁcation and, 244
Purchased input costs
   analysis of, 88–93
   cost leadership strategy and, 106–107, 116
   drivers of, 91, 92
Quaker State Corporation, 505
Qualiﬁcation costs, 286
Quality assurance activities, 44–45
Ralston-Purina, 218
Rank Xerox, 530
“Razor and blade” strategy: see Cross subsidization
RCA Corporation, 190, 212, 292, 309, 423, 530
Reconﬁgured value chains, 99, 107–111, 158, 518–523
Record industry, 296
Redeﬁnition of scope, 518, 523–528
Regions, segmentation and, 246
Relative value/price of a substitute, 279–280; see also Substitution
Remington Company, 450
Renault, 507
Reputation, 186–187
Residential siding industry, 295
Response to attack, 508–511


---PAGE BREAK---

Retaliation, 210, 219, 488, 494–498, 530–533
Revlon, Inc., 227
Richardson-Vicks, Inc., 522
Ricoh Corporation, 262, 524
Risk proﬁles of buyers, 289
Risk-taking, competitor, 215
Rivalry, 4–7, 10
   bundling and, 429
   gentleman’s game and, 533, 534
   segmentation and, 234–236, 256
   substitution and, 289
   technology and, 174–175
Robertson, Thomas S., 299n
Robitschek, Ruth, 445n
Rockwell International Corporation, 128, 348
Roper Company, 450
Royal Crown Cola, 16, 267–268
Royal Dutch/Shell, 447, 478n
Rubber industry, 4–5, 226
Rules of competition, 213
Rumelt, Richard, 445n
Savin Company, 262, 524
Scale
   bundling and, 426–427, 435
   cost advantage and
   asset utilization and, 85
   control of, 100–101
   discretionary policies and, 84, 87
   inﬂuence on costs, 70–73
   integration and, 87
   location and, 87
   measures of, 72–73
   purchased input costs and, 92
   sustainability of, 112
   defensive increase in, 491–492


---PAGE BREAK---

   differentiation and
   cost of differentiation and, 129
   inﬂuence on uniqueness, 127
   sharing and, 328–330
   technology and, 169–170, 195, 196
Scenarios
   deﬁned, 446
   industry: see Industry scenarios
   macroscenarios, 446–447, 479
Schering-Plough, 227
Schocker, Allan D., 130n, 146n
SCM, 507
Scott Paper Company, 322, 356
Scoville Company, 320
Sears, Roebuck and Company, 23, 212, 245, 322, 401
Sector organizational structures, 395–397
Segment attractiveness, 256–257
Segment cost behavior, 93–94
Segment interrelationships, 258–264, 319–320
Segment scope, 54–55
Segment spillover, 261
Segmentation
   industry: see Industry segmentation
   market, 231–232
Seiko, 77–78, 261, 489
Semiconductor industry, 125, 190, 208, 219
Sequencing strategies, 524
Seven Up, 218, 352
Shapiro, Benson P., 241n
Sharing of value activities, 78, 103, 129, 323–324, 326–350, 371–372
   complementary products and, 421
   conﬂicts over priorities in, 387
   costs of, 259, 261, 270, 331–335, 372, 385
   cost advantage, 326, 328–331
   differentiation and, 326, 330–331
   difﬁculty of matching and, 335–336


---PAGE BREAK---

   horizontal strategy and, 368–372, 375–378
   negative leverage from, 381–382
   among segments, 258–264
   value chain and, 326, 327
Shearson/American Express, 411
Shearson Loeb Rhoades, 410
Shrinkage barriers, 225, 485
Signals of value
   complementary products and, 419
   deﬁned, 139
   ignoring need for, 161
   reinforcing differentiation with, 154–155
   signaling criteria, 142, 143–145, 147–148
   substitution and, 279–280, 286, 295–296, 308
SISCO, 56
Skills, transference of: see Intangible interrelationships
Smirnoff Vodka, 23, 143
Smith International, 10, 128
Soft contact lens industry, 105
Soft drink industry, 4, 16, 123, 218, 224, 267–268, 289, 533
Software industry, 203–204
Solar heating industry, 295
Sony, 297, 377
Southwest Airlines, 107–108, 517
Spillover of learning: see Learning
Sprint, 109
Square D, 322
Squibb Corporation, 208–209, 215
Srinivasan, V., 130n, 147n
Staley, A. E., Company, 516
Standard Brands, 191, 516
Standards, deﬁnition of, 188
Steel industry, 4–5, 97, 102, 105
Steinway and Sons, 145, 145n
Stengrevics, John M., 390n, 397n, 398n, 404n
Stihl Company, 450, 524


---PAGE BREAK---

Stolichnaya Vodka, 23
Stouffer’s, 150, 152, 153, 157, 159, 187, 513, 519, 521
Strategic business units (SBUs), 317
Strategic groups, 234n
Strategic mapping, 466
Strategic planning
   generic strategies and, 25–26
   horizontal, 403
   scenarios and, 478–481
Structural analysis of industries: see Industry structure
Stuart, Alexander, 109n
“Stuck-in-the-middle” position, 16–17, 19, 535
Substitution, 4–7, 9, 10, 58–59, 273–314
   complementary products and, 284, 309, 439, 440
   defensive strategy and, 310–312, 506
   technology and, 174, 196, 289, 294–295
Subtechnologies, 166, 180
Sun-Diamond, 102
Supplier cost behavior, 91, 93
Supplier linkages, 50–51, 77, 78, 125
Supplier power, 4–7, 9, 10, 58, 174, 234–236, 256; see also Bargaining
power
Suppliers
   enlistment of, for defense against substitution, 311
   selection of, 107
   tieing up, 493
Supply and demand, 10–11
Support activities, 38, 40–45, 166
Sustainable competitive advantage, 11, 515
Switching back costs, 288
Switching costs
   changing, 296
   differentiation and, 159
   ﬁrst movers and, 187
   optimal market conﬁguration and, 222–223
   raising, as defensive strategy, 490–491


---PAGE BREAK---

   reduction of, 308
   segmentation and, 290–291
   subsidy of, 308
   technological change and, 173, 174
   types of, 286–288
Synergy, 317–318, 325
Tampax, 356, 531–532
Tangible interrelationships, 326–350
   deﬁned, 323–324
   sharing: see Sharing of value activities
Task forces, 401
Technological change, 20, 37, 41–42, 96, 164–200, 209–210
   bundling and, 435
   cost advantage and, 169–171, 181–184
   cost drivers and, 84, 169–172
   desirable, tests of, 171–172
   differentiation and, 169–171, 181–184, 195
   discontinuous, 190, 197, 534
   industry structure and, 172–176, 192
   interrelationships and, 170, 175, 184, 321–322
   segmentation and, 271
   strategy and: see Technology strategy
   substitution and, 174, 196, 289, 294–295
   uniqueness drivers and, 170–172
   value chain and, 166–169
Technological interrelationships, 337–339, 347–348, 376–378
Technology
   alternative, 492
   buyer type identiﬁcation and, 242
   diffusion of, 185–186, 195
   forecasting, 480
   investment in, 104–105
   licensing, 191–193, 219
   product varieties and, 240
Technology strategy, 176–200


---PAGE BREAK---

Teece, David J., 53n
Telecommunication equipment industry, 95
Television set industry, 188, 190, 212, 235, 237, 307–308, 525, 530
Test markets, disruption of, 498
Texas Instruments, 13, 26, 507
Tire industry, 534
Timex, 248, 533
Timing
   cost advantage and
   asset utilization and, 85
   control of, 104
   inﬂuence on costs, 79–80
   learning and, 80
   purchased input costs and, 92
   sustainability of, 112–113
   differentiation and
   cost of differentiation and, 129
   inﬂuence on uniqueness, 126
   technology and, 170
Timken Company, 121
Tobacco industry, 7, 8
Toyota, 526
Trans World Corporation, 320
Transamerica, 409
Transfer pricing, 404
Transportation industry, 72
Truck (heavy) industry, 9, 133–134, 138
Trucking industry, 83, 507
Trusthouse Forte, 18
TRW, 499
Turbine generator industry, 194, 235, 237, 256
“Turf,” protection of, 386
TWA, 97
Typewriter industry, 534
Unbundling, 429n, 430–432, 434, 436, 490


---PAGE BREAK---

Uncertainty
   competitive strategy under: see Industry scenarios
   industry structure and, 451–457
   substitution and, 284–285
Underwood, 534
Union Carbide Corporation, 105
Uniqueness: see Differentiation
Uniqueness drivers
   inﬂuence of, 124–127
   technology and, 170–172
United Airlines, 36, 97
U. S. Home, 424
United Technologies, 321
Upjohn Company, The, 506
Upstream value, 34
USA Today, 525, 528
Use criteria, 141–143, 145–149
Utilities industry, 41, 256–257
Utterback, James M., 194
Value, 3, 38; see also Buyer value signals of: see Signals of value of a
substitute, relative, 279–286, 294–295
Value activities, 38–52; see also Value chain
Value added, 39
Value chain, 33–63
   of buyers, 34, 52–53, 130–135, 280–286, 534
   of competitors, 97–98, 101–102
   cost advantage and, 97–99
   competitor costs determination, 98–99
   reconﬁguration of, 99, 107–111
   cost analysis and, 64–70
   deﬁning of, 45–48
   differentiation and, 120–127, 153–154, 157–158
   industry segmentation and, 236–237, 258–264
   industry structure and, 58–59
   linkages within: see Linkages within value chain


---PAGE BREAK---

   organizational structure and, 59–61
   reconﬁguration of, 99, 107–111, 158, 518–523
   tangible interrelationships and, 326, 327
   technology and, 166–169
   value activities and: see Value activities
   vertical linkages and: see Vertical linkages
Value system, 34, 35
Velcro, 137
Vertical integration: see Integration
Vertical linkages, 50–52, 56, 76–78, 85, 87, 103, 112, 116–117, 125, 158
Vetco, 520–521
Viability, competitor, 213
Video cassette recorder industry, 192
Video game industry, 4–5, 95, 192, 294
Vodka industry, 23
Volvo, 507
Wack, Pierre, 445n, 447n, 478n
Wal-Mart, 23
Wall Street Journal, 527, 528
Watch industry, 248, 533
Wells, John R., 62n, 326n, 351n
Western Company, 227
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, 184, 322
Weyerhaeuser, 356
White Motor Company, 507
Williamson, Oliver E., 415n
Wine industry, 514–515
WKM, 530
Wrigley Company, 188
Write Brothers, 531
Xerox Corporation, 137, 207, 217, 262, 323, 355, 440–441, 492, 515, 524,
530, 532
Yellen, Janet L., 428n


---PAGE BREAK---

Yip, George, 519n
YKK, 522
Zenith Corporation, 212, 532


---PAGE BREAK---

THE FREE PRESS
A Division of Simon & Schuster Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 1985 by Michael E. Porter
Introduction copyright © 1998 by Michael E. Porter
All rights reserved, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part in any form.
First Free Press Edition 1985
THE FREE PRESS and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Porter, Michael E.
Competitive advantage: creating and sustaining superior performance: with a new
introduction/Michael E. Porter.
p. cm.
Originally published: New York: Free Press; London: Collier Macmillan, c1985.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Competition. 2. Industrial management. I. Title.
HD41.P668 1998
658—dc21
98–9581
CIP
ISBN 0–684-84146–0
ISBN: 978-0-6848-4146-5 (print)
ISBN: 978-1-4165-9584-7 (eBook)


---PAGE BREAK---

