

---PAGE BREAK---



---PAGE BREAK---

OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

PLATFORM
REVOLUTION
HOW NETWORKED MARKETS
ARE TRANSFORMING THE ECONOMY—
AND HOW TO MAKE THEM WORK FOR YOU
Geoffrey G. Parker,
Marshall W. Van Alstyne, and
Sangeet Paul Choudary
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

To the memory of my mother, Mary Lynn Goodrich Parker.
For my A., my X. and my E.
For Devika, for always being there.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

CONTENTS
PREFACE
  1. TODAY: Welcome to the Platform Revolution
  2. NETWORK EFFECTS: The Power of the Platform
  3. ARCHITECTURE: Principles for Designing a Successful Platform
  4. DISRUPTION: How Platforms Conquer and Transform Traditional
Industries
  5. LAUNCH: Chicken or Egg? Eight Ways to Launch a Successful Platform
  6. MONETIZATION: Capturing the Value Created by Network Effects
  7. OPENNESS: Defining What Platform Users and Partners Can and Cannot
Do
  8. GOVERNANCE: Policies to Increase Value and Enhance Growth
  9. METRICS: How Platform Managers Can Measure What Really Matters
10. STRATEGY: How Platforms Change Competition
11. POLICY: How Platforms Should (and Should Not) Be Regulated
12. TOMORROW: The Future of the Platform Revolution
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


---PAGE BREAK---

GLOSSARY
NOTES
INDEX
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

PREFACE
Platform Revolution is our attempt to provide the first clear, complete,
authoritative guide to one of the most important economic and social
developments of our time—the rise of the platform as a business and
organizational model.
The platform model underlies the success of many of today’s biggest,
fastest-growing, and most powerfully disruptive companies, from Google,
Amazon, and Microsoft to Uber, Airbnb, and eBay. What’s more, platforms
are beginning to transform a range of other economic and social arenas,
from health care and education to energy and government. No matter who
you are or what you do for a living, it’s highly likely that platforms have
already changed your life as an employee, a business leader, a professional,
a consumer, or a citizen—and are poised to produce even greater changes in
your daily life in the years to come.
Over the past two decades, we have come to recognize that powerful
economic, social, and technological forces are transforming our world in
ways that few people fully understand. We’ve dedicated ourselves to
studying those forces and how they work—how they are disrupting
traditional companies, upending markets, and altering careers, and how they
are being leveraged by startup businesses that are using them to dominate
traditional industries and launch new ones.
Realizing that the platform business model is the leading embodiment of
these forces, we began branching out from our academic and corporate
backgrounds to work closely with companies that are deeply engaged in
creating platform businesses, including Intel, Microsoft, SAP, Thomson
Reuters, Intuit, 500 Startups, Haier Group, Telecom Italia, and many others.
We’ll recount their stories in the pages that follow.


---PAGE BREAK---

Our goal in writing this book is to solve a number of puzzles posed by
the rapid rise of the platform model. These puzzles include:
•    How have platform businesses such as Uber and Airbnb managed to disrupt and dominate vast
traditional industries within just a few years of their own launch? (We address this question
throughout the book, and focus on it especially closely in chapter 4.)
•    How can platform businesses outcompete traditional companies while employing just a tiny
fraction of the number of people the incumbents employ? (See chapters 1 and 2.)
•    How has the rise of the platform transformed the principles governing economic growth and
business competition? How do platform businesses resemble the industrial giants of the past—
and how do they differ? (See chapters 2 and 4.)
•    How and why have specific companies and business leaders soared to the heights of success,
plummeted to the depths of failure—or both—as a result of their use, or misuse, of platform
business methods? Why did Blackberry fall from 49 percent market share to 2 percent in just
four years? How did Steve Jobs fumble his company’s platform-model choices in the 1980s
… and then get them dramatically right in the 2010s? (See chapters 2 and 7.)
•    How do some companies solve the challenge of attracting producers and consumers to a new
platform simultaneously, while others fail miserably? Why is free pricing sometimes a
brilliant business move, and sometimes a fatal error? (See chapters 5 and 6.)
•    Why do competitive markets flourish in some platform arenas, while in others winner-take-all
markets dominated by a single platform swiftly emerge? (See chapter 10.)
•    As platforms grow, they are subject to abuse: customers shopping on eBay can be defrauded,
women seeking dates on Match.com can be assaulted, homes rented on Airbnb can be
ransacked. Who should pay the price? And how should platform users be protected? (See
chapters 8 and 11.)
In answering questions like these, we’ve sought to create a practical
guide to the new economy that is reshaping the world in which we all live,
work, and play. Platform Revolution is an outgrowth of three careers that
have been spent immersed in studying and unraveling the mysteries of the
platform model.
Two of the authors—Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne—became
interested in the emerging network economy during the dot-com boom of
1997–2000, when both were PhD students at MIT. Those were heady times.
The NASDAQ stock index spiked by more than 80 percent as venture
capitalists poured investment money into startups boasting cool new
technologies and names featuring the prefix e or the suffix com. With
traditional metrics of business success seemingly rendered obsolete, several
companies launched hugely successful initial public offerings (IPOs)
without ever having made a dime in profit. Students and faculty alike were
dropping out of school to launch fledgling technology businesses.
Inevitably, the market came crashing down. Beginning in March 2000,
trillions of dollars’ worth of paper valuations vanished in a matter of


---PAGE BREAK---

months. Yet amid the rubble, certain companies survived. While Webvan
and Pets.com disappeared, Amazon and eBay survived and thrived. Steve
Jobs, who had lost Apple to mistakes he made earlier, recovered, returned to
Apple, and built it into a juggernaut. Eventually, the online world emerged
from the depths of the 2000 downturn to become stronger than ever.
Why were some Internet-based businesses successful while others were
not? Were the differences a matter of random luck, or were deeper design
principles at work? What are the rules of the new economics of networks?
Geoff and Marshall set about trying to answer these questions.
It turned out to be a harder challenge than they expected. They ended up
having to develop a new economic theory of two-sided networks. Their
Harvard Business Review article “Strategies for Two-Sided Markets,”
coauthored with Harvard professor Thomas R. Eisenmann, laid out what
became one of the most widely taught theories of Internet business, one that
is still taught in MBA programs around the world. Along with the work of
other scholars, Geoff’s and Marshall’s insights helped to reshape
mainstream thinking about business regulation. Later, at the MIT Initiative
on the Digital Economy, they furthered their work with such firms as
AT&T, Dun & Bradstreet, Cisco, IBM, Intel, Jawbone, Microsoft,
Salesforce, SAP, Thomson Reuters, and many others.
The third author of this book, Sangeet Choudary, was a high school
student during the dot-com boom of the 1990s, but he was already
fascinated by the immense power of the Internet—particularly its power to
create business models capable of rapid, scalable growth. Later, while
working as the head of innovation and new ventures at Yahoo and Intuit,
Sangeet started digging deeper into the factors that spell success or failure
for Internet startups. His research on business model failure, coupled with
his conversations with venture capitalists and entrepreneurs, helped him
identify the increasing importance of a new and massively scalable business
model: the platform.
In 2012, Sangeet started focusing on platform businesses full-time. His
premise: as the world becomes increasingly networked, businesses that do a
better job of harnessing the power of platform networks will win. Sangeet
has offered guidance on platform strategy to a wide range of companies
around the world, ranging from startups to Fortune 100 firms, and his
popular blog (http://platformed.info) has been featured on leading media
globally.


---PAGE BREAK---

In the spring of 2013, Marshall and Geoff came across Sangeet’s work,
and we immediately realized the value of a collaboration. Our partnership
coalesced in the summer of 2013 when we met for three weeks at MIT to
work together on building a cohesive view of platform dynamics. Since
then, we’ve cochaired the MIT Platform Strategy Summit, spoken about
platform models at leading world forums such as the G20 summit, Emerce
eDay, and TED, taught about platforms at the world’s leading universities,
and collaborated on implementing platform strategy with business clients
around the world.
Now the three of us have written Platform Revolution, representing our
first attempt to bring together our thinking on platforms in a cohesive,
comprehensive fashion.
We’ve been fortunate enough to have access to the ideas and experiences
of some of the greatest firms in the world, having worked with more than a
hundred companies in diverse industries on developing and implementing
their platform strategies. At the MIT Platform Strategy Summit, leaders of
organizations that are building platforms, managing them, or reacting to
them, including edX, Samsung, Apigee, Accenture, OkCupid, Alibaba, and
many others, have shared their stories with one another and with us. We
have also benefited from working with a group of world-class scholars who
have dedicated their careers to understanding the digital economy, and who
participate in the annual Workshop on Information Systems and Economics
(WISE) and the Boston University Platform Strategy Research Symposium,
as well as some of the world’s leading thinkers in adjacent fields such as
behavior design, data science, systems design theory, and agile
methodologies.
We have written this book because we believe that digital connectivity
and the platform model it makes possible are changing the world forever.
The platform-driven economic transformation is producing enormous
benefits for society as a whole and for the businesses and other
organizations that create wealth, generate growth, and serve the needs of
humankind. At the same time, it is creating sweeping changes in the rules
that have traditionally governed success and failure. We hope that Platform
Revolution will help market upstarts, incumbent organizations, regulators
and policy-makers, and engaged citizens effectively navigate the
challenging new landscape of a world in which platforms win.


---PAGE BREAK---

GEOFFREY G. PARKER            
MARSHALL W. VAN ALSTYNE
SANGEET PAUL CHOUDARY    
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

PLATFORM
REVOLUTION
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

1
TODAY
Welcome to the
Platform Revolution
In October 2007, a tiny item appeared in an online newsletter aimed at
industrial designers—men and women who shape the appearance of
everything from coffee makers to jumbo jets. It referred to an unusual
housing option for professionals who planned to attend the upcoming joint
convention of two industrial design organizations, the International
Congress of Societies of Industrial Design (ICSID) and the Industrial
Designers Society of America (IDSA):
If you’re heading out to the ICSID/IDSA World Congress/Connecting ’07 event in San Francisco
next week and have yet to make accommodations, well, consider networking in your jam-jams.
That’s right. For “an affordable alternative to hotels in the city,” imagine yourself in a fellow
design industry person’s home, fresh awake from a snooze on the ol’ air mattress, chatting about
the day’s upcoming events over Pop Tarts and OJ.
The hosts for this “networking in your jam-jams” opportunity were Brian
Chesky and Joe Gebbia, budding designers who’d moved to San Francisco
only to find they couldn’t afford the rent on the loft they shared. Strapped
for cash, they impulsively decided to make air mattresses and their own
services as part-time tour guides available to convention attendees. Chesky
and Gebbia attracted three weekend guests and made a thousand bucks,
which covered the next month’s rent.
Their casual space-sharing experience would launch a revolution in one
of the world’s biggest industries.


---PAGE BREAK---

Chesky and Gebbia recruited a third friend, Nathan Blecharczyk, to help
them make affordable room rentals a long-term business. Of course, renting
space in their San Francisco loft wouldn’t yield much revenue. So they
designed a website that allowed anyone, anywhere, to make a spare sofa or
guest room available to travelers. In exchange, the company—now dubbed
Air Bed & Breakfast (Airbnb), after the air mattresses in Chesky and
Gebbia’s loft—took a slice of the rental fee.
The three partners started out focusing on events for which hotel space
was often sold out, scoring their first big hit at the 2008 South by Southwest
festival in Austin. But they soon discovered that demand for friendly,
affordable accommodations provided by local residents existed year-round
and nationwide—and even internationally.
Today, Airbnb is a giant enterprise active in 119 countries, where it lists
over 500,000 properties ranging from studio apartments to actual castles
and has served over ten million guests. In its last round of investment
funding (April 2014), the company was valued at more than $10 billion—a
level surpassed by only a handful of the world’s greatest hotel chains.
In less than a decade, Airbnb has siphoned off a growing segment of
customers from the traditional hospitality industry—all without owning a
single hotel room of its own.
It’s a tale of dramatic, unexpected change. Yet it’s only one in a series of
improbable industry upheavals that share a similar DNA:
•    Smartphone-based car service Uber was launched in a single city (San Francisco) in March
2009. Less than five years later, it was valued by investors at over $50 billion, and is poised to
challenge or replace the traditional taxi business in many of the more than 200 global cities it
operates in—all without owning a single car.
•    China-based retailing giant Alibaba features nearly a billion different products on just one of
its many business portals (Taobao, a consumer-to-consumer marketplace similar to eBay) and
has been dubbed by The Economist “the world’s biggest bazaar”—all without owning a single
item of inventory.
•    With over 1.5 billion subscribers visiting regularly to read news, look at photos, listen to
music, and watch videos, Facebook garners an estimated $14 billion in annual advertising
revenue (2015) and is arguably the world’s biggest media company—all without producing a
single piece of original content.
How can a major business segment be invaded and conquered in a matter
of months by an upstart with none of the resources traditionally deemed
essential for survival, let alone market dominance? And why is this
happening today in one industry after another?


---PAGE BREAK---

The answer is the power of the platform—a new business model that
uses technology to connect people, organizations, and resources in an
interactive ecosystem in which amazing amounts of value can be created
and exchanged. Airbnb, Uber, Alibaba, and Facebook are just four examples
from a list of disruptive platforms that includes Amazon, YouTube, eBay,
Wikipedia, iPhone, Upwork, Twitter, KAYAK, Instagram, Pinterest, and
dozens more. Each is unique and focused on a distinctive industry and
market. And each has harnessed the power of the platform to transform a
swath of the global economy. Many more comparable transformations are
on the horizon.
The platform is a simple-sounding yet transformative concept that is
radically changing business, the economy, and society at large. As we’ll
explain, practically any industry in which information is an important
ingredient is a candidate for the platform revolution. That includes
businesses whose “product” is information (like education and media) but
also any business where access to information about customer needs, price
fluctuations, supply and demand, and market trends has value—which
includes almost every business.
So perhaps it’s no wonder that the list of fastest-growing global brands is
increasingly dominated by platform businesses. In fact, in 2014, three of the
world’s five largest firms as measured by market capitalization—Apple,
Google, and Microsoft—all run platform business models. One of these,
Google, debuted as a public company in 2004. Another, Apple, nearly went
bankrupt a few years earlier—when it still ran a closed business model
rather than a platform. Now incumbent giants from Walmart and Nike to
John Deere, GE, and Disney are all scrambling to adopt the platform
approach to their businesses. To varying degrees, platform businesses are
claiming a large and growing share of the economy in every region of the
world (see Figure 1.1).


---PAGE BREAK---

FIGURE 1.1. North America has more platform firms creating value, as measured by market
capitalization, than any other region in the world. Platform firms in China, with its large,
homogeneous market, are growing fast. Platform businesses in Europe, with its more
fragmented market, have less than a quarter the value of such firms in North America, and the
developing regions of Africa and Latin America are not far behind. Source: Peter Evans, Center
for Global Enterprise.
The disruptive power of platforms is also transforming the lives of
individuals in ways that would have been impossible a few years ago:
•    Joe Fairless was a New York advertising executive who dabbled in real estate investing on the
side. Teaching a real estate class on Skillshare, an education platform, introduced Joe to
hundreds of eager young investors and helped him hone his speaking skills—enabling him to
raise over a million dollars to launch his own investment firm and quit the ad business.
•    Taran Matharu was a twenty-two-year-old business student living in London when he decided
to write a book during the annual Novel Writing Month challenge. He posted excerpts on
Wattpad, a story-sharing platform, and quickly attracted over five million readers. His first
novel, Summoner, is being published in Britain and ten other countries, and Matharu is a full-
time author.
•    James Erwin was a software manual writer in Des Moines, Iowa, as well as a history buff.
Browsing the community-based news platform Reddit one afternoon, he spotted a question
about what would happen if a battalion of modern U.S. Marines took on the ancient Roman
Empire. His typed response attracted eager followers and, within weeks, a movie deal. Erwin
has now left his job to devote himself to screenwriting.
Teacher or lawyer, photographer or scientist, plumber or therapist—no
matter what kind of work you do, the chances are good that a platform is
poised to transform it, creating new opportunities and, in some cases,
daunting new challenges.
The platform revolution is here—and the world it is ushering in is here to
stay. But what exactly is a platform? What makes it unique? And what


---PAGE BREAK---

accounts for its remarkable transformative power? These are questions
we’ll begin to explore in the remainder of this chapter.
Let’s start with a basic definition. A platform is a business based on
enabling value-creating interactions between external producers and
consumers. The platform provides an open, participative infrastructure for
these interactions and sets governance conditions for them. The platform’s
overarching purpose: to consummate matches among users and facilitate the
exchange of goods, services, or social currency, thereby enabling value
creation for all participants.
Broken down in this way, the workings of platforms may seem simple
enough. Yet today’s platforms, empowered by digital technology that
annihilates barriers of time and space, and employing smart, sophisticated
software tools that connect producers and consumers more precisely,
speedily, and easily than ever before, are producing results that are little
short of miraculous.
THE PLATFORM REVOLUTION
AND THE SHAPE OF CHANGE
To understand the powerful forces that are being unleashed by the explosion
of platform businesses, it helps to think about how value has long been
created and transferred in most markets. The traditional system employed
by most businesses is one we describe as a pipeline. By contrast with a
platform, a pipeline is a business that employs a step-by-step arrangement
for creating and transferring value, with producers at one end and
consumers at the other. A firm first designs a product or service. Then the
product is manufactured and offered for sale, or a system is put in place to
deliver the service. Finally, a customer shows up and purchases the product
or service. Because of its simple, single-track shape, we may also describe a
pipeline business as a linear value chain.
In recent years, more and more businesses are shifting from the pipeline
structure to the platform structure. In this shift, the simple pipeline
arrangement is transformed into a complex relationship in which producers,
consumers, and the platform itself enter into a variable set of relationships.
In the world of platforms, different types of users—some of them
producers, some of them consumers, and some of them people who may


---PAGE BREAK---

play both roles at various times—connect and conduct interactions with one
another using the resources provided by the platform. In the process, they
exchange, consume, and sometimes cocreate something of value. Rather
than flowing in a straight line from producers to consumers, value may be
created, changed, exchanged, and consumed in a variety of ways and
places, all made possible by the connections that the platform facilitates.
Every platform operates differently, attracts different kinds of users, and
creates different forms of value, but these same basic elements can be
recognized in every platform business. In the mobile phone industry, for
example, there are currently two major platforms—Apple’s iOS and the
Google-sponsored Android. Consumers who sign up for one of these
platforms can consume value provided by the platform itself—for example,
the image-making capability provided by the phone’s built-in camera. But
they can also consume value supplied by a set of developers who produce
content for the platform to extend its functionality—for example, the value
provided by an app that users access through Apple’s iPhone. The result is
an exchange of value that is made possible by the platform itself.
In itself, the shift from the traditional linear value chain to the complex
value matrix of a platform may sound reasonably straightforward. But its
implications are staggering. The spread of the platform model into one
industry after another is causing a series of revolutionary changes in almost
every aspect of business. Let’s consider a few of these changes.
Platforms beat pipelines because platforms scale more efficiently by
eliminating gatekeepers. Until recently, most businesses were built around
products, which were designed and made at one end of the pipeline and
delivered to consumers at the other end.* Today, plenty of pipeline-based
businesses still exist—but when platform-based businesses enter the same
marketplace, the platforms virtually always win.
One reason is that pipelines rely on inefficient gatekeepers to manage the
flow of value from the producer to the consumer. In the traditional
publishing industry, editors select a few books and authors from among the
thousands offered to them and hope the ones they choose will prove to be
popular. It’s a time-consuming, labor-intensive process based mainly on
instinct and guesswork. By contrast, Amazon’s Kindle platform allows
anyone to publish a book, relying on real-time consumer feedback to
determine which books will succeed and which will fail. The platform


---PAGE BREAK---

system can grow to scale more rapidly and efficiently because the
traditional gatekeepers—editors—are replaced by market signals provided
automatically by the entire community of readers.
The elimination of gatekeepers also allows consumers greater freedom to
select products that suit their needs. The traditional model of higher
education forces students and their parents to purchase one-size-fits-all
bundles that include administration, teaching, facilities, research, and much
more. In their role as gatekeepers, universities can require families to buy
the entire package because it is the only way they can get the valuable
certification that a degree offers. However, given the choice, many students
would likely be selective in the services they consume. Once there is an
alternate certification that employers are willing to accept, universities will
find it increasingly challenging to maintain the bundle. Unsurprisingly,
developing such an alternate certification is among the primary goals of
platform education firms such as Coursera.
Consulting and law firms are also in the business of selling bundles.
Firms might be willing to pay high prices for the services of experts. In
order to gain access, they must also purchase the services of relatively
junior staff at high markups. In the future, the most talented lawyers and
consultants might work individually with firms and transact across a
platform that can supply the back office and lower-level services once
provided by a law or consulting firm. Platforms like Upwork are already
making professional services available to prospective employers while
eliminating the bundling effect imposed by traditional gatekeepers.
Platforms beat pipelines because platforms unlock new sources of
value creation and supply. Consider how the hotel industry has
traditionally worked. Growth required hospitality firms like Hilton or
Marriott to add additional rooms to sell through their existing brands using
sophisticated back-office reservation and payments systems. This means
continually scouting the real estate markets for promising territories,
investing in existing properties or building new ones, and spending large
sums to maintain, upgrade, expand, and improve them.
Upstart Airbnb is, in one sense, in the same business as Hilton or
Marriott. Like the hotel giants, it uses refined pricing and booking systems
designed to allow guests to find, reserve, and pay for rooms as they need
them. But Airbnb applies the platform model to the hotel business: Airbnb


---PAGE BREAK---

doesn’t own any rooms. Instead, it created and maintains the platform that
allows individual participants to provide the rooms directly to consumers.
In return, Airbnb takes a 9–15 percent (average 11 percent) transaction fee
for every rental arranged through the platform.1
One implication is that growth can be much faster for Airbnb or any rival
platform than for a traditional hotel company since growth is no longer
constrained by the ability to deploy capital and manage physical assets. It
may take years for a hotel chain to select and purchase a new piece of real
estate, design and build a new resort, and hire and train staff. By contrast,
Airbnb can increase its “inventory” of properties as quickly as it can sign up
users with spare rooms to rent. As a result, in just a few years, Airbnb has
achieved a scope and value that a traditional hotelier can hope to reach only
after decades of often risky investment and hard work.
In platform markets, the nature of supply changes. Supply now unlocks
spare capacity and harnesses contributions from the community which used
to be only a source of demand. Whereas the leanest traditional businesses
ran on just-in-time inventory, new organizational platforms run on not-
even-mine inventory. If Hertz could deliver a car to an airport just as the
plane arrived, it ran as well as could be expected. Now RelayRides borrows
the car of a departing traveler in order to loan it to an arriving traveler. The
person who used to pay to park an empty car now gets paid, complete with
insurance, to let others use it. Everyone wins except Hertz and the other
traditional car rental companies. TV stations built studios and hired staff to
produce video. YouTube, operating a different business model, has more
viewers than any station, and it uses content produced by the people who
watch it. Everyone wins except the TV networks and movie studios that
once had a near-monopoly on video production. Singapore-based Viki is
challenging the traditional media value chain by using an open community
of translators to add subtitles to Asian movies and soap operas. Viki then
licenses the subtitled videos to distributors in other countries.
Thus, platforms disrupt the traditional competitive landscape by
exposing new supply to the market. Hotels that must cover fixed costs find
themselves competing with firms that have no fixed costs. This works for
the new firms because there is spare capacity that can be brought to market
through the assistance of the platform intermediary. The sharing economy is
built on the idea that many items, such as automobiles, boats, and even
lawnmowers, sit idle most of the time. Before the rise of the platform, it


---PAGE BREAK---

might have been possible to loan something to a family member, close
friend, or neighbor, but much harder to loan to a stranger. This is because it
would be difficult to trust that your home would be left in good shape
(Airbnb), your car would be returned undamaged (RelayRides), or your
lawnmower would come back (NeighborGoods).
The effort necessary to individually verify credit- and trustworthiness is
an example of the high transaction costs that used to prevent exchange. By
providing default insurance contracts and reputation systems to encourage
good behavior, platforms dramatically lower transaction costs and create
new markets as new producers start producing for the first time.
Platforms beat pipelines by using data-based tools to create
community feedback loops. We’ve seen how the Kindle platform relies on
reactions from the community of readers to determine which books will be
widely read and which will not. Platforms of all kinds rely on similar
feedback loops. Platforms like Airbnb and YouTube use such feedback
loops to compete with traditional hotels and television channels. As these
platforms gather community signals about the quality of content (in the case
of YouTube) or the reputation of service providers (on Airbnb), subsequent
market interactions become increasingly efficient. Feedback from other
consumers makes it easy to find videos or rental properties that are likely to
suit your needs. Products that receive overwhelmingly negative feedback
usually disappear from the platform completely.
By contrast, traditional pipeline firms rely on mechanisms of control—
editors, managers, supervisors—to ensure quality and shape market
interactions. These control mechanisms are costly and inefficient to grow to
scale.
Wikipedia’s success demonstrates that platforms can leverage
community feedback to replace a traditional supply chain. Reference works
like the venerable Encyclopaedia Britannica were once created through
costly, complex, difficult-to-manage centralized supply chains of academic
experts, writers, and editors. Using the platform model, Wikipedia has built
an information source comparable to Britannica in quality and scope by
leveraging a community of external contributors to grow and police the
content.


---PAGE BREAK---

Platforms invert the firm. Because the bulk of a platform’s value is
created by its community of users, the platform business must shift its focus
from internal activities to external activities. In the process, the firm inverts
—it turns inside out, with functions from marketing to information
technology to operations to strategy all increasingly centering on people,
resources, and functions that exist outside the business, complementing or
replacing those that exist inside a traditional business.
The language used to describe this process of inversion differs from one
business function to another. In marketing, for example, Rob Cain, the CIO
of Coca-Cola, notes that the key terms used to define systems of message
delivery have shifted from broadcast to segmentation, and then to virality
and social influence; from push to pull; and from outbound to inbound. All
these terminological changes reflect the fact that marketing messages once
disseminated by company employees and agents now spread via consumers
themselves—a reflection of the inverted nature of communication in a
world dominated by platforms.2
Similarly, information technology systems have evolved from back-
office enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems to front-office consumer
relationship management (CRM) systems and, most recently, to out-of-the-
office experiments using social media and big data—another shift from
inward focus to outward focus. Finance is shifting its focus from
shareholder value and discounted cash flows of assets owned by the firm to
stakeholder value and the role of interactions that take place outside the
firm.
Operations management has likewise shifted from optimizing the firm’s
inventory and supply chain systems to managing external assets the firm
doesn’t directly control. Tom Goodwin, senior vice president of strategy for
Havas Media, describes this change succinctly: “Uber, the world’s largest
taxi company, owns no vehicles. Facebook, the world’s most popular media
owner, creates no content. Alibaba, the most valuable retailer, has no
inventory. And Airbnb, the world’s largest accommodation provider, owns
no real estate.”3 The community provides these resources.
Strategy has moved from controlling unique internal resources and
erecting competitive barriers to orchestrating external resources and
engaging vibrant communities. And innovation is no longer the province of
in-house experts and research and development labs, but is produced


---PAGE BREAK---

through crowdsourcing and the contribution of ideas by independent
participants in the platform.
External resources don’t completely replace internal resources—more
often they serve as a complement. But platform firms emphasize ecosystem
governance more than product optimization, and persuasion of outside
partners more than control of internal employees.
THE PLATFORM REVOLUTION:
HOW WILL YOU RESPOND?
As you’ll see in this book, the rise of the platform is driving transformations
in almost every corner of the economy and of society as a whole, from
education, media, and the professions to health care, energy, and
government. Figure 1.2 is a necessarily incomplete table of some notable
current arenas of platform activity, along with examples of some of the
platform enterprises at work in those industry sectors. Note that platforms
are continually evolving, that many platforms serve more than one purpose,
and that new platform companies are appearing every day. Many of the
businesses listed here are likely to be familiar to you; some may not be. The
stories behind a number of them will be recounted in this book. Our goal
here is to provide not a comprehensive or systematic overview but simply a
sketch which we hope will convey the growing scope and importance of
platform companies on the world stage.
 
INDUSTRY
EXAMPLES
Agriculture
John Deere, Intuit Fasal
Communication and
Networking
LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, Tinder,
Instagram, Snapchat, WeChat
Consumer Goods
Philips, McCormick Foods FlavorPrint
Education
Udemy, Skillshare, Coursera, edX, Duolingo


---PAGE BREAK---

Energy and Heavy
Industry
Nest, Tesla Powerwall, General Electric,
EnerNOC
Finance
Bitcoin, Lending Club, Kickstarter
Health Care
Cohealo, SimplyInsured, Kaiser Permanente
Gaming
Xbox, Nintendo, PlayStation
Labor and Professional
Services
Upwork, Fiverr, 99designs, Sittercity,
LegalZoom
Local Services
Yelp, Foursquare, Groupon, Angie’s List
Logistics and Delivery
Munchery, Foodpanda, Haier Group
Media
Medium, Viki, YouTube, Wikipedia,
Huffington Post, Kindle Publishing
Operating Systems
iOS, Android, MacOS, Microsoft Windows
Retail
Amazon, Alibaba, Walgreens, Burberry,
Shopkick
Transportation
Uber, Waze, BlaBlaCar, GrabTaxi, Ola Cabs
Travel
Airbnb, TripAdvisor
 
FIGURE 1.2. Some of the industry sectors currently being transformed by platform businesses,
along with examples of platform companies working in those arenas.
Figure 1.2 also suggests the remarkable diversity of platform businesses.
At a glance, there doesn’t seem to be much that companies like Twitter and
General Electric, Xbox and TripAdvisor, Instagram and John Deere all have
in common. Yet all are operating businesses that share the fundamental
platform DNA—they all exist to create matches and facilitate interactions


---PAGE BREAK---

among producers and consumers, whatever the goods being exchanged may
be.
As a result of the rise of the platform, almost all the traditional business
management 
practices—including 
strategy, 
operations, 
marketing,
production, research and development, and human resources—are in a state
of upheaval. We are in a disequilibrium time that affects every company and
individual business leader. The coming of the world of platforms is a major
reason why. 
Consequently, platform expertise has now become an essential attribute
for business leadership. Yet most people—including many business leaders
—are still struggling to come to grips with the rise of the platform.
In the chapters that follow, we’ll provide a comprehensive guide to the
platform business model and its growing impact on practically every sector
of the economy. The insights we’ll share are based on extensive research as
well as our experience as consultants working with platform businesses
large and small, in a wide range of industries and nonprofit arenas in
countries around the world.
You’ll learn precisely how platforms work, the varying structures they
assume, the numerous forms of value they create, and the almost limitless
range of users they serve. If you’re interested in starting your own platform
business—or in modifying an existing organization to take advantage of the
power of the platform—this book will serve as a manual to help you
navigate the complexities of designing, launching, managing, governing,
and growing a successful platform. And if running a platform business isn’t
for you, you’ll learn how the growing impact of platforms is likely to affect
you as a businessperson, a professional, a consumer, and a citizen—and
how you can participate happily (and profitably) in an economy
increasingly dominated by platforms of every type.
No matter what role you play in today’s rapidly changing economy, now
is the time for you to master the principles of the world of platforms. Turn
the page, and we’ll help you do just that.


---PAGE BREAK---

TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER ONE
    A platform’s overarching purpose is to consummate matches among users and facilitate the
exchange of goods, services, or social currency, thereby enabling value creation for all
participants.
    Because platform businesses create value using resources they don’t own or control, they
can grow much faster than traditional businesses.
    Platforms derive much of their value from the communities they serve.
    Platforms invert companies, blurring business boundaries and transforming firms’
traditional inward focus into an outward focus.
    The rise of the platform has already transformed many major industries—and more,
equally important transformations are on the way.
 
* For simplicity’s sake, we refer here to both products and services as “products.” The main
difference between the two is that products are tangible, physical objects, while services are
intangible and delivered through activities. In traditional businesses, both are delivered through linear
value chains—pipelines—which justifies our lumping them together in this discussion.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

2
NETWORK EFFECTS
The Power of the Platform
For several weeks in June 2014, a very public debate over a seemingly
arcane topic raged between a famous finance professor at New York
University and a renowned venture capitalist in
Silicon Valley.
Aswath Damodaran—a chaired professor at NYU, author of textbooks
on corporate finance and valuation, and the 2013 recipient of the prestigious
Herbert Simon Award—launched the debate when he published an article
estimating the value of Uber, the platform company whose smartphone app
connects riders with drivers. Earlier that month, investors had ponied up
$1.2 billion in financial capital for Uber, receiving in return a share of the
company that suggested the overall value of the business was around $17
billion. Damodaran called this “a mind-boggling sum for a young company
with only a few hundred million in revenue.”1 He implied that the idea that
Uber was worth this much—or even more, as some were claiming—was yet
another mark of Silicon Valley hubris.
Damodaran’s judgment was based on the classic tools of finance. He
estimated the size of the global taxi market, Uber’s prospective market
share, and the revenues this was likely to yield. Then he used risk-adjusted
cash flows to come up with a company valuation of $5.9 billion. With
admirable forthrightness, he even posted his spreadsheet online so others
could examine and test his assumptions.
Bill Gurley, a partner at Benchmark Capital and one of Uber’s Silicon
Valley investors, took up the challenge. A venture capitalist famous for
having been among the first to spot such technology skyrockets as


---PAGE BREAK---

OpenTable, Zillow, and eBay, Gurley argued that the $17 billion valuation
was likely an underestimate, and that Damodaran’s figure could be short by
a factor of 25.2 Gurley questioned Damodaran’s assumptions about both the
total market size and Uber’s potential market share, basing his calculations
on economist W. Brian Arthur’s analysis of network effects.3
In classic platform style, Uber performs a matching service. It helps
riders find drivers, and vice versa. As drivers sign on and coverage density
rises within a city, a number of striking growth dynamics are set in motion.
Riders tell their friends about the service; some even start driving
themselves in their spare time. Wait time falls for riders, and downtime falls
for drivers. Less downtime means that a driver can make the same amount
of money even if fares are lower, because he has more riders during the
same number of working hours. Thus, less downtime means that Uber can
cut fares and stimulate even more demand, which creates a virtuous cycle
that increases coverage density still further.
In his article, Gurley reproduced a graphic from another investor that
illustrates how this virtuous cycle works—a napkin sketch created by David
Sacks, co-founder of Yammer and veteran of PayPal (Figure 2.1).
Sacks’s napkin sketch captures a classic example of network effects. It
shows how the value of Uber to each of its participants grows the more
people use it—which attracts still more users, thereby increasing the value
of the service even more.
Network effects refers to the impact that the number of users of a
platform has on the value created for each user. Positive network effects
refers to the ability of a large, well-managed platform community to
produce significant value for each user of the platform. Negative network
effects refers to the possibility that the growth in numbers of a poorly-
managed platform community can reduce the value produced for each user.
As we’ll see, positive network effects are the main source of value
creation and competitive advantage in a platform business. However,
network effects can also be negative, and in this chapter we’ll explain how
and why negative network effects arise and what platform business
managers can do about them. But understanding value creation via positive
network effects is the essential first step.


---PAGE BREAK---

FIGURE 2.1. David Sacks’s napkin sketch of Uber’s virtuous cycle. Reprinted by permission.
Gurley’s data showed that, by mid-2014, network effects were already
beginning to drive Uber’s growth. When Travis Kalanick, CEO of Uber,
sought seed funding in 2009, the size of the taxi and limousine market in
Uber’s hometown of San Francisco was $120 million. Based on Uber’s own
data, the market in 2014 appeared already to be three times as large and still
growing. This threefold multiple would, all by itself, justify increasing
Damodaran’s $5.9 billion valuation to the $17 billion value imputed by
investors. Unaware of this insider information, Damodaran hadn’t adjusted
his equations for network effects—as he graciously conceded in an elegant
and well-reasoned response.
DEMAND ECONOMIES OF SCALE
The network effect represents a new economic phenomenon, driven by
technological innovation. In the twentieth-century industrial era, giant
monopolies were created based on supply economies of scale. These are


---PAGE BREAK---

driven by production efficiencies, which reduce the unit cost of creating a
product or service as the quantities produced increase. These supply
economies of scale can give the largest company in an industrial economy a
cost advantage that is extremely difficult for competitors to overcome.
Consider some of the giant businesses that grew up during the industrial
era. In steel production, the British Bessemer process of blowing air
through molten slag removed impurities and cut costs of production from
£40 to £7 per ton. Operating eighteen five-ton Bessemer blast furnaces,
Barrow Hematite Steel Company became the largest steel mill in the world
at the turn of the twentieth century. Similarly, the German Haber-Bosch
process of producing fertilizer from nitrogen in air, which is used in the
production of half of all foodstuffs consumed today, was one factor
contributing to rise of giant BASF, which is still the world’s largest
chemical company. And American Thomas Edison’s inventions in lighting
and cheap power generation gave rise to General Electric, while Henry
Ford’s use of mass production accelerated the rise of Ford Motor Company.
The bigger the business, the cheaper the costs of production, marketing, and
distribution—a positive spiral that helped companies grow steadily larger
and more profitable (until the process was derailed by government
intervention or disruptive technological change that rendered the old
economies obsolete).
In the twenty-first-century Internet era, comparable monopolies are
being created by demand economies of scale (a term used by the two
experts largely responsible for popularizing the concept of network effects,
Hal Varian, the chief economist at Google, and business professor Carl
Shapiro).4 By contrast with supply economies of scale, demand economies
of scale take advantage of technological improvements on the demand side
—the other half of the profit equation from the production side. Demand
economies of scale are driven by efficiencies in social networks, demand
aggregation, app development, and other phenomena that make bigger
networks more valuable to their users. They can give the largest company in
a platform market a network effect advantage that is extremely difficult for
competitors to overcome.
Demand economies of scale are the fundamental source of positive
network effects, and thus the chief drivers of economic value in today’s
world. This is not to say that supply economies of scale no longer matter; of


---PAGE BREAK---

course they do. But demand economies of scale, in the form of network
effects, have become the most important differentiating factor.
Metcalfe’s law is a useful way of encapsulating how network effects
create value for those who participate in a network as well as for those who
own or manage the network. Robert Metcalfe, co-inventor of Ethernet and
founder of 3Com, pointed out that the value of a telephone network grows
nonlinearly as the number of subscribers to the network increases, making
more connections among subscribers possible.
When there’s only one node in a network, no connections are possible.
An MIT professor we know likes to joke that the prize for “greatest
salesperson in history” should go to whoever sold the first telephone.
Arguably, it had zero value, because when there’s only one telephone in the
world, you can’t call anyone. But as more people buy telephones, the value
grows. With two telephones, one connection is possible. With four
telephones, six. With twelve, sixty-six. And with 100 telephones, there are
4,950 connections. This is known as nonlinear or convex growth, and it is
precisely the characteristic growth pattern seen in companies like Microsoft
in the 1990s, Apple and Facebook today, and Uber tomorrow. (Working in
reverse, it explains the convex collapse of Blackberry in the 2000s: as users
began to flee the Blackberry platform, the loss of network nodes caused the
value of the network itself to plummet, encouraging still more people to
abandon Blackberry for other devices.)
Major economic consequences follow from this pattern. Growth via
network effects leads to market expansion. New buyers enter the market,
attracted by the growing number of friends who are part of the network. If
prices also fall—as they often do when technology matures and production
quantities increase—then network effects work together with more
attractive pricing to drive massive market adoption.
TWO-SIDED NETWORK EFFECTS
David Sacks’s napkin sketch suggests a second dynamic at work in the
growth of Uber, one we refer to as a two-sided network effect.5 In
Metcalfe’s telephone example, phone users attract more phone users. But in
the case of Uber, two sides of the market are involved: riders attract drivers,
and drivers attract riders. A similar dynamic can be seen in many other


---PAGE BREAK---

platform businesses. In the case of Google’s Android, app developers attract
consumers, and consumers attract app developers. On Upwork (formerly
known as Elance-oDesk), job listings attract freelancers, and freelancers
attract job listings. On PayPal, sellers attract buyers, and buyers attract
sellers. And on Airbnb, hosts attract guests, and guests attract hosts. All of
these businesses attract two-sided network effects with positive feedback.
The importance of these effects for stimulating network growth is so
great that platform businesses will often spend money to attract participants
to one side of the market. They know that, if they can get one side to join
the platform, the other side will follow. Two-sided network effects with
positive feedback explain how Uber can afford to use millions of dollars of
money from Bill Gurley and other investors to give away free rides worth
$30 each. Uber’s coupons buy market share in a way that attracts a virtuous
cycle of drivers and riders who will later pay full price to participate in the
network.
A familiar (non-tech) example is a local bar that holds a weekly Ladies’
Night, when discounted drinks are offered to female customers. When the
women show up, the men appear—and they’re happy to buy their own
drinks at full price. Thus, in a two-sided market, it can sometimes make
economic sense to accept financial losses—not just temporarily, but
permanently!—in Market A if growing that market enables growth in a
related Market B. The only proviso is that the profits to be earned in Market
B must outweigh the losses incurred in Market A.
NETWORK EFFECTS VERSUS
OTHER GROWTH-BUILDING TOOLS
It’s important to distinguish network effects from other familiar market-
building tools, such as price effects and brand effects. Misunderstanding of
these distinctions is a source of the current confusion over how to value
platform business models, and contributed to the dot-com boom and bust of
1997–2000.
During the dot-com boom, investors in startups like eToys, Webvan, and
FreePC regarded market share as practically the only significant metric of
business success. Captivated by slogans like “Get big fast” and “Get large
or get lost,” they urged companies to spend lavishly to lure customers in


---PAGE BREAK---

hopes of achieving an insurmountable market share advantage. The
companies responded: for example, via discounting and couponing, they
created price effects. Attracting customers through extraordinarily low
pricing—as low as zero in some cases—is a foolproof way of buying
market share, at least temporarily. Books like the bestselling Free: The
Future of a Radical Price, published in 2009 by Chris Anderson, then the
editor-in-chief of Wired magazine, preached the gospel of the giveaway,
positing a steady climb from “free” to “premium” to “freemium” (free +
premium) pricing of the product or service.
The problem is that price effects are evanescent. They disappear the
moment the discounts end or another firm offers a better price. Typically,
only 1–2 percent of customers convert from free to paying. Thus, as David
Cohen, CEO and founder of the venture incubator Techstars, says, you need
to reach millions of customers before the giveaway model becomes
profitable.6 Freemium models also create freeloaders than can be hard to
monetize (that is, to profit from), as FreePC discovered in 1999 when it
gave away free Pentium PCs in exchange for viewing ads and the prospect
of online sales.7
Brand effects are stickier. They arise when people come to associate a
particular brand with quality. But brand effects, like price effects, are often
difficult to sustain. They can also be extremely expensive. EToys spent
millions to establish a brand in hopes of competing with Amazon and
Toys“R”Us. Kozmo, an online company that promised free one-hour
delivery of food, books, coffee, and other basic goods in major U.S. cities,
hired actress Whoopi Goldberg as a spokesperson and paid her in stock,
only to have the business collapse soon thereafter. In January 2000—the
peak before the dot-com crash—nineteen startups bought Super Bowl ads,
spending over $2 million each in order to build brand recognition. A decade
or so later, eight of them no longer existed.8
Price effects and brand effects have their place in a startup’s growth
strategy. But only network effects create the virtuous cycle we described
above, which leads to the building of a longlasting network of users—a
phenomenon we called lock-in.
Another growth-building tool that’s easy to confuse with network effects
is virality. Derived from the expression “going viral,” virality is the
tendency of an idea or brand to be circulated rapidly and widely from one
Internet user to another.


---PAGE BREAK---

Virality can attract people to a network—for example, when fans of an
irresistibly cute, funny, or startling video persuade their friends to visit
YouTube. But network effects keep them there. Virality is about attracting
people who are off the platform and enticing them to join it, while network
effects are about increasing value among people on-platform.
When the dot-com boom turned to bust in 2000, two of the authors of
this book (Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne) were recent PhD
graduates from MIT. We watched the cycle with fascination, observing as
smart investment firms like Benchmark and Sequoia made both lucrative
hits and expensive misses. (Benchmark Capital, the venture capital firm that
is now getting it right in the case of Uber, invested in Webvan, which was
listed by CNET as one of the biggest dot-com disasters in history,9 as did
Sequoia Capital, which nonetheless got it right with Apple, Google, and
PayPal.)
Curious about what separated the successful companies from those that
failed, we examined dozens of cases and found that the failures mostly
relied on price or brand effects. By contrast, the successes hit on an idea
that really worked—driving traffic from one user group in order to drive
profits from another user group. We described our findings in a paper that
analyzed the mathematics of two-sided network effects.10 Today, such
successful platform businesses as eBay, Uber, Airbnb, Upwork, PayPal, and
Google exhibit this model extensively.11
SCALING NETWORK EFFECTS: FRICTIONLESS ENTRY
AND OTHER SCALABILITY TOOLS
As you can see, network effects depend on the size of the network.12 So one
important corollary is that effective platforms are able to expand in size
quickly and easily, thereby scaling the value that derives from network
effects.
It’s hard to remember now, but there was a time when Yahoo was a more
popular portal to the Internet than Google. The story of how Google
overtook Yahoo—despite the latter’s four-year head start—vividly
illustrates the importance of being able to scale both sides of a network.


---PAGE BREAK---

Yahoo started out as a human-edited database. It classified web pages
using a tree structure of subcategories within categories the same way
librarians organize books or biologists organize plant and animal species.
This worked well for a time. But during the 1990s and early 2000s, growth
in Internet users and web page producers increased exponentially—and it
soon became apparent that employee-edited hierarchical databases do not
scale well.13 One of the authors recalls submitting web pages to Yahoo, then
waiting days and weeks until the results showed up in master lists. (No
wonder frustrated users began claiming that Yahoo stood for “Yet Another
Hierarchical Officious Oracle!”)
By contrast, Google found a way to serve web page searchers by
harnessing the work of web page producers. Google’s page rank algorithm
considers the extent to which web pages link to one another. To attract page
viewers, page producers already consider what viewers want. More links
from more important pages mean higher-priority search results. Therefore,
Google’s algorithm effectively matches both sides of the network. Not only
do algorithms scale better than employees, but using web links as the key
sorting tool shifted the focus from inside the firm to outside the firm, where
the choices of the crowd could control the action—a far more scalable
model than Yahoo’s.
As the story of Google suggests, networks that permit frictionless entry
are able to grow organically almost without bound. Frictionless entry is the
ability of users to quickly and easily join a platform and begin participating
in the value creation that the platform facilitates. Frictionless entry is a key
factor in enabling a platform to grow rapidly.
Threadless is a T-shirt company founded by people with expertise in
information technology services, web design, and consulting. Their
business model involves holding weekly design contests open to outside
participants, printing only T-shirts with the most popular designs, and
selling them to their large and growing customer base. Threadless doesn’t
need to hire artistic talent, since skilled designers compete for prizes and
prestige. It doesn’t need to do marketing, since eager designers contact their
friends to solicit votes and sales. It doesn’t need to forecast sales, since
voting customers have already announced what numbers they will buy. By
outsourcing production, Threadless can also minimize its handling and
inventory costs. Thanks to this almost frictionless model, Threadless can
scale rapidly and easily, with minimal structural restrictions.


---PAGE BREAK---

Threadless’s business model arose by accident. The founders originally
thought they were in the web services business, selling consulting to firms
who needed websites. But selling web consulting didn’t scale: each project
had to be negotiated individually, each project required dedicated staff, and
after completion, no project could be resold without modification. The
company founders launched the T-shirt contest website as a side project to
illustrate their capabilities. It was simply an online copy of an offline
contest that one of the founders had entered. When this side venture
exploded in popularity, its enormous scalability advantages became
obvious.
Scaling a network requires that both sides of the market grow
proportionally. For example, one Uber driver can serve an average of about
three Uber riders an hour. It would make no sense for Uber to have one
rider and 1,000 drivers—nor 1,000 riders and one driver. Airbnb faces a
parallel issue in scaling both hosts and guests. If one side becomes
disproportionally large, coupons or discounting to attract more participants
to the other side becomes good business.
In some cases, the growth of a platform can be facilitated by an effect we
call side switching. This occurs when users of one side of the platform join
the opposite side—for example, when those who consume goods or services
begin to produce goods and services for others to consume. On some
platforms, users engage in side switching easily and repeatedly.
Uber, for example, recruits new drivers from among its rider pool, just as
Airbnb recruits new hosts from among its guest pool. A scalable business
model, frictionless entry, and side switching all serve to lubricate network
effects.
NEGATIVE NETWORK EFFECTS:
THEIR CAUSE AND CURE
So far, we’ve been focusing on positive network effects. But the very
qualities that lead platform networks to grow so quickly may also lead them
to fail quickly. The growth of a network can produce negative network
effects that drive away participants, even leading to the death of a platform
business.


---PAGE BREAK---

One negative network effect occurs when the growth in numbers that
enables more matches between producers and consumers also leads to
increasing difficulty, or impossibility, in finding the best match. To avoid
this dilemma, frictionless entry must be balanced through effective
curation. This is the process by which a platform filters, controls, and limits
the access of users to the platform, the activities they participate in, and the
connections they form with other users. When the quality of a platform is
effectively curated, users find it easy to make matches that produce
significant value for them; when curation is nonexistent or poorly handled,
users find it difficult to identify potentially valuable matches amid a flood
of worthless matches.
Dating platform OkCupid discovered that scale can cause network
collapse if not carefully managed. According to CEO Christian Rudder,
when you get lots of users on a dating website, the natural tendency of men
on the platform is to approach the most beautiful women. Scaling male
behavior creates the problem that most of the men who approach a highly
attractive woman will be markedly less attractive—she is “out of their
league,” as the saying goes. When these B-level males (our description, not
Rudder’s!) bombard the A-level females with requests for a date, no one is
happy. The beautiful females are unhappy and likely to abandon the site
because of all the unfiltered attention, while the B-level males are unhappy
because the women of their choice never respond. And the few highly
attractive men who might have been a good match for the most attractive
women are unhappy because the women they want have left the platform.14
Once this happens, the men at all attractiveness levels converge on the
women in the second most beautiful tier, and the whole process repeats.
Network effects reverse, and the business model breaks down.
To solve this problem, OkCupid implemented a curation strategy
involving multiple levels of network matching. The first level addresses the
obvious issue of matching compatible interests. Do both parties smoke? Do
both parties like tattoos and horror movies? Do both parties believe in
dinosaurs? This level eliminates many clearly unsuitable matches and
reduces the number of participants in the process.
The second matching level addresses the question of comparative
attractiveness—the “in her league” question. If OkCupid’s algorithm
determines, based on reactions by other users, that Joe is significantly less
attractive than Mary (for example), then Joe’s routine search for matches


---PAGE BREAK---

will not turn up Mary’s picture. (She might show up in a highly targeted
search, but not otherwise.) Instead, Joe will be presented with a selection of
women thought to be comparable to him in attractiveness. The result is win-
win. Mary is happier because the platform helps her find what she’s looking
for while protecting her from an onslaught. And Joe is happier, too, because
women are returning his messages when previously he got the cold
shoulder.
Of course, the use of this algorithm means that, if a guy only sees
pictures of average-looking women when conducting an OkCupid search,
he probably doesn’t have the movie-star good looks he thought he had. But
his chances for a successful match have greatly increased, which should
lead in the long run to a higher level of satisfaction.
Skillful curation like that practiced by OkCupid greatly reduces negative
network effects. At the same time, it increases and leverages the benefits of
positive network effects. As the number of participants in the network
grows, the volume of information about them increases. As any statistician
will tell you, having more data to work with generally increases the
accuracy and value of the inferences you can draw from the data. Thus, the
larger your network grows, the better your curation can become—a
phenomenon we refer to as data-driven network effects. Of course, this is
dependent on having well-designed curation tools that are continually
tested, updated, and improved.
By contrast, poor curation leads to greater noise, which makes the
platform less useful and may even cause it to unravel. Such a negative
feedback loop following the exponential growth of Chatroulette quickly led
to an equally dramatic collapse.
Chatroulette pairs random people from around the world for webcam
conversations. People can leave a conversation at any time by initiating a
new connection or simply by quitting. The strangely addictive site grew
from twenty people at launch in late 2009 to more than 1.5 million users six
months later.
Initially, Chatroulette had no registration requirement and no controls of
any kind, leading to what became known as the Naked Hairy Men problem.
As the network grew without policing, a growing number of naked hairy
men showed up to chat, leading many of the non-naked, non-hairy others to
abandon the network. As legitimate users fled, the noise level on the
platform increased, setting a negative feedback loop in motion.


---PAGE BREAK---

Chatroulette realized it needed to curate access in a way that scales with
platform growth. The platform now lets users filter other users in addition
to using algorithms to screen callers with undesirable images, and it is
growing again—though more slowly than during its initial phase.
Every successful platform faces the problem of matching content and
connections at scale—which means that, at some point in its growth, every
successful platform must address the challenge of effective curation. We’ll
return to the issue of curation in later chapters.
FOUR KINDS OF NETWORK EFFECTS
A two-sided network (i.e., one with both producers and consumers) has four
kinds of network effects. It’s important to understand and consider all four
when designing and managing a platform.
In a two-sided market, same-side effects are network effects created by
the impact of users from one side of the market on other users from the
same side of the market—the effects that consumers have on other
consumers and those that producers have on other producers. By contrast,
cross-side effects are network effects created by the impact of users from
one side of the market on users from the other side of the market—the
effects that consumers have on producers and those that producers have on
consumers. Both same-side effects and cross-side effects can be positive or
negative, depending on the design of the system and the rules put in place.
Here’s how these four types of network effects work.
The first category, positive same-side effects, includes the positive
benefits received by users when the number of users of the same kind
increases—for example, the effect that arose as the number of subscribers to
the Bell Telephone network grew. The more of your friends and neighbors
who were accessible on “the Bell,” the greater the value you received from
your Bell membership. Today, a comparable positive effect on the
consumer-to-consumer side can be seen with a gaming platform like the
Xbox MMOG: the more fellow gamers you encounter on the platform, the
greater the fun you experience when using it.
Positive same-side effects can also be found on the producer side. For
example, consider Adobe’s all-but-universal image production and sharing
platform. The more people who are creating and sharing images using the


---PAGE BREAK---

PDF platform, the greater the benefit you get from using the same platform
for your own image production needs.
However, not all same-side effects are positive. Sometimes there is a
downside to the numbers growth on one side of a platform. This is called a
negative same-side effect. For example, consider the information
technology platform Covisint, which connects businesses that are interested
in developing cloud-based networking tools with service providers. As the
number of competing suppliers on the Covisint platform grows, customers
are attracted to the platform, which makes the suppliers happy. But when
the list of suppliers grows too great, it becomes more difficult for
appropriate providers and customers to find one another.
Cross-side effects arise when either consumers or producers gain or lose
based on the number of users on the opposite side of the platform. Positive
cross-side effects occur when users benefit from an increase in the number
of participants on the other side of the market. Think about a payment
mechanism like Visa: when more merchants (producers) agree to accept the
Visa card, the flexibility and convenience of the shopping experience
increases for shoppers (consumers), creating a positive cross-side effect.
The same effect works in the opposite direction, of course; more Visa
cardholders lead to more potential customers for merchants. In a similar
way, when the number of app developers for Windows grows, the versatility
and power of the operating system increases for users; and when the
number of Windows users grows, so do the potential benefits (financial and
otherwise) for app developers. Positive cross-side effects produce win-win
results.
Of course, cross-side effects are not necessarily symmetrical. On
OkCupid, women attract men more than men attract women. On Uber, a
single driver is more critical to growth than a single rider. On Android, a
single developer’s app attracts users more than a single user attracts
developer apps. On Twitter, the vast majority of people read, while a
minority tweet. On question-and-answer networks like Quora, the vast
majority asks questions, while a minority answers them.15
Again, however, there is the dark side to consider—the situation in
which negative cross-side effects arise. Think about a platform that
facilitates the sharing of digital media—music, text, images, videos, and the
like. In most circumstances, a growing number of producers (music
companies, for example) leads to positive benefits for consumers, but it can


---PAGE BREAK---

also lead to growing complexity and expense—for example, too many
varying digital rights management forms to read and accept. When this
happens, the cross-side effects flip from positive to negative, leading
consumers to abandon the platform or at least reduce their usage. In a
similar way, when the proliferation of messages from competing merchants
on a platform site leads to unpleasant advertising clutter, the positive impact
of expanding producer choice may be transformed into a negative cross-
side effect that turns off consumers and damages the platform’s value.
We can foresee the arrival of growing pains at Uber as a result of
increasing negative cross-side effects. If Uber attracts too many drivers
relative to the number of riders, driver downtimes will go up; if Uber
attracts too many riders relative to drivers, rider wait times will go up (see
Figure 2.2, in which the resulting feedback loops have been inserted).
FIGURE 2.2. David Sacks’s napkin sketch of Uber, with negative feedback loops inserted.
In fact, this is happening already. As Uber reaches saturation within a
given market, too many drivers conflict with one another, increasing
downtimes and causing some drivers to abandon the market. The more


---PAGE BREAK---

complete depiction of Uber’s growth spiral in Figure 2.2 highlights the fact
that a firm in a two-sided market must manage all four network effects.
Good platform husbandry seeks to reinforce positive network effects,
creating and strengthening as many positive feedback loops as possible.
This is another topic we’ll return to in later chapters, where we’ll offer
specific advice about how to manage these challenges effectively.
STRUCTURAL CHANGE: NETWORK EFFECTS TURN
FIRMS INSIDE OUT
As we’ve seen, in the industrial era, giant companies relied on supply-side
economies of scale. By contrast, most Internet era giants rely on demand-
side economies of scale. Firms such as Airbnb, Uber, Dropbox, Threadless,
Upwork, Google, and Facebook are not valuable because of their cost
structures: the capital they employ, the machinery they run, or the human
resources they command. They are valuable because of the communities
that participate in their platforms. The reason Instagram sold for $1 billion
is not its thirteen employees; the reason WhatsApp sold for $19 billion
wasn’t its fifty employees. The reasons were the same: the network effects
both organizations had created.
Standard accounting practices might not factor the value of communities
into the value of a firm, but stock markets do. Little by little, the
accountants are catching up. A team of experts collaborating with the
consulting and accounting firm of Deloitte published research that sorts
companies into four broad categories based on their chief economic
activity: asset builders, service providers, technology creators, and network
orchestrators. Asset builders develop physical assets that they use to deliver
physical goods; companies like Ford and Walmart are examples. Service
providers employ workers who provide services to customers; companies
like UnitedHealthcare and Accenture are examples. Technology creators
develop and sell forms of intellectual property, such as software and
biotechnology; Microsoft and Amgen are examples. And network
orchestrators develop networks in which people and companies create value
together—in effect, platform businesses. The research suggests that, of the
four, network orchestrators are by far the most efficient value creators. On
average, they enjoy a market multiplier (based on the relationship between


---PAGE BREAK---

a firm’s market valuation and its price-to-earnings ratio) of 8.2, as
compared with 4.8 for technology creators, 2.6 for service providers, and
2.0 for asset builders.16 It’s only a slight simplification to say that that
quantitative difference represents the value produced by network effects.
Furthermore, where network effects are present, industries operate by
different rules.17 One reason is that it is far easier to scale network effects
outside a firm than inside it—since there are always many more people
outside a firm than inside it. Thus, where network effects are present, the
focus of organizational attention must shift from inside to outside. The firm
inverts; it turns inside out. The management of human resources shifts from
employees to crowds.18 Innovation shifts from in-house R & D to open
innovation.19 The primary venue for activities in which value is created for
participants shifts from an internal production department to a collection of
external producers and consumers—which means that management of
externalities becomes a key leadership skill. Growth comes not from
horizontal integration and vertical integration but from functional
integration and network orchestration. The focus on processes such as
finance and accounting shifts from cash flows and assets you can own to
communities and assets you can influence. And while platform businesses
themselves are often extraordinarily profitable, the chief locus of wealth
creation is now outside rather than inside the organization.
Network effects are creating the giants of the twenty-first century.
Google and Facebook each touch more than one-seventh of the world’s
population. In the world of network effects, ecosystems of users are the new
source of competitive advantage and market dominance.


---PAGE BREAK---

TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER TWO
    Whereas giant industrial-era firms were made possible by supply economies of scale,
today’s giants are made possible by demand economies of scale—expressed as network
effects.
    Network effects are not the same as price effects, brand effects, or other familiar growth-
building tools.
    Frictionless entry and other features of scalability maximize the value-building impact of
network effects.
    A two-sided market (with both producers and consumers) gives rise to four kinds of
network effects: same-side effects (positive and negative) and cross-side effects (positive
and negative). A growing platform business must manage all four.
    The key to minimizing most negative network effects is quality curation, which increases
the chances of a happy match between producer and consumer.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

3
ARCHITECTURE
Principles for Designing
a Successful Platform
How do we build a platform that invites participation and creates
significant value for all its users? How do we provide tools and services that
make it easy for producers and consumers to interact in mutually rewarding
ways? And how do we design a technological infrastructure that is capable
of scaling rapidly, and encouraging positive network effects while
minimizing negative ones?
These are daunting challenges. Platforms are complex, multisided
systems that must support large networks of users who play different roles
and interact in a wide variety of ways. An industry-wide platform—a
platform for the health care industry, for example—may need to facilitate
interactions among an enormous range of industry participants with
motivations that vary widely and change frequently as economic,
regulatory, and technological circumstances evolve.
Designers and builders of any complex system often find it difficult to
identify a logical starting point. This problem is particularly acute with
platform businesses, since they are less familiar and much more
complicated than pipeline businesses, which generally feature a
straightforward linear design. The natural tendency of those charged with
creating a new platform business is to study similar implementations and
imitate them. But because no two markets are identical, this strategy often
fails. A poorly designed platform produces little or no value for users and
generates weak network effects, or none at all.


---PAGE BREAK---

So where do we start in designing a new platform? The best way is to
focus on the fundamentals. What exactly does a platform do, and how does
it work?
As we’ve seen, a platform connects producers with consumers and
allows them to exchange value. Some platforms allow direct connection
between users, as we see in the case of social networks. These connections
then lead to the exchange of value between users. Other platforms do not
facilitate direct connections between users but establish other mechanisms
for value exchange. For example, on YouTube, videos created by producers
are delivered to consumers without a direct connection being made between
them.
In this respect, interactions on a platform resemble any economic or
social exchange, whether it occurs in the real world or in the virtual world
of the Internet. In every such exchange, the producer and the consumer
exchange three things: information, goods or services, and some form of
currency.
Exchange of information. Whether it’s the cattle auctioneer shouting
out prices to an assembled crowd of ranchers or an eBay search results page
displaying the goods available, every platform interaction starts with the
exchange of information. This information enables the parties to decide
whether, and how, to engage in any further exchange.
Thus, every platform business must be designed to facilitate the
exchange of information. Some platforms have the exchange of information
as their sole purpose—for example, a news forum like Reddit or a question-
and-answer site like Quora. But even platforms whose primary goal is to
enable the exchange of physical goods or services must enable the exchange
of information. Uber provides information about driver availability and
location in response to passenger requests; Yelp provides information about
restaurants to enable users to choose a place to eat; and Upwork allows
companies and freelancers to exchange information about themselves to
facilitate hiring decisions.
Notice that, in every case, the exchange of information takes place
through the platform itself. In fact, this is one of the fundamental
characteristics of a platform business.


---PAGE BREAK---

Exchange of goods or services. As a result of the information exchange,
the platform participants may decide to exchange valuable goods or
services as well. In some cases, the exchange of goods or services may also
occur through the platform. On Facebook, photos, links, and posts with
personal or other news are exchanged among users, while on YouTube
videos are exchanged. Each item exchanged among platform users can be
referred to as a value unit. In some cases, platforms feature sophisticated
systems that make it easy and convenient for value units to be exchanged.
Upwork, for example, provides clients with built-in tools to manage remote
service delivery, so digital goods created by a freelancer, like slide decks
and videos, can be exchanged directly through the platform itself.
In other cases, goods or services are exchanged outside of the platform
(although information about the delivery may be tracked and exchanged on
the platform). Transportation services requested via Uber are delivered on
real city streets using actual cars; dinner reservations made via Yelp result
in physical meals consumed around real tables in actual restaurants.
Exchange of currency. When goods or services are exchanged between
platform participants, they are typically paid for using some form of
currency. In many cases, this is traditional currency—money transmitted in
one of a variety of ways, including credit card data, a PayPal transaction, a
Bitcoin transfer, or (rarely) physical cash.
However, there are other forms of value, and therefore other ways in
which consumers “pay” producers in the world of platforms. Video viewers
on YouTube or followers on Twitter pay the producer with attention, which
adds value to the producer in a variety of ways. (If the producer is a
political pundit or business leader, for example, he gains value in the form
of growing influence as a thought leader; if she is a singer, actor, or athlete,
she gains value in the form of a growing fan base.) Community members on
sites like TripAdvisor, Dribbble, and 500px pay by enhancing the reputation
of producers whose work they like. Thus, attention, fame, influence,
reputation, and other intangible forms of value can play the role of
“currency” on a platform.
Sometimes the exchange of currency takes place through the platform
itself. This is usually the case when the currency takes the form of attention
or reputation. But monetary payment may also take place on the platform,
even when the exchange of goods or services occurs elsewhere. Uber and


---PAGE BREAK---

Airbnb, for example, allow service delivery outside the platform, but they
close the loop by ensuring that money is exchanged through the platform.
As we’ll discuss in more detail in chapter 6, a platform’s ability to
monetize the value of the exchanges it facilitates is directly related to the
types of currency exchange it can capture and internalize. A platform that
can internalize the flow of money may be well placed to charge a
transaction cut—for example, the fee of 10 percent of the sale price
typically charged by eBay after a successful auction. A platform that can
capture only attention may monetize its business by collecting payments
from a third party that considers the attention valuable—for example, an
advertiser willing to pay Facebook for “eyeballs” attracted by posts related
to a particular topic.
The platform’s goal, then, is to bring together producers and consumers
and enable them to engage in these three forms of exchange: of information,
of goods or services, and of currency. The platform provides an
infrastructure that participants plug in to, which provides tools and rules to
make exchanges easy and mutually rewarding.
THE CORE INTERACTION:
THE WHY OF PLATFORM DESIGN
Platforms are designed one interaction at a time. Thus, the design of every
platform should start with the design of the core interaction that it enables
between producers and consumers. The core interaction is the single most
important form of activity that takes place on a platform—the exchange of
value that attracts most users to the platform in the first place. The core
interaction involves three key components: the participants, the value unit,
and the filter. All three must be clearly identified and carefully designed to
make the core interaction as easy, attractive, and valuable to users as
possible. The fundamental purpose of the platform is to facilitate that core
interaction.
This basic rule about the primacy of the core interaction applies despite
the fact that many platforms involve a wide range of participants who may
interact in a variety of ways. LinkedIn, for example, enables multiple
interactions. Professionals exchange ideas about career and business
strategy; recruiters exchange information about job listings with potential


---PAGE BREAK---

applicants; human resource managers exchange news about labor market
conditions; and thought leaders offer their views about global trends. These
various forms of interaction were built into the platform over time, each
designed to meet a particular platform goal and to help users create a new
form of value. The multisided LinkedIn platform we see today was first
designed around a single core interaction: professionals connecting with
other professionals.
So let’s consider the three key components of the core interaction and
how they connect to create value on the platform.
The participants. There are fundamentally two participants in any core
interaction: the producer, who creates value, and the consumer, who
consumes value. When defining the core interaction, both roles need to be
explicitly described and understood.
One nuance of platform design is recognizing that the same user may
play a different role in differing interactions. The same person may be both
a host and a guest on Airbnb, although he or she will typically perform only
one of those roles in a particular interaction. On YouTube, users may upload
videos as well as view them. A well-designed platform makes it easy for
users to move from role to role.
Conversely, many users, and many types of users, may perform the same
role in an interaction. For example, one of the most common interactions on
Facebook is a “status update”—a content posting that informs participants
in the network about what a particular member is doing or thinking. The
producer who drives a change of status on a particular Facebook page may
be an individual, a business, a group of friends, or a nonprofit organization,
but the fundamental role remains the same. Similarly, videos on YouTube
are created by media companies as well as individuals. The incentives that
encourage different parties to participate are different, but the roles remain
consistent.
The value unit. As we’ve noted, every interaction starts with an
exchange of information that has value to the participants. Thus, in virtually
every case, the core interaction starts with the creation of a value unit by the
producer.
Here are a few examples. On a marketplace like eBay or Airbnb, the
product/service listing information is the value unit that is created by a


---PAGE BREAK---

seller and then served to buyers based on their search query or past
interests. On a platform like Kickstarter, the project details constitute the
value unit that enables potential backers to make a decision whether to fund
it. Videos on YouTube, tweets on Twitter, profiles of professionals on
LinkedIn, and listings of available cars on Uber are all value units. In each
case, users are provided with a basis for deciding whether or not they want
to proceed to some further exchange.
The filter. The value unit is delivered to selected consumers based on
filters. A filter is an algorithmic, software-based tool used by the platform to
enable the exchange of appropriate value units between users. A well-
designed filter ensures that platform users receive only value units that are
relevant and valuable to them; a poorly-designed filter (or no filter at all)
means users may be flooded with units they find irrelevant and valueless,
which may drive them to abandon the platform.
A search query is an example of a filter. Participants search for
information of interest to them by specifying particular search terms:
“hotels in and around Hana on the island of Maui” or “single straight males
aged 18–25 in Austin TX,” for example. Out of millions of value units
previously created by producers (such as hotel proprietors and users in
search of a mate), the platform employs the filter to select specific units that
match the search terms and delivers them to the consumer.
In one way or another, every platform makes use of filters to manage the
exchange of information. Uber’s drivers announce their availability on the
platform by sharing various parameters on location, occupancy, and so on—
value units that enable them to be matched to the right consumers. When a
consumer pulls out her phone and requests a car, she sets up a filter based
on her location at the time of the request. Information about the drivers
most relevant to the consumer is then exchanged.
Once this exchange of information happens, everything else clicks into
action. The car turns up, the traveler is taken to her destination, the
appropriate funds are transferred out of the traveler’s account, and the
driver is compensated. The core interaction is completed—value has been
created and exchanged.
Some platforms have more complicated models, but the basic structure
remains the same:


---PAGE BREAK---

Participants + Value Unit + Filter → Core Interaction
Google’s search engine acts in a fundamentally similar way. Google’s
crawlers search the web, creating web page indices (value units). A
consumer types in a query. Google combines the query with other specified
inputs, such as social signals—the volume of “likes,” retweets, comments,
and other responses received by a particular posting on the Internet. This
combination of inputs constitutes the filter, which determines which value
units are delivered to the consumer.
On Facebook, your entire network creates status updates, pictures,
comments, links, and so on—all of them value units that are being added to
the platform. Your news feed algorithm, based on signals you’ve given in
the past through your interactions with previous content, acts as the filter
that determines which units are delivered to you and which are not.
When designing a platform, your first and most important job is to
decide what your core interaction will be, and then to define the
participants, the value units, and the filters to make such core interactions
possible.
As we see in cases like LinkedIn and Facebook, platforms often expand
over time to embrace many kinds of interactions, each involving different
participants, value units, and filters. But successful platforms begin with a
single core interaction that consistently generates high value for users. A
valuable core interaction that is easy, even enjoyable, to engage in attracts
participants and makes the emergence of positive network effects possible.
The crucial role of the value unit. As this description of the core
interaction shows, value units play a crucial role in the workings of any
platform. Yet, in most cases, platforms don’t create value units; instead,
they are created by the producers who participate in the platform. Thus,
platforms are “information factories” that have no control over inventory.
They create the “factory floor” (that is, they build the platform
infrastructure within which value units are produced). They can foster a
culture of quality control (by taking steps to encourage producers to create
value units that are accurate, useful, relevant, and interesting to consumers).
They develop filters that are designed to deliver valuable units while
blocking others. But they have no direct control over the production process
itself—a striking difference from the traditional pipeline business.1


---PAGE BREAK---

Fasal is an online system that connects farmers in rural India directly
with market agents and other buyers. Via Fasal, farmers can quickly learn
the price of goods at a number of nearby markets, choose the sales location
most advantageous to them, and use the data to negotiate a better deal, a
challenge that exists around the world.2
Sangeet Choudary, one of the authors of this book, led the
commercialization and launch of the Fasal initiative. One of the challenges
facing Choudary and his team was figuring out what kind of
communications infrastructure they could use to enable producers and
consumers to share value units. They realized that the big advantage
working in their favor was cell phones. More than half of Indian farmers,
even the poorest, own and use cell phones. In fact, as in much of the
developing world, cell phone use in rural India has spread rapidly. Cellular
telephony, with its instant communications capability, became the conduit
for the market data the small farmers so desperately needed.
But creating the crucial value units needed to make exchanges possible
between the farmers and the mandis (the local market-makers) would prove
to be an even more significant challenge. “We needed information of
various kinds,” Choudary explains:
Of course, we needed price data from the mandis—current market rates for various grades of
commodities ranging from carrots and cauliflower to beans and tomatoes. This turned out to be
fairly easy to gather. Some of the agents themselves would provide the information to us. And we
supplemented this source by hiring local people to visit each of the mandis to gather price quotes
firsthand and report them to us.
The other side of the equation was more difficult. In order to create an electronic information
resource that would be truly useful to the farmers, we needed data about the farmers themselves—
the crops they were planting, the expected harvest cycle, the locations of the farms, their access to
various mandis, and so on. All of these factors would influence the best deal they could make in
the marketplace.
But gathering this information from a widely scattered collection of farmers—most of them
illiterate—was very tricky. We conducted a series of experiments. We tried relying on word of
mouth to spread news about the service we were creating and to collect information for us. We
tried using the local “head men”—the unofficial mayors of the villages—as conduits for the
information. We tried arranging deals with local sellers of seeds, fertilizer, and SIM cards for cell
phones, all of whom were frequently in touch with individual farmers. But none of these methods
worked well—the people we tried to work with weren’t interested, and the incentives simply
weren’t strong enough to produce a powerful flow of data.
In the end, we had to build our own network of data gatherers—what Indians call a “feet on
street” (FOS) sales force. The FOS team went door to door in each village, meeting with farmers
and recording key information about their crops and their marketing plans on paper forms. Then
they brought the data back to our offices, where we entered it into our spreadsheets. Little by
little, we built up the database we needed to begin making sense of the local markets.


---PAGE BREAK---

As you can see, a focus on the value unit is extremely important if
you’re running a platform. Deciding who can create value units, how they
are created and integrated into the platform, and what differentiates a high-
quality unit from a low-quality one are all critical issues, and we’ll explore
these throughout this book.
PULL, FACILITATE, MATCH:
THE HOW OF PLATFORM DESIGN
The core interaction is the why of platform design. The whole purpose of a
platform is to make core interactions possible—indeed, to the extent
possible, to make them inevitable by making them highly valuable to all
participants. But how do you achieve this? What can the platform designer
do to ensure that valuable core interactions begin to occur in significant
numbers, thereby attracting more and more participants to the platform?
In the next few pages, we’ll examine the how of platform design.
Platforms must perform three key functions in order to encourage a high
volume of valuable core interactions, which we summarize as pull,
facilitate, and match. The platform must pull the producers and consumers
to the platform, which enables interactions among them. It must facilitate
their interactions by providing them with tools and rules that make it easy
for them to connect and that encourage valuable exchanges (while
discouraging others). And it must match producers and consumers
effectively by using information about each to connect them in ways they
will find mutually rewarding.
All three functions must be performed well if the platform is to succeed.
A platform that fails to pull participants will be unable to create the network
effects that make the platform valuable. A platform that fails to facilitate
interactions—one with clunky technology or overly restrictive policies that
make usage difficult—will eventually discourage and alienate participants.
And a platform that fails to match participants accurately will waste their
time and energy, soon driving participants away.
Let’s examine each of these three crucial functions in a little more detail.
Effective platform design is all about creating systems that perform these
functions as powerfully as possible.


---PAGE BREAK---

Pull. Attracting consumers to platforms presents challenges that pipeline
companies don’t face. Consequently, the approach to marketing such
platforms is likely to seem counterintuitive, especially to business leaders
who grew up in the old pipeline-dominated universe.
To begin with, platforms need to solve a chicken-or-egg problem that
pipeline businesses don’t suffer from: users won’t come to a platform unless
it has value, and a platform won’t have value unless users use it. Most
platforms fail simply because they never overcome this problem. It’s such
an important challenge that we’ll devote all of chapter 5 to analyzing it and
helping you solve it.
A second pull challenge revolves around keeping the interest of users
who visit or sign up for the platform. The large social networks of our day
have all faced this problem at some point. Facebook, for example,
discovered that users found the platform valuable only after they had
connected to a minimum number of other users. Until then, they were likely
to stop using the network entirely. In response, Facebook shifted its
marketing efforts away from recruiting new members to helping them form
connections.
One powerful tool that encourages users to keep returning to the
platform is the feedback loop. A feedback loop in a platform may take
various forms, all of which serve to create a constant stream of self-
reinforcing activity. In the typical feedback loop, a flow of value units is
that generates a response from the user. If the units are relevant and
interesting, the user will be drawn to the platform repeatedly, generating a
further flow of value units and facilitating more interactions. Effective
feedback loops help to swell the network, increase value creation, and
enhance network effects.
One kind of feedback loop is the single-user feedback loop. This
involves an algorithm built into the platform infrastructure that analyzes
user activity, draws conclusions about the user’s interests, preferences, and
needs, and recommends new value units and connections that the user is
likely to find valuable. When it is adroitly designed and programmed, the
single-user feedback loop can be a powerful tool for increasing activity,
since the more the participant uses the platform, the more the platform
“learns” about him and the more accurate its recommendations become.
In a multi-user feedback loop, activity from a producer is delivered to
relevant consumers, whose activity in turn is fed back to the producer.


---PAGE BREAK---

When effective, this creates a virtuous cycle, encouraging activity on both
sides and ultimately strengthening network effects. Facebook’s news feed is
a classic multiuser feedback loop. Status updates from producers are served
to consumers, whose likes and comments serve as feedback to the
producers. The constant flow of value units stimulates still more activity,
making the platform increasingly valuable to all participants.
Other factors strengthen or weaken a platform’s ability to pull users. One
is the value of the currency available for exchange on the platform. As
we’ve discussed, some platform exchanges are paid for in intangible forms
of currency: attention, popularity, influence, and so on. Thus, one form of
network effect is the increased attractiveness of the currency available on a
platform that is growing in size. Because Twitter has achieved such an
enormous user base, a successful tweet is likely to attract far more currency
in the form of attention than the same message disseminated on some other
platform. So Twitter’s huge size enlarges its pull, encouraging still more
participant activity and making a competitive challenge to the platform
increasingly unlikely.
Pull can also be increased by leveraging the outside networks of
participants. Instagram and WhatsApp pulled in tens of millions of
participants in a few years mainly by piggybacking on their users’ Facebook
networks. We’ll examine these and other techniques for turbocharging pull
in more detail in chapter 5, which focuses on the launch process.
Facilitate. Unlike traditional pipeline businesses, platforms don’t control
value creation. Instead, they create an infrastructure in which value can be
created and exchanged, and lay out principles that govern these interactions.
That’s what the process of facilitating is all about.
One aspect of facilitating interactions is making it as easy as possible for
producers to create and exchange valuable goods and services via the
platform. This may involve providing creative tools for collaboration and
sharing, as the Canadian photography platform 500px does with its
infrastructure, which allows photographers to host their entire portfolios on
the platform, or as invention platform Quirky does with its tools for letting
users work together on creative ideas for innovative products and services.
Facilitating interactions may also involve reducing barriers to usage. Not
long ago, a Facebook user who wanted to share photos with friends had to
use a camera, transfer the images to a computer, use Photoshop or another


---PAGE BREAK---

software package to edit them, and finally upload them to Facebook.
Instagram enabled users to snap, modify, and share pictures in three clicks
on a single device. Lowering barriers to usage in this way encourages
interactions and helps expand participation on the platform.
In some cases, increasing barriers has a positive effect on usage.
Sittercity is platform that helps parents find babysitters. To inspire trust
among its users (the parents), Sittercity has imposed a stringent set of rules
that restrict those who can sign up as producers (the babysitters). In other
cases, platforms must develop intrusive rules for curating value units and
other producer-created content in order to encourage desirable interactions
and discourage undesirable ones. Though relatively rare, misdeeds like the
racist and sexist abuse spewed by trolls on Reddit, the murders of people
found through Craigslist, and the trashing of apartments booked through
Airbnb illustrate how undesirable interactions damage network effects.
Designing a platform to facilitate value-creating interactions is not a
simple matter. We’ll explore the challenges of platform curation and
governance in more detail in chapters 7 and 8.
Match. A successful platform creates efficiencies by matching the right
users with one another and ensuring that the most relevant goods and
services are exchanged. It accomplishes this by using data about producers,
consumers, the value units created, and the goods and services to be
exchanged. The more data the platform has to work with—and the better
designed the algorithms used to collect, organize, sort, parse, and interpret
the data—the more accurate the filters, the more relevant and useful the
information exchanged, and the more rewarding the ultimate match
between producer and consumer.
The data required for optimal matching may be extremely diverse. They
range from relatively static information such as identity, gender, and
nationality to dynamic information such as location, relationship status, age,
and point-in-time interest (as reflected in a search query). Sophisticated data
models like the Facebook news feed may build a filter that considers all
these factors as well as all of the participant’s previous activities on the
platform.
As part of the design process, platform companies need to develop an
explicit data acquisition strategy. Users vary greatly in their willingness to
share data and their readiness to respond to data-driven activity


---PAGE BREAK---

recommendations. Some platforms use incentives to encourage participants
to provide data about themselves; others leverage game elements to gather
data from users. LinkedIn famously used a progress bar to encourage users
to progressively submit more information about themselves, thereby
completing their personal data profiles. Data may also be acquired from
third-party providers. Some mobile apps, such as the music streaming app
Spotify, ask users to sign in using their Facebook identities, which helps the
app pull in initial data to use in facilitating accurate matches. However,
resistance from some users has led many app makers, including Spotify, to
provide alternative ways to sign in that don’t require a Facebook link.
Successful platforms create mutually rewarding matches on a consistent
basis. As such, continual improvement of data acquisition and analysis
methods is an important challenge for any organization seeking to build and
maintain a platform.
Balancing the three functions. All three key functions—pull, facilitate,
and match—are essential to a successful platform. But not all platforms are
equally good at all three. It’s possible for a platform to survive, at least for a
time, thanks mainly to its strength at a particular function.
As of mid-2015, Craigslist continues to rule the classifieds space despite
a poor interface, an utter lack of governance, and an unsophisticated data
system. Craigslist’s massive network keeps pulling users back. Thus, this
platform’s enormous advantage in pull has compensated for its weaknesses
in facilitate and match—at least, so far.
Vimeo and YouTube coexist in the video sharing arena by focusing on
different functions. YouTube employs a strong pull and deep understanding
of the use of data in matching, while Vimeo differentiates itself through
better hosting, bandwidth, and other tools for facilitating production and
consumption.
BEYOND THE CORE INTERACTION
As we’ve seen, platform design begins with the core interaction. But over
time, successful platforms tend to scale by layering new interactions on top
of the core interaction.


---PAGE BREAK---

In some cases, the gradual addition of new interactions is part of the
long-term business plan that platform founders had in mind from the
beginning. In early 2015, both Uber and Lyft began experimenting with a
new ride-sharing service that complements their familiar call-a-taxi
business model. The new services, known as UberPool and Lyft Line, allow
two or more passengers traveling in the same direction to find one another
and share a ride, thereby reducing their cost while increasing the revenues
enjoyed by the driver. Lyft cofounder Logan Green says that ride-sharing
was always part of the Lyft idea. The initial version of Lyft, he explains,
was designed to attract an initial customer base “in every market.” Having
achieved that, he continues, “Now we get to play that next card and start
matching up people to take rides.”3
Uber isn’t taking the competition lightly. To try to ensure that its ride-
sharing service out-competes Lyft’s, Uber has joined the bidding for Here, a
digital mapping service owned by Nokia that is the chief alternative to
Google Maps. Uber hopes to buy Here and use its mapping power to
produce swift and accurate ride-sharing matches more effectively than any
other service.4
In other cases, ideas for new interactions emerge from experience,
observation, and necessity. In its search for new drivers, Uber discovered
that many of its best prospects were recent immigrants to the U.S. who were
eager to supplement their incomes by driving for Uber but who lacked the
credit histories and financial qualifications needed to finance car purchases.
Andrew Chapin of Uber’s driver operations group came up with the idea of
having Uber act as a middleman to guarantee car loans for its drivers,
deducting repayments from driver revenue and sending them directly to the
lenders. Finance companies like the program because loans backed by
Uber’s massive corporate cash flow are almost risk-free, and local auto
dealers are happy with the additional inventory turnover.5
Another example: LinkedIn started by enabling professionals to network
with one another. During its initial days, it focused exclusively on enabling
its core interaction. Over time, the team at LinkedIn realized that the
platform hadn’t created the same high level of daily engagement that
Facebook and a handful of other platforms had achieved. To address this
issue, LinkedIn layered an additional interaction on top of its core
interaction: It began allowing users to organize themselves into groups and
start discussions.


---PAGE BREAK---

This second form of interaction didn’t achieve the popularity LinkedIn
had hoped for either. Given the self-promotional behavior that a
professional network encourages, the loudest users in the groups were often
also the most obnoxious. So LinkedIn went on to add a further interaction,
partly driven by the quest to monetize the platform: it allowed recruiters to
use the site to target candidates, and advertisers to target ads to relevant
professionals. Later still, LinkedIn created another interaction when it
allowed thought leaders, and subsequently all users, to publish posts on
LinkedIn for others to read, effectively turning the site into a publishing
platform. This combination of many forms of interaction gives users more
reasons to visit LinkedIn.
The evolution of Uber, Lyft, and LinkedIn illustrates several of the ways
that new interactions may be layered on top of the core interaction in a
given platform:
•    By changing the value unit exchanged between existing users (as when LinkedIn shifted the
basis of information exchange from user profiles to discussion posts)
•    By introducing a new category of users as either producers or consumers (as when LinkedIn
invited recruiters and advertisers to join the platform as producers)
•    By allowing users to exchange new kinds of value units (as when Uber and Lyft made it
possible for riders to share rides as well as arranging solo pickups)
•    By curating members of an existing user group to create a new category of users (as when
LinkedIn designated certain participants as “thought leaders” and invited them to become
producers of informational posts)
Of course, not every new interaction is successful. Jake McKeon
founded the social network Moodswing as a place where people could share
their emotional states, from elation to gloom. Over time, he found that some
users were turning to Moodswing in times of severe depression, and a few
even used the site to threaten suicide. Distressed, McKeon decided to try to
provide these users with the emotional support they needed. He concocted a
plan to recruit psychology students who would volunteer to offer counseling
and advice via chat lines to depressed Moodswing members. The volunteers
would be tested and vetted in an effort to curate their quality. This “amateur
therapy” offering would represent a new form of value exchange facilitated
by Moodswing.
It’s an intriguing concept, but one that raises some obvious questions—
in particular the potential danger in having untrained and unlicensed
counselors offering psychological guidance to people whose lives are at


---PAGE BREAK---

risk. As of mid-2014, McKeon was in the process of seeking crowdfunding
support for the project. It remains to be seen whether Moodswing’s new
interaction will be launched successfully and produce the user benefits
McKeon hopes for.
APPLYING THE END-TO-END PRINCIPLE
TO PLATFORM DESIGN
As we’ve seen, adding new features and interactions to a platform can be a
powerful way to increase its usefulness and attract more users. But
innovation can easily lead to excessive complexity, which makes the
platform more difficult for users to navigate. Needless complexity can also
create enormous technical problems for the programmers, content
developers, and managers who are charged with updating and maintaining
the platform. The derisive term bloatware has been coined to describe
software systems that have become complicated, slow, and inefficient
through thoughtless accretion of features.
However, avoiding innovation altogether is no solution. A platform that
fails to evolve by adding desirable new features is likely to be abandoned
by users who discover a competing platform with more to offer. Instead, a
way must be found to strike a balance, changing the core platform only
slowly while allowing positive adaptations at the periphery.
This concept is the equivalent, for a platform business, of a long-
established computer networking idea known as the end-to-end principle.
Originally formulated in 1981 by J. H. Saltzer, D. P. Reed, and D. D. Clark,
the end-to-end principle states that, in a general-purpose network,
application-specific functions ought to reside in the end hosts of a network
rather than in intermediary nodes.6 In other words, activities that are not
central to the workings of the network but valuable only to particular users
should be located at the edges of the network rather than at its heart. In this
way, secondary functions don’t interfere with or draw resources away from
the core activities of the network, nor do they complicate the task of
maintaining or updating the network as a whole. Over time, the end-to-end
principle has been expanded from network design to the design of many
other complex computing environments.


---PAGE BREAK---

One of the most storied examples of failure to heed the end-to-end
principle concerns Microsoft’s 2007 introduction of Vista, the latest version
of its Windows operating system. CEO Steven Ballmer trumpeted Vista as
“the biggest product launch in Microsoft’s history” and backed the launch
with a marketing budget of hundreds of millions of dollars.7
Yet Vista failed badly. The problem was that Microsoft’s design team
had sought to retain the software components needed to maintain
backwards compatibility with older computer systems while adding features
needed by next-generation systems—all within the core platform. As a
result, Vista was less stable and more complex than its predecessor,
Windows XP, and outside app developers had difficulty writing code for it.8
Critics described Vista as worse than bloatware—in fact, they dubbed it
goatware because it ate all a system’s resources.9 To this day, millions of
Windows users have refused to adopt Vista, clinging to Windows XP
despite repeated efforts by Microsoft to retire it. Ironically, while Microsoft
stopped retail sales of XP in 2008 and of Vista in 2010, XP’s market share
in 2015 was above 12 percent, while that of Vista was below 2 percent.10
By contrast, when Steve Jobs returned to the leadership of Apple in 1997
after his years developing the ambitious but unsuccessful NeXT computer,
he made a crucial decision that honored the end-to-end principle and helped
lead to Apple’s subsequent success. At NeXT, Jobs and his team had
developed an elegant new operating system with a clean, layered
architecture and a beautiful graphical interface. Now, planning a successor
to Apple’s Mac OS 9 operating system, Jobs faced a hard choice: he could
merge the NeXT and Mac OS 9 software code, thereby producing an
operating system that would be compatible with both systems, or he could
jettison Mac OS 9 in favor of NeXT’s clean architecture.
Jobs placed a dangerous bet on dumping the old code from OS 9.
However, he made one concession: the design team developed a separate
“Classic Environment” that would allow consumers to run their old OS 9
applications. This compartmentalized approach satisfied the end-to-end
principle. The old code did not slow down or add complexity to the new
applications, and new Mac buyers were unburdened by software written to
accommodate apps they didn’t own. Jobs’s choice made innovation on the
new Mac OS X easier and more efficient, which enabled Apple to develop
new features that made Microsoft’s operating systems look dated by
comparison.11


---PAGE BREAK---

The end-to-end concept can also be applied to the design of a platform.
In this case, the principle states that application-specific features should
reside in the layer of process at the edge or on top of the platform, rather
than at the roots deep within the platform. Only the highest-volume,
highest-value features that cut across apps should become part of the core
platform.
There are two reasons for this rule. First, when specific new features are
incorporated into the core platform rather than attached to the periphery,
applications that do not use those features will appear slow and inefficient.
By contrast, when application-specific features are run by the app itself
rather than by the core platform, the user experience will be much cleaner.
Second, a platform ecosystem can evolve faster when the core platform
is a clean, simple system rather than a tangle of numerous features. For this
reason, C. Y. Baldwin and K. B. Clark of Harvard Business School describe
a well-designed platform as consisting of a stable core layer that restricts
variety, sitting underneath an evolving layer that enables variety.12
Today’s best-designed platforms incorporate this structural principle. For
example, Amazon Web Services (AWS), the most successful platform for
providing cloud-based information storage and management, focuses on
optimizing a handful of basic operations, including data storage,
computation, and messaging.13 Other services, which are used by just a
fraction of AWS customers, are restricted to the periphery of the platform
and provided through purpose-built apps.
THE POWER OF MODULARITY
There are advantages to an integral approach where the system is developed
as quickly as possible to serve a single purpose, especially in the early days
of a platform. However, in the long run, a successful platform must have a
more modular approach. A full discussion of this trade-off is well beyond
the scope of this chapter, but we will cover some of the important ideas. We
begin with a definition provided by Baldwin and Clark (1996):
Modularity is a strategy for organizing complex products and processes efficiently. A modular
system is composed of units (or modules) that are designed independently but still function as an
integrated whole. Designers achieve modularity by partitioning information into visible design
rules and hidden design parameters. Modularity is beneficial only if the partition is precise,


---PAGE BREAK---

unambiguous, and complete. The visible design rules (also called visible information) are
decisions that affect subsequent design decisions. Ideally, the visible design rules are established
early in a design process and communicated broadly to those involved.14
In a 2008 paper, Carliss Young Baldwin and C. Jason Woodard provided
a useful and succinct definition of a stable system core:
We argue that the fundamental architecture behind all platforms is essentially the same: namely,
the system is partitioned into a set of “core” components with low variety and a complementary
set of “peripheral” components with high variety. The low-variety components constitute the
platform. They are the long-lived elements of the system and thus implicitly or explicitly establish
the system’s interfaces, [and] the rules governing interactions among the different parts.15
A critical factor that makes modularity so effective is that when systems
are cleanly partitioned into subsystems, they can work as a whole by
connecting and communicating through well-defined interfaces. The
implication is that subsystems can be designed independently so long as
they adhere to overall design rules and connect to the rest of the system
only through standard interfaces. Readers will likely have heard the term
application programming interfaces, or APIs. These are the standard
interfaces that systems such as Google Maps, the New York Stock
Exchange, Salesforce, Thomson Reuters Eikon, Twitter, and many more use
to facilitate access by external entities to core resources.16
Amazon has been especially effective at opening APIs to its modular
services. Figure 3.1 compares the range of APIs made available by Amazon
and by the leading traditional retailer, Walmart, which is making a strong
effort to become a significant platform competitor. As you can see, Amazon
has by far outstripped Walmart in the number and variety of APIs provided.
The power of modularity is one of the reasons that the personal computer
industry grew so quickly in the 1990s. The key components of PC systems
were central processing units (CPUs) that provided the computation,
graphical processing units (GPUs) that created rich images on the screen,
random access memory (RAM) that provided working storage, and a
spinning hard drive (HD) that provided large amounts of long-term storage.
Each of these subsystems communicated with the others using well-defined
interfaces that allowed for tremendous innovation, as firms such as Intel
(CPUs), ATI and Nvidia (GPUs), Kingston (RAM), and Seagate (HD) all
worked independently to improve the performance of their products.


---PAGE BREAK---

FIGURE 3.1. Amazon has far more remixes or “mashups” of APIs than Walmart. These span
payments, e-commerce, cloud services, messaging, task allocation, and more. While Walmart
optimizes logistics, Amazon also allows third parties to build value on its modular services.
Source: Evans and Basole using ProgrammableWeb data.17 Reprinted by permission.
The reason that most platforms launch with a tightly integrated
architectural design is that there is significant work involved in carefully
specifying subsystem interfaces—and even in simply documenting them.
When firms are pursuing narrow market windows with limited engineering
resources, they can easily be tempted to skip the hard work of decomposing
systems into clean modules and instead proceed as quickly as possible to a


---PAGE BREAK---

viable solution. Over time, however, this approach makes it much more
difficult to mobilize an external ecosystem of developers who can build on
top of the core platform and extend its offerings into new markets.18 Thus, a
firm that has an integral architecture will likely have to invest in remaking
its core technology.19
RE-ARCHITECTING THE PLATFORM
It is possible to pull off the trick of re-architecting a system toward a
modular design. The first step is to analyze the degree of modularity the
system has already achieved. Fortunately, a number of tools have been
developed to accomplish this goal. Key among these are “design structure
matrices” that allow a visual examination of the dependencies in complex
systems.20
In a 2006 article in Management Science, Alan MacCormack and Carliss
Baldwin document an example of a product that successfully evolved from
an integral to a modular architecture.21 When the software was put into the
public domain as open source, the commercial firm that owned the
copyright invested significant resources to make the transition. This was
critical because the software could not have been maintained by distributed
teams of volunteer developers if it had not been broken into smaller
subsystems.
The need to re-architect a complex system is not unique to software. In
the early 1990s, Intel faced a major challenge in growing its market. The
performance of Intel’s CPU chips was doubling every eighteen to twenty-
four months.22 Similar performance improvements were occurring in the
other key PC subsystems: GPU, RAM, and hard drives. However, the
information connections between the subsystems were still defined by an
old standard called the Industry Standard Architecture (ISA). As a result,
consumers saw little improvement in PC performance and thus had little
reason to buy new machines. In a 2002 paper, Michael A. Cusumano and
Annabelle Gawer document how Intel took the lead by investing in a new
Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI) to better connect the main
subsystems, and the universal serial bus (USB) standard which fostered
tremendous amounts of innovation in connected devices such as computer


---PAGE BREAK---

mice, cameras, microphones, keyboards, printers, scanners, external hard
drives, and much more.23
ITERATIVE IMPROVEMENT:
THE ANTI-DESIGN PRINCIPLE
When you’re launching a new platform—or seeking to enhance and grow
an existing platform—thoughtful attention to the principles of platform
design will maximize your chances of value creation.24 But as we’ve seen,
platforms cannot be entirely planned; they also emerge. Remember that one
of the key characteristics that distinguishes a platform from a traditional
business is that most of the activity is controlled by users, not by the owners
or managers of the platform. It’s inevitable that participants will use the
platform in ways you never anticipated or planned.
Twitter was never meant to have a discovery mechanism. It originated as
simply a reverse-chronological stream of feeds. There was no way to seek
out tweets on particular topics other than by scrolling through pages of
unrelated and irrelevant content. Chris Messina, an engineer at Google,
originally suggested the use of hashtags to annotate and discover similar
tweets. Today, the hashtag has become a mainstay of Twitter.
Platform designers should always leave room for serendipitous
discoveries, as users often lead the way to where the design should evolve.
Close monitoring of user behavior on the platform is almost certain to
reveal unexpected patterns—some of which may suggest fruitful new areas
for value creation. The best platforms allow room for user quirks, and they
are open enough to gradually incorporate such quirks into the design of the
platform.
Smart design is essential to building and maintaining a successful
platform. But sometimes the best design is anti-design, which makes space
for the accidental, the spontaneous, and even the bizarre.25


---PAGE BREAK---

TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER THREE
    The design of a platform should begin with its core interaction—one kind of interaction
that is at the heart of the platform’s value-creation mission.
    Three key elements define the core interaction: the participants, the value unit, and the
filter. Of these, the value unit is the most crucial, and often the most difficult to control.
    In order to make the core interaction easy and even inevitable, a platform must perform
three crucial functions: pull, facilitate, and match. All three are essential, and each has its
special challenges.
    As a platform grows, it often finds ways to expand beyond the core interaction. New kinds
of interactions may be layered on top of the core interaction, often attracting new
participants in the process.
    It’s important to design a platform thoughtfully to make mutually satisfying interactions
easy for large numbers of users. But it’s also important to leave room for serendipity and
the unexpected, since users themselves will find new ways to create value on the platform.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

4
DISRUPTION
How Platforms Conquer and
Transform Traditional Industries
The platform concept is fundamentally simple: create a place where
producers and consumers can come together in interactions that create value
for both parties. It’s an idea that humans have been practicing for millennia.
After all, what is the traditional open-air marketplace found in villages and
cities from Africa to Europe if not a platform in which farmers and
craftspeople sell their wares to local consumers? The same is true of the
original stock markets that grew up in cities like London and New York,
where buyers and sellers of company shares would gather in person to
establish fair market prices through the open outcry auction system.
The main difference between these traditional platform businesses and
the modern platforms featured in this book is, of course, the addition of
digital technology, which enormously expands a platform’s reach, speed,
convenience, and efficiency. (There’s a good reason why most stock trading
has now migrated from physical exchange floors to electronic marketplaces
accessible from anywhere in the world.) The Internet and its associated
technologies give today’s platform businesses a truly breathtaking ability to
transform industries, often in unpredictable ways.
We’ve already looked at the way in which the car-service platform Uber
has leveraged network effects to claim a huge and growing share of the
rides-for-hire market from such traditional businesses as taxis and
limousine services—and in the process has built an enormous corporate
valuation in a startlingly short period of time. By the end of 2014, the five-


---PAGE BREAK---

year-old company was valued by investors at $40 billion (up from the $17
billion valuation of just six months earlier), making it more valuable, at
least on paper, than such venerable commercial giants as Mitsubishi, Target,
FedEx, General Dynamics, and Sony.1 Uber, which now operates in more
than 250 cities around the world, has scaled these heights by providing an
exceedingly simple yet valuable service to both consumers and producers,
bringing quick and inexpensive rides to passengers while enabling drivers
to earn better incomes than most taxi drivers—and without having to shell
out the enormous sums required for a traditional taxi license. At the height
of the market, in mid-2013, a New York City taxi medallion was valued at
over $1.2 million.
So the Uber platform, simply by providing an online location where
riders and drivers can come together, has brought benefits to both
consumers and producers while building vast wealth for its investors. It’s a
winning proposition for everyone—except for the hundreds of thousands of
taxi drivers, car-service dispatchers, and limousine company employees
whose jobs are suddenly in jeopardy. No wonder Barry Korengold,
president of the cab drivers association in San Francisco (the city where
Uber was launched back in the summer of 2010) describes the leaders of
Uber as “robber barons”: “They started off by operating illegally, without
following any of the regulations and unfairly competing. And that’s how
they became big—they had enough money to ignore all the rules.” The
president of one San Francisco cab company predicted that the entire taxi
industry would collapse before the end of 2015—a forecast echoed by taxi
executives in cities around the world. As a result, the value of a New York
City taxi medallion fell by almost $300,000 in one year—with no bottom in
sight.2
In chapter 11, we’ll return to the question of whether platform businesses
like Uber are engaging in unfair competition, or whether traditional
incumbent companies are simply angry about being outcompeted by digital
interlopers. But for now, just let’s marvel at how swiftly and seemingly
effortlessly a platform business is revolutionizing a once-secure industry.
Even more remarkably, the changes that Uber has already brought are
probably just the opening salvo in a barrage of further disruptions that may
ultimately transform the entire transportation sector. Combining the
platform model with another technology that is rapidly moving from the
drawing board to the showroom—the self-driving car—will improve Uber’s


---PAGE BREAK---

already stellar economic model and could lead to a series of cascading
impacts that extend beyond the taxi industry. One futurist foresees a time
when millions of people will eschew car ownership altogether, instead
relying on an instantly deployable fleet of driverless Uber vehicles to take
them wherever they want to go at a cost of around fifty cents per mile. Uber
cofounder and CEO Travis Kalanick comments, “We want to get to the
point that using Uber is cheaper than owning a car.” The ultimate promise:
“Transportation that’s as reliable as running water.”3
The implications are startling. The major automakers would be
devastated by the shrinkage of their market. So would ancillary businesses
such as auto insurance, car finance, and parking. On the other hand, the
sudden decrease in demand for parking places (since driverless cars can be
in virtually continual use) will free up tens of millions of square feet of real
estate for development, liberate lanes on practically every city street, and
drastically reduce the pollution and congestion caused by drivers cruising
the streets in search of a parking spot. If this vision for the next phase of
Uber’s growth comes true, the landscape of America may well be rendered
unrecognizable.4
And if all that is not enough, consider this observation by Kalanick: “If
we can get you a car in five minutes, we can get you anything in five
minutes.”5 Anything at all? One wonders what limits can be set on Uber’s
disruptive potential. Kalanick seems not to acknowledge any.
A CAPSULE HISTORY OF DIGITAL DISRUPTION
“Software is eating the world.” The slogan was originally used by Netscape
founder Marc Andreessen in the title of a 2011 op-ed article in the Wall
Street Journal to encapsulate how technology—particularly the Internet—
has transformed the world of business.6 The story of Internet-enabled
disruption as we’ve witnessed it so far has occurred in two main stages.
In stage one, efficient pipelines ate inefficient pipelines. Most Internet
applications during the 1990s involved the creation of highly efficient
pipelines—online systems for distributing goods and services that
outcompeted incumbent industries. Unlike traditional offline pipelines,
online pipelines benefited from low marginal costs of distribution—


---PAGE BREAK---

sometimes as low as zero. This allowed them to target and serve large
markets with much smaller investment.
Traditional media companies were the first to feel the pinch. Newspapers
were upended by the Internet’s ability to distribute news to a global
audience without the traditional distribution costs (printing, shipping,
retailing, delivery). An efficient pipeline had eaten an inefficient one. The
unbundling of classifieds and other forms of advertising from editorial
content then stripped the newspaper model of a crucial monetization
mechanism, as the more efficient online method for delivering targeted
advertising outcompeted the traditional ink-on-paper method. Again, an
efficient pipeline ate an inefficient one.
Retail and mail order shopping soon felt the pain. Amazon’s success in
the book industry led to the fall of Borders and other bookstores.
Blockbuster’s bricks-and-mortar system for distributing DVDs failed to
compete with Netflix’s distribution economics, based initially on the online
selection of DVDs that were delivered by mail, and later on streaming
video. Music company revenues plummeted as sales of CDs collapsed,
replaced by faster and cheaper file downloads, many of them pirated or
shared illegally. Over time, many of the Internet distributors found ways to
leverage granular data about consumer choice so as to serve their customers
better than the traditional pipelines ever did.
Business revolutions such as these embodied Andreessen’s vision of
“software eating the world.” Today, having attained the status of a cliché,
his vision needs an update: “Platforms are eating the world.” We’ve entered
stage two of the disruption saga, in which platforms eat pipelines.
HOW PLATFORMS EAT PIPELINES
The evidence for this new stage of disruption is all around us. As we’ve
seen, taxi companies—and regulators—have realized that Uber is on the
march to global domination of local transportation. Once ridiculed by the
hotel industry, Airbnb has rapidly scaled to become a global provider of
accommodation, with more rooms booked every night than the largest
global hotel chains. Upwork is gradually evolving from a marketplace for
talent into an infrastructure that allows entire organizations to be built in the
cloud, connecting freelance workers from remote locations without the need


---PAGE BREAK---

for a physical workspace and the costs associated with it. Amazon continues
to expand its impact on traditional book publishing while making inroads
into dozens of other retailing arenas. And while traditional pipeline giants
Nokia and Blackberry have lost 90 percent of their market value in the last
decade, platform giants Apple and Google have dominated the stock
market.
How and why is this happening? Let’s break it down.
In the world of platforms, the Internet no longer acts merely as a
distribution channel (a pipeline). It also acts as a creation infrastructure and
a coordination mechanism. Platforms are leveraging this new capability to
create entirely new business models. In addition, the physical and the digital
are rapidly converging, enabling the Internet to connect and coordinate
objects in the real world—for example, through smartphone apps that allow
you to control your home appliances at long distance. Simultaneously,
organizational boundaries are being redefined as platform companies
leverage external ecosystems to create value in new ways.7
In this new stage of disruption, platforms enjoy two significant economic
advantages over pipelines.
One of these advantages is superior marginal economics of production
and distribution. As we’ve noted, when hotel chains like Hilton and
Sheraton want to expand, they build new rooms and employ thousands of
staff. By contrast, Airbnb expands with near-zero marginal costs, since its
cost for adding an additional room to its network listings is minimal.
A platform’s ability to scale rapidly is further enhanced by network
effects. When positive network effects kick in, higher production leads to
higher consumption, and vice versa. More freelancers participating on
Upwork make it more attractive to companies looking to hire, which in turn
attracts more freelancers; a wider array of merchants on Etsy attracts more
customers, who in turn attract more merchants. A virtuous feedback loop is
set in motion, fueling the growth of the platform at minimal cost.
Leveraging network effects, platforms are able to build open electronic
ecosystems embracing hundreds, thousands, or millions of remote
participants. Such ecosystems can be larger than most pipeline-based
organizations and can have access to more resources than a traditional
pipeline company can command. As a result, the value created in such an
ecosystem can be much larger than the value created in a comparable
traditional organization. Therefore, firms that continue to compete on the


---PAGE BREAK---

basis of resources that are owned internally are increasingly finding it
difficult to compete with platforms.
THE IMPACTS OF PLATFORM DISRUPTION ON VALUE
CREATION, VALUE CONSUMPTION, AND QUALITY
CONTROL
Platforms, then, have economic advantages that enable them to grow faster
than similar pipeline businesses. This phenomenon alone would lead to
significant disruption of traditional industries, as platform businesses
displace pipeline businesses at the top of the Fortune 500 rankings. But the
era of platforms-eat-pipelines is disrupting businesses in many other ways
as well. In particular, the rise of the world of platforms is reconfiguring the
familiar business processes of value creation, value consumption, and
quality control.8
Reconfiguring value creation to tap new sources of supply. As self-
serve systems, platforms grow and conquer markets when they minimize
the barriers to usage for their users. In particular, every time a platform
removes a hurdle that makes the participation of producers more difficult,
value creation is reconfigured and new sources of supply are opened up.
Wikipedia became one of the first platforms to tap a new source of
supply when it created a system that enabled volunteers to capture and
organize the world’s knowledge. Soon, YouTube was empowering any
teenager with a video camera or a smartphone to compete with movie
studios and television networks.
Today, we see the phenomenon of reconfigured value creation at work in
many kinds of platform business. Singapore-based video-
streaming platform Viki leveraged a global community of enthusiasts
(rather than hiring employees) to add subtitles to Korean and Japanese
dramas, which it then marketed in the U.S. After the resulting rapid burst of
growth, Viki was sold to the Japanese company Rakuten for $200 million.
Facebook used a similar approach to find translators for its website instead
of relying on professionals.


---PAGE BREAK---

To fuel the continued explosion of new sources of supply, platform
businesses are steadily lowering barriers that might discourage producers.
Twitter attracted millions of content creators with its new standard literary
format—the message of 140 characters or fewer. By comparison with
traditional blogging, which required more effort and time, the tweet is a
quick and easy form of writing, which encouraged many more users to
become content producers.
In similar fashion, Airbnb works to lower the hurdles for its member-
hosts by regularly conducting events and programs designed to illustrate
and teach its best practices. Uber works to remove economic barriers that
might discourage would-be drivers by providing financial incentives like
sign-up bonuses. Platforms like Dribbble, Threadless, and 99designs have
built large ecosystems of designers, largely owing to the democratization of
the tools of design and printing over the last several years—yet another case
of barriers to entry being lowered, in part through the help of platform tools.
The proliferation of new production technologies further enables the
emergence of new groups of producers. Just as the smartphone camera
expanded the volume of content on platforms like Instagram and Vine, the
spread of 3D printing is likely to lead to a new range of platforms for
industry design. However, technology often needs the support of innovative
business design to produce massive reconfiguration of value creation.
Software for word processing, typography, and graphic design has existed
for decades, but not until Amazon’s Kindle Publishing platform offered
quick and easy access to a large readership did a whole new ecosystem of
authors emerge.
Reconfiguring value consumption by enabling new forms of
consumer behavior. The advent of the world of platforms is also disrupting
traditional consumer behavior, inspiring millions of people to use products
and services in ways that would have been unimaginable a few years ago.
As journalist Jason Tanz puts it:
We are hopping into strangers’ cars (Lyft, Sidecar, Uber), welcoming them into our spare rooms
(Airbnb), dropping our dogs off at their houses (DogVacay, Rover), and eating food in their dining
rooms (Feastly). We are letting them rent our cars (RelayRides, Getaround), our boats
(Boatbound), our houses (HomeAway), and our power tools (Zilok). We are entrusting complete
strangers with our most valuable possessions, our personal experiences—and our very lives. In the
process, we are entering a new era of Internet-enabled intimacy.9


---PAGE BREAK---

Not so long ago, activities like these would have been viewed as weird,
if not downright dangerous. Today, they are familiar to millions, thanks to
the trust-building mechanisms established by platform businesses. A host of
upstart platforms that bill themselves as “the Uber of X” are working to
alter consumer behavior in other arenas.10
Reconfiguring quality control through community-driven curation.
When new platforms such as YouTube, Airbnb, and Wikipedia are
launched, they are often widely criticized, even ridiculed. This is because,
in their early stages, they fail to offer the quality and reliability provided by
their traditional competitors. YouTube’s early content often bordered on
pornography; much of it was pirated. Apartments listed on Airbnb would
get raided by city inspectors responding to complaints about orgies.
Wikipedia biographies declared many a living person deceased.
This is the problem with abundance. When platforms start unlocking
new sources of supply, quality often nosedives—an example of the negative
network effects we discussed in chapter 2.
These early days in the life of a platform can be difficult. However, over
time, as the curation mechanism starts to work, the platform improves its
ability to match consumers with relevant and high-quality content, goods,
and services from producers. Strong curation encourages desirable behavior
while discouraging and eventually weeding out undesirable behavior. As the
platform nurtures quality, it develops the reliability needed to attract a wide
array of customers. Mainstream competitors, often quite suddenly, find
themselves competing with an unfamiliar upstart—one that is poised to
grow much faster than they can.
Once platforms start scaling, they need to ensure that the curation
mechanism doesn’t break down. Platforms that successfully scale their
curation efforts gather better data on their users and improve their matching
algorithms over time. They also ensure that manual curation is gradually
phased out in favor of automated curation mechanisms based on socially
driven feedback loops. For example, Quora, the question-and-answer
platform, started out with in-house editors curating its content. Once a
critical mass of users started participating, curation was largely turned over
to algorithms driven by community judgments.
The rise of the world of platforms, then, doesn’t simply mean the
emergence of new business entities competing with traditional incumbent


---PAGE BREAK---

firms. It also means the appearance of new forms of business activity, as
these changes in the modes of value creation, value consumption, and
quality control suggest.
STRUCTURAL IMPACTS OF
PLATFORM DISRUPTION
The rise of platform businesses is transforming the structure of the business
landscape in three specific ways that have largely gone unnoticed. We
describe these three forms of platform-driven disruptions as de-linking
assets from value, re-intermediation, and market aggregation.
De-linking assets from value. The most familiar platform examples—
Airbnb, Uber, Amazon—come from the business-to-consumer (B2C) arena.
How do you convert a product to a platform in the business-to-
business (B2B) arena? Many corporations own massive fixed assets like
power generation plants, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines, or
tracts of farmland. How do you build platforms around those?
The answer: you de-link ownership of the physical asset from the value
it creates. This allows the use of the asset to be independently traded and
applied to its best use—that is, the use that creates the greatest economic
value—rather than being restricted to uses specific to the owner. As a result,
efficiency and value rise dramatically.
Two of this book’s authors (Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne)
used this approach in response to a request from the state of New York to
help in designing a smart market to integrate the state’s increasing number
of distributed energy resources. These include solar rooftops, battery
storage, and household generators, as well as the virtual storage that arises
from a building’s thermal inertia. Buildings can be preheated or cooled or
can delay heating and cooling within a couple of degrees without affecting
occupants’ comfort. Together, these systems constitute resources that can be
used to help the state’s electric power system accommodate the swings in
demand and supply that are part the natural daily and seasonal cycle—but
only if there is a system in place to handle the coordination. Currently, price
signals arise from the system-wide wholesale market and are aggregated,
thereby obscuring the clearer signals that localized data would provide.


---PAGE BREAK---

To solve this problem, we recommended a platform that separates the
physical assets from the value they create—that is, the energy produced.
Such a platform would allow small sellers to meet the demand by the larger
buyers of power, who then deliver it to end consumers. To obviate the need
for users of the platform to constantly check market prices, the system
should create automated signals so that sellers’ machines can be
programmed to respond automatically to local relevant price and demand
information distributed through the platform. 
If the New York system is implemented, significant savings would be
realized, since investments in new transmission, distribution, and generation
capacity could be delayed or avoided entirely. In addition, the system, being
highly flexible and responsive, could accommodate further deployments of
renewable energy better than the current system can, as it relies on large
power plants to respond to variability in supply and demand.
De-linking assets from value also allows expensive health care
equipment such as MRI machines (each costing $3–5 million) to be used
more efficiently. A single hospital may use just 40 to 50 percent of its own
MRI capacity. Solution: time-slice the usage, and create a market for slices
among other hospitals and small clinics that cannot afford their own
machines. Separating the asset from the value it creates can drive the
utilization rate to 70 or even 90 percent, producing incremental revenue for
the machine’s owner.
It’s just one further step to turn a local market into a statewide or
regional one. In fact, as of mid-2015, a Boston firm called Cohealo is taking
that step, with the goal of becoming the Airbnb of expensive hospital
equipment.
This concept of de-linking assets from value helped  rescue Australian
farmers from a drought more severe than that faced by California in 2015.
Like California, Australia suffered from a patchwork system of water rights
that limits the use of water to whatever an individual owner has in mind.
The system was reformed beginning in 2003 by separating land ownership
from water rights. With the help of a private company called Waterfind,
Australia created a platform for water trading that greatly increased the
economic efficiency of water use. A farmer with a low-value crop might
stop farming and sell his water to a farmer with a high-value crop, or to a
municipal water authority within transport distance. As a result, when
Australia was hit by drought starting in 2006, its farmers suffered far less


---PAGE BREAK---

than those in California have. Now Waterfind is setting up a subsidiary
based in Sacramento, hoping to apply the same platform-based solution to
American agriculture.11
Re-intermediation. During the first stage of Internet-driven disruption,
many business commentators predicted that the biggest impact of the new
information and communication technologies would be widespread
disintermediation—the elimination of middlemen, or intermediate layers,
from industries, establishing direct connections between producers and
consumers. Experts pointed to the decline of traditional businesses like
travel agents and insurance brokers, as consumers learned to shop for
airline tickets and insurance policies without intermediaries. The same
process of disintermediation was expected to sweep many other industries
over time.
The reality has proven to be somewhat different. Across numerous
industries, platforms have repeatedly re-intermediated markets, introducing
new kinds of middlemen rather than simply eliminating layers of market
participants. Typically re-intermediation involves replacing non-scalable
and inefficient agent intermediaries with online, often automated tools and
systems that offer valuable new goods and services to participants on both
sides of the platform.
Networked platforms serve as more efficient intermediaries owing to
their ability to use market-mediating mechanisms that scale. While
traditional intermediaries relied on manual efforts, platform intermediaries
rely on algorithms and social feedback, both of which scale quickly and
efficiently. Moreover, their ability to gather data over time and use it to
make the system more intelligent allows platforms to scale their
intermediation in the market in a manner that was impossible for traditional
middlemen.
Intermediation by platform businesses is transforming industries,
creating new venues where market participants are connected with greater
power and efficiency than ever before. In the music industry, artist and
repertoire (A & R) executives, who traditionally associated themselves with
a large record label in order to attract talent, now operate as independent
professionals, scouting for talent on platforms such as YouTube and
SoundCloud. Literary agents search for new authors on content platforms
such as Quora and Medium. Small businesses run advertising campaigns


---PAGE BREAK---

without using traditional ad agencies or media channels by relying on
Google’s AdWords platform. This, in turn, has led to the rise of an entire
new range of intermediary agencies in Asia that manage AdWords
campaigns for a fraction of the traditional price. Thus, while platforms
displace large and inefficient intermediaries, they empower small and
nimble service providers who leverage the platform to provide services to
end users.
In another form of re-intermediation, platforms create a new layer of
reputational information by leveraging social feedback about producers.
Platforms like Yelp, Angie’s List, and TripAdvisor have created an entirely
new industry based on certifying the quality of product and service
providers—in the process driving some traditional industry certifiers (such
as travel guide and consumer magazine publishers) out of business.
The re-intermediation produced by platforms is also changing the
economics of participation for producers and consumers, leading to both
new winners and new losers. In the traditional book business, publishers
absorb (and spend) the bulk of book revenues, generally paying author
royalties that range between 10 and 15 percent. By contrast, authors on
Amazon’s self-publishing platform generally retain 70 percent of the
revenues. Of course, Amazon authors must also defray many of the costs
that a traditional publisher would cover, such as editing, design, publicity,
and marketing—which makes the designation of “winners” and “losers” in
this instance more complicated.
A similar economic shift in favor of app developers was set into motion
with the emergence of the app ecosystem of the iPhone and Android. These
new economics for participants are possible because of the superior
marginal economics enjoyed by platforms.12
Market aggregation. Platforms are also creating new efficiencies by
aggregating unorganized markets. Market aggregation is the process
whereby platforms provide centralized markets to serve widely dispersed
individuals and organizations. Market aggregation provides information and
power to platform users who formerly engaged in interactions in a
haphazard fashion, often without access to reliable or up-to-date market
data.
Consider, for example, bus transportation in India. Different bus fleets
operate on interstate, intrastate, and other routes. Many different types of


---PAGE BREAK---

bus exist, and pricing is extremely variable. Because the industry is so
fragmented and unorganized, consumer search costs and decision overhead
are high.13 Now a platform business called redBus is aggregating
information from all Indian bus operators in a central plug-and-play
infrastructure. The result is quicker, easier, and cheaper decision-making for
consumers, and, in the long run, a healthier transportation market for India.
Many successful platforms perform a similar market aggregation
function. Amazon Marketplace, Alibaba, and Etsy provide online sites
where vendors of thousands of kinds of products from around the world can
offer their wares to consumers. Service platforms like Upwork bring
thousands of skilled professionals under a single roof, making it easy for
potential employers to evaluate, compare, and hire them.
THE INCUMBENTS FIGHT BACK: PIPELINES
BECOMING PLATFORMS
Platform businesses, then, are disrupting the traditional business landscape
in a number of ways—not only by displacing some of the world’s biggest
incumbent firms, but also by transforming familiar business processes like
value creation and consumer behavior as well as altering the structure of
major industries.
What can incumbents do to respond? Are entrenched companies that
operate familiar pipeline businesses doomed to capitulate as platforms
reshape and ultimately take over their industries?
Not necessarily. But if incumbents hope to fight the forces of platform
disruption, they’ll need to reevaluate their existing business models. For
example, they’ll need to scrutinize all their transaction costs—that is, the
money they spend on processes such as marketing, sales, product delivery,
and customer service—and imagine how those costs might be reduced or
eliminated in a more seamlessly connected world. They’ll also need to
examine the entire universe of individuals and organizations they currently
interact with and envision new ways of networking them so as to create new
forms of value.14 They’ll need to ask questions such as:
•    Which processes that we currently manage in-house can be delegated to outside partners,
whether suppliers or customers?


---PAGE BREAK---

•    How can we empower outside partners to create products and services that will generate new
forms of value for our existing customers?
•    Are there ways we can network with current competitors to produce valuable new services for
customers?
•    How can the value of the goods and services we currently provide be enhanced through new
data streams, interpersonal connections, and curation tools?
Nike has proven to be one of the most intelligent incumbent companies
seeking new ways to survive and thrive in the world of platforms. Some of
the competitive steps they’ve taken may seem obvious. They aren’t.
Pipeline businesses like Nike have traditionally scaled in one of two
ways. Some expand by owning and integrating a greater length of the value-
creation-and-delivery pipeline—for example, by buying upstream suppliers
or downstream distributors. This is referred to as vertical integration.
Others expand by widening the pipeline to push more value through it. This
is horizontal integration. When consumer goods companies grow by
creating new products and brands, it’s an example of horizontal integration.
In January 2012, Nike brought out a wearable technology device, the
FuelBand, to track user fitness activities, including steps walked and
calories burned. Like many other companies, Nike has also been developing
apps—in this case, apps related to sports and fitness. On the surface, these
might seem like traditional product-line extensions aiming at horizontal
integration. But in reality, Nike is testing an approach that, if successful,
will lead to a new form of growth—one pioneered by platform businesses
like Apple.
Over the last decade, Apple has grown in part by connecting its products
and services to one another in the cloud. The ability to sync contents and
data over iTunes and iCloud makes the ownership of multiple Apple
products particularly valuable, and much more useful than (say) the
ownership of multiple products from Sony, Toshiba, or another electronics
manufacturer. Data acts as an integration glue to make all these products
and services perform in concert.
This leads to a new form of growth. When multiple products and
services connect and interact using data, pipelines can start behaving like
platforms, producing new forms of value and encouraging users to engage
in more interactions.
Like a suite of Apple products, Nike’s FuelBand-connected shoes and
mobile apps are not simply separate products and services connected by a


---PAGE BREAK---

brand name. Instead, they constantly interact, providing users with
information and advice about their athletic performance, their fitness
regime, and their health goals. Unlike a traditional sporting goods company,
Nike is building an ecosystem of users using the data it captures about
them. Over time, it can leverage this data to create more relevant
experiences for its users and connect them with one another to enable
valuable interactions.
Nike is not the only company taking the first steps in transforming its
traditional pipeline business into a platform business. Under Armour, a rival
of Nike in the sports and casual wear market, has been moving quickly to
build its own fitness ecosystem. In November 2013, it purchased
MapMyFitness, a leading workout and exercise tracking platform. Then, in
February 2015, it followed up by buying two more fitness platforms—
MyFitnessPal, which focuses on nutrition, and Endomondo, a “trainer in
your pocket” that mainly serves consumers in Europe. The total purchase
price for the three companies: a hefty $710 million. “What’s really
astounding,” one analyst commented, “is that none of the companies
acquired make actual devices. Instead, everything is about platform and
data. And—more importantly—users.” In combination, the three
acquisitions boast 130 million platform users.15 Like Nike, Under Armour
sees that the future of its industry is platform-based, and it is determined to
be a disruptor.
Similar competitive moves are occurring in other sectors. Industrial
giants including GE, Siemens, and Haier are connecting their machines to
the nascent Internet of things.16 These networked machines constantly
stream data into a central platform that enables them to interact with and
learn from one another.17 Access to data from this network of devices helps
each machine better utilize its resources and provide more reliable service.
Can any product or service become the basis of a platform business?
Here’s the test: if the firm can use either information or community to add
value to what it sells, then there is potential for creating a viable platform.
This creates huge opportunities for a lot of firms.
Consider McCormick Foods, a 126-year-old company that sells herbs,
spices, and condiments. By 2010, the company’s traditional growth
strategies had run their course. McCormick had already expanded into a full
range of food seasonings and established a foothold up and down its supply
chain, including operations in farming and food preparation. The company


---PAGE BREAK---

was running out of growth options. CIO Jerry Wolfe heard about Nike’s
move into platform-building. Could McCormick do the same?
Wolfe reached out to Barry Wacksman, a partner at R/GA, a leading
New York design firm that had helped Nike design its platform. Together,
they hit on the idea of using recipes and taste profiles to build a food-based
platform. Wolfe and Wacksman used McCormick’s taste laboratories to
distill three dozen flavor archetypes—such as minty, citrus, floral, garlicky,
meaty—that can be used to describe almost any recipe. Based on personal
preferences, the system can predict new recipes an individual is likely to
savor. Members of the McCormick platform community can modify recipes
and upload the new versions, creating ever-expanding flavor options and
helping to identify new food trends, generating information that’s useful not
only to the platform’s users but also to managers of grocery stores, food
manufacturers, and restaurateurs.18
As these examples demonstrate, the ability to leverage platforms is no
longer restricted to the Internet upstarts of Silicon Valley. Nor is the
incumbent’s response to the forces of disruption restricted to merely
attempting to fight back against the rising tide of platform power—or
trying, usually in vain, to hurriedly build a copycat platform after their
industry has been colonized.
The leaders of incumbent companies who understand the new business
model can begin building tomorrow’s platforms in a way that not only
leverages their existing assets but strengthens and reinforces them.
So platforms are eating the world. The disruption they are driving is
reaching businesses one industry at a time and is likely to hit practically all
information-intensive industries at some point. We’ve already seen it play
out in the media and telecom industries. Retail, city transportation, and
hospitality are currently under assault. We expect banking, education, and
health care to start feeling the heat soon. These industries are highly
information-intensive but have so far resisted platform-driven disruption
thanks largely to protective regulatory regimes and the consumer
conservatism driven by greater risk sensitivity. When YouTube shows a user
a tasteless or pirated video, the damage is less serious than when a poorly
curated platform connects a borrower to a loan shark, an education platform


---PAGE BREAK---

offers a college student inaccurate math or science information, or a
medical platform matches a patient with an incompetent physician.
Nonetheless, Lending Club, Udemy, and Jawbone are chipping away at
these markets and making early inroads.
In the end, of course, bringing platform disruption to these and other
industries is not primarily a technological challenge. The innovators who
hope to create the great new platforms of the future need to focus on the
core interactions in the marketplaces they hope to conquer, and analyze the
barriers that limit them. Overcoming those barriers will enable the building
of platform-based ecosystems in those markets. We’ll explore this topic in
greater detail in the final chapter of this book, where we’ll share our vision
of the future of the world of platforms.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER FOUR
    Platforms are able to outcompete pipelines because of their superior marginal economics
and because of the value produced by positive network effects. As a result, platforms are
growing faster than pipelines and taking leading positions in industries once dominated by
pipelines.
    The rise of platforms is also disrupting business in other ways. It is reconfiguring value
creation to tap new sources of supply; reconfiguring value consumption by enabling new
forms of consumer behavior; and reconfiguring quality control through community-driven
curation.
    The rise of platforms is also causing structural changes in many industries—specifically,
through the phenomena of re-intermediation, separation of ownership and control, and
market aggregation.
    Incumbent companies can fight back against platform-driven disruption by studying their
own industries through a platform lens and beginning to build their own value-
creating ecosystems, as Nike and GE are doing.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

5
LAUNCH
Chicken or Egg? Eight Ways
to Launch a Successful Platform
The fall of 1998 was a heady time in the world of business. Fueled by the
astonishing growth of the Internet, technology-based businesses were being
launched by the hundreds, and many were enjoying acclaim and soaring
valuations out of all proportion to their actual revenues (often minimal) and
profits (often nonexistent). Inspired by the early experiences of companies
like AOL and Amazon, high-tech entrepreneurs and their cheerleaders in the
media decided that the key to long-term success was growth at all costs—
and many of them burned through millions of dollars in pursuit of that
growth. Countless ambitious nerds in their twenties and early thirties were
amassing giant fortunes—on paper, at least.
In this tumultuous atmosphere, a pair of young entrepreneurs entered the
exploding Internet arena. Thirty-one-year-old Peter Thiel was born in
Germany and raised in California, where he became one of the country’s
highest-ranked young chess players and went on to study philosophy and
law at Stanford University. An avowed libertarian, Thiel helped found the
Stanford Review, a conservative newspaper that challenged the university’s
dominant liberal culture.
Max Levchin, twenty-three years old, was born in Ukraine and granted
political asylum when he moved to the U.S. with his family. Levchin grew
up in Chicago and studied computer science at the University of Illinois at
Champaign–Urbana, where he developed a passion for cryptography—the
science of making and breaking codes. By 1998, he was ready to apply his


---PAGE BREAK---

genius for crafting secure forms of computerized communications to the
world of business.
Thiel and Levchin (along with a third partner, John Bernard Powers, who
soon departed) launched Confinity, a startup aimed at enabling money
transfers on Palm Pilots and other personal digital assistants (PDAs)
equipped with infrared ports. At the time, the Palm Pilot was an
exceptionally popular mobile device whose adoption rate was expected to
grow, and launching a payment system on a mobile device that people
carried with them everywhere made sense. The business logic behind
Confinity seemed indisputable. The notion of a payment mechanism that
could potentially liberate millions of people from reliance on government-
sponsored currency also appealed to the idealistic Thiel’s libertarian streak,
much as another ambitious online payment platform—Bitcoin—would fire
the imagination of libertarians a decade later.
Nonetheless, Confinity attracted few users. After two years, having
gained only 10,000 signups, Levchin and Thiel shut Confinity down.
Along the way, however, they unlocked a much more promising business
prospect. Back in October 1999, a Confinity engineer had cobbled together
an online demo to accept payments via email. This side project represented
a significant potential improvement in payments processing; unlike
previous systems for online payments, it allowed anyone in the world to
receive an online payment from anyone else without needing to use the
unwieldy system for transferring funds from one bank account to another.
Levchin and Thiel recognized that it might be possible to turn this new form
of online payment into a significant business on its own—one that could
serve millions of consumers and the online businesses they patronized.
They came up with a name for the service—PayPal—and set out to build
a company around it. It was, at that point, an inauspicious moment in the
business cycle to launch such a service; the possibility of a collapse of the
so-called Internet bubble was looming over the high-tech industry, and
within a few months a precipitous decline in the NASDAQ index would
make the dot-com bust official. Adding to the pressure was the fact that
Thiel and Levchin knew they would have to make PayPal successful fast—
they were spending some $10 million per month on the business, a large
amount in the platform world, where huge capital expenditures are normally
not required.1


---PAGE BREAK---

They also realized they would have to overcome one of the toughest
challenges associated with creating a business designed to serve two sides
of a market—the chicken-or-egg problem. When trying to build a two-sided
market in which both sides are equally essential, which comes first? And
how do you attract one without the other?
In the case of a new payments mechanism, the chicken-or-egg problem
is particularly obvious and acute. Without sellers who are willing to accept
the new form of payment, buyers won’t adopt it. But if buyers don’t adopt
the new form of payment, sellers won’t invest time, effort, and money in
accepting it. So how do you launch a new payments platform from a base of
zero, starting with neither sellers nor buyers—when neither group has a
reason to join until the other side joins first?
In terms of simple logic, the chicken-or-egg problem might seem
insoluble. PayPal solved the problem through a series of ingenious
strategies.
To start with, PayPal reduced the friction involved in accepting online
payments. All a user needed was an email address and a credit card. This
simplicity was in stark contrast to previous online payment mechanisms,
which demanded multiple rounds of verification before an account could be
set up, thereby discouraging early users. PayPal’s user-friendly, almost
frictionless system attracted a significant initial base of consumers—though
not enough, in itself, to make the platform attractive to the universe of
online sellers.
In a lecture he later gave at Stanford, Peter Thiel explained what
happened next:
PayPal’s big challenge was to get new customers. They tried advertising. It was too expensive.
They tried BD [business development] deals with big banks. Bureaucratic hilarity ensued. … the
PayPal team reached an important conclusion: BD didn’t work. They needed organic, viral
growth. They needed to give people money.
So that’s what they did. New customers got $10 for signing up, and existing ones got $10 for
referrals. Growth went exponential, and PayPal wound up paying $20 for each new customer. It
felt like things were working and not working at the same time; 7 to 10 percent daily growth and
100 million users was good. No revenues and an exponentially growing cost structure were not.
Things felt a little unstable. PayPal needed buzz so it could raise more capital and continue on.
(Ultimately, this worked out. That does not mean it’s the best way to run a company. Indeed, it
probably isn’t.)2
Thiel’s account captures both the desperation of those early days and the
almost random experimentation the company resorted to in an effort to get


---PAGE BREAK---

PayPal off the ground. But in the end, the strategy worked. PayPal
dramatically increased its base of consumers by incentivizing new sign-ups.
Most important, the PayPal team realized that getting users to sign up
wasn’t enough; they needed them to try the payment service, recognize its
value to them, and become regular users. In other words, user commitment
was more important than user acquisition. So PayPal designed the
incentives to tip new customers into the ranks of active users. Not only did
the incentive payments make joining PayPal feel riskless and attractive,
they also virtually guaranteed that new users would start participating in
transactions—if only to spend the $10 they’d been gifted in their accounts.
PayPal’s explosive growth triggered a number of positive feedback
loops. Once users experienced the convenience of PayPal, they often
insisted on paying by this method when shopping online, thereby
encouraging sellers to sign up. New users spread the word further,
recommending PayPal to their friends. Sellers, in turn, began displaying
PayPal logos on their product pages to inform buyers that they were
prepared to honor this method of online payment. The sight of those logos
informed more buyers of PayPal’s existence and encouraged them to sign
up. PayPal also introduced a referral fee for sellers, incentivizing them to
bring in still more sellers and buyers. Through these feedback loops, the
PayPal network went to work on its own behalf—it served the needs of
users (buyers and sellers) while spurring its own growth.
However, the company leaders didn’t sit back and rely on the positive
feedback loops to do all the growth work on their own. They looked for
opportunities to jack up the growth rate still further.
In early 2000, they noted the growing popularity of PayPal on eBay, the
most popular online auction site. It was a natural place for PayPal, since
most of the sellers on eBay aren’t full-time merchants but ordinary people
without facilities for accepting credit cards or other forms of online
payment.
PayPal’s marketing team opportunistically refocused its efforts toward
enabling payments on eBay. Among other techniques, they simulated
consumer demand on eBay by creating a bot (an automated software tool)
that bought goods on the site and then insisted on paying for these
transactions using PayPal. Noting this apparent growth in demand, many
eBay sellers signed up for the PayPal service—which in turn made PayPal
even more visible and attractive to consumers. The sellers began posting


---PAGE BREAK---

PayPal icons on their sites, enabling buyers to access the payment system
with just a single click of the mouse, reducing friction still further.3
Within three months, PayPal’s user base grew from 100,000 to one
million.
The leaders of eBay noticed how PayPal had built its own platform
business partly on eBay’s back. Concerned about the potential competitive
threat posed by a company that was building an independent connection
with eBay customers (and siphoning off a fraction of the revenues from
eBay transactions to boot), eBay tried to fight back. It launched its own
payment system, Billpoint, in partnership with Wells Fargo Bank. It
promoted Billpoint aggressively, at one point requiring eBay merchants
who accepted both Billpoint and PayPal to post larger icons for Billpoint on
their sale pages. Despite these efforts, Billpoint failed to get traction among
eBay users, partly because of its belated launch, partly because of ill-
advised business moves by eBay—for example, the decision to squelch
deals that would have promoted Billpoint’s use by non-eBay merchants.
PayPal continued to grow. By the time Confinity shut down its Palm
Pilot business in late 2000, its offspring PayPal had already garnered three
million accounts—three hundred times the number achieved by its parent
company. Not since the launch of the first credit card, Diners Club, has the
world seen such rapid global adoption of a new payment instrument. In
February 2002, PayPal went public.
In October 2002, eBay finally gave up on Billpoint and acquired PayPal
in exchange for $1.4 billion in stock—a modest sum by today’s standards
but a significant one at the time. At the time of the sale, 70 percent of all
eBay auctions accepted PayPal, and roughly 25 percent of closed auction
purchases were transacted using the payment service. Today, PayPal
produces a major portion of eBay’s revenues and profits while enabling
hundreds of thousands of small merchants to conduct business online more
easily, efficiently, and profitably than ever before.
THE HEART OF PLATFORM MARKETING: DESIGNING
FOR VIRAL GROWTH


---PAGE BREAK---

As the PayPal story suggests, building a platform business differs from
traditional product or pipeline marketing in a number of ways. For starters,
in the world of platform marketing, pull strategies rather than push
strategies are most effective and important.
The industrial world of pipelines relies heavily on push. Consumers are
accessed through specific marketing and communication channels that the
business owns or pays for. In a world of scarcity, options were limited, and
getting heard often sufficed to get marketers and their messages in front of
consumers. In this environment, the traditional advertising and public
relations industries focused almost solely on awareness creation—the
classic technique for “pushing” a product or service into the consciousness
of a potential customer.
This model of marketing breaks down in the networked world, where
access to marketing and communication channels is democratized—as
illustrated, for example, by the viral global popularity of YouTube videos
such as PSY’s “Gangnam Style” and Rebecca Black’s “Friday.” In this
world of abundance—where both products and the messages about them are
virtually unlimited—people are more distracted, as an endless array of
competing options is only a click or a swipe away. Thus, creating awareness
alone doesn’t drive adoption and usage, and pushing goods and services
toward customers is no longer the key to success. Instead, those goods and
services must be designed to be so attractive that they naturally pull
customers into their orbit.
Furthermore, for a platform business, user commitment and active usage,
not sign-ups or acquisitions, are the true indicators of customer adoption.
That’s why platforms must attract users by structuring incentives for
participation—preferably incentives that are organically connected to the
interactions made possible by the platform. Traditionally, the marketing
function was divorced from the product. In network businesses, marketing
needs to be baked into the platform.
This new way of thinking about marketing is reflected in the strategies
that the leaders of PayPal used to make their platform successful. Rather
than pushing PayPal into the consciousness of users through, for example,
television commercials, print advertisements, or email blasts, they created
incentives that gave the platform itself a pull appeal—including both the
ultra-simplicity of PayPal’s service and the payments that rewarded those
who delivered new sign-ups. They pulled sellers onto the platform by both


---PAGE BREAK---

creating demand for PayPal’s service among buyers and simulating demand
through the eBay shopping bot. As more users signed up, PayPal’s
attractiveness continued to intensify. In the end, competing payment
services were swept away—testament to the power of pull.
Traditional push strategies continue to be relevant in the world of
platforms. For example, Instagram received tens of thousands of downloads
on the day of its launch when it was featured as the number one app on
Apple’s iTunes store—the kind of push strategy that pipeline companies
have used for decades. And, as we’ll discuss later, Twitter achieved liftoff
largely because of a massively successful public relations event—another
push type of strategy.
But in the world of platforms, rapid, scalable, and sustainable user
growth is most often achieved through pull processes.
THE INCUMBENTS’ ADVANTAGE:
REALITY OR ILLUSION?
The chicken-or-egg problem and the difficulties of attracting a large user
base may cause you to wonder: why shouldn’t incumbent companies with
huge existing customer bases take over the world of platforms? Perhaps it’s
just a matter of time before companies like Walmart, Samsung, and GE
leverage their head starts to crush the competition.
Large enterprises do have some advantages when launching platform
businesses. They have existing value chains, powerful alliances and
partnerships with other companies, pools of talent to draw upon, and vast
arsenals of resources—including loyal customer bases.
However, these advantages can create complacency. In the traditional
business world dominated by products and pipelines, there is usually time
to observe the rise of outside competition and to make adjustments. Most
big companies have evolved metabolisms that reflect this relatively slow
pace of change: their processes for strategic planning, goal-setting, self-
evaluation, and course correction operate on leisurely schedules with annual
or, at best, quarterly checkpoints. However, in the world of platforms,
dominated by networks that interact rapidly and unpredictably, the market


---PAGE BREAK---

can change quickly and customer expectations can change even faster.
Management systems need to change accordingly.
As incumbent companies reinvent themselves for the world of platforms,
they will find themselves on the same playing field as lithe, fast-moving
startup companies. In a world of democratized network access and pull
marketing, the advantages once produced by size, experience, and resources
have become less important.
So if you’re an entrepreneur or a would-be entrepreneur, or if you help to
run a small or midsized company that has its eye on a platform business
opportunity, don’t be intimidated by the prospect of a giant competitor
encroaching on your space. The rules of the growth game have changed,
and if you understand and master the new rules, you have as good a chance
of surviving and thriving as anyone.
THERE ARE MANY WAYS
TO LAUNCH A PLATFORM
It’s tempting to assume that the launch strategy that works for Platform A
will work for Platform B. But history shows it isn’t so. In fact, even
platforms that are direct competitors may need to adopt different launch
strategies in order to carve out powerful and unique positions in the
marketplace. The stories of three competing online video platforms—
YouTube, Megaupload, and Vimeo—illustrate this point vividly.
YouTube was the first democratic (anyone can upload) video hosting
platform to gain mainstream traction. It did this by focusing entirely on
content creators. During its initial days, YouTube conducted contests
incentivizing content creators to upload videos. Additionally, it allowed
content creators to embed their videos off-platform, which rapidly spread
the word about YouTube. Certain potential users found the new venue
highly attractive. For example, much of the engagement on the then-popular
social network Myspace was built around indie bands. YouTube improved
on Myspace by creating the Flash-based, one-click video experience,
making it easy for bands to upload videos of their music. This created an
initial corpus of content for YouTube and simultaneously leveraged
producers to bring in consumers, some of whom eventually converted to
producers as well. Strengthening its focus on producers, YouTube even


---PAGE BREAK---

elevated top content creators to a partner status that entitled them to a share
of ad revenue.
YouTube’s unrelenting focus on producers helped in four ways. First, it
seeded the platform with content. Second, it created a curation dynamic on
the platform to identify quality content by letting viewers vote up or down
on the videos they watched. Third, it leveraged producers to bring in
consumers. Fourth, and most important, it created a set of content creators
who had an investment in the platform, had a user following, and would not
be easily incentivized to invest in another one.
Megaupload was faced with the late-mover problem. By 2005, when
Megaupload launched, most content creators were already active on
YouTube, and there was no incentive for them to participate in a new
platform with a smaller market of viewers. As the second mover,
Megaupload couldn’t compete head-on following the same user acquisition
strategy as the market pioneer. So it employed an alternative launch
strategy. It focused exclusively on consumers (viewers) by seeding the
platform with content internally, specifically creating content in categories
that were increasingly being policed on YouTube, including pirated videos
and pornography. Megaupload gained significant traction by addressing
these seemingly underserved needs. However, in the process it exposed
itself to lawsuits and negative publicity.
Our third player, Vimeo, was another late entrant (it was launched in
November 2004)—but it succeeded with a producer-first strategy that
competed directly with YouTube. The key was creating a set of higher-
quality tools that appealed to a particular set of users who felt neglected by
YouTube.
In its initial days, YouTube’s hosting and bandwidth infrastructure,
coupled with its embeddable player, constituted a compelling value
proposition to producers. However, as YouTube gained traction among
producers, the focus of the platform moved from improving video hosting
infrastructure (as a value proposition to producers) to improving
matchmaking of videos with consumers (focusing on video search, and a
video feed).
Vimeo responded to YouTube’s shift by focusing its platform on the
producers and providing them with superior infrastructure, including built-
in support for high-definition video playback and a better embeddable
player for installation on blogs. This enabled it to compete successfully with


---PAGE BREAK---

YouTube in pursuit of producers who would create a sustainable flow of
videos.
As these varying examples illustrate, if you’re launching a platform,
knowing the value propositions offered by your competitors can help you
structure your own, allowing you to claim a relatively untouched market
niche—even if your basic value unit may appear similar on the surface.
EIGHT STRATEGIES FOR BEATING THE CHICKEN-OR-
EGG DILEMMA
Understanding the importance of pull strategies in a platform market, as
well as the need to analyze and respond to your rivals’ business designs, are
significant elements of launch strategy. But the dilemma we call the
chicken-or-egg problem still looms for virtually all platform founders. How
to begin building a user base for a two-sided market when each side of the
market depends on the prior existence of the other side?
One way to address this conundrum is to avoid the chicken-or-egg
problem altogether by building a platform business on the foundation of an
existing pipeline or product business. This approach is known as:
1.  The follow-the-rabbit strategy. Use a non-platform demonstration
project to model success, thereby attracting both users and producers to a
new platform erected on your project’s proven infrastructure.
Consider Amazon. It never faced the chicken-or-egg problem because, as
a successful online retailer, it operated an effective pipeline business that
used online product listings to attract consumers. With a thriving consumer
base, Amazon converted itself into a platform business simply by opening
its system to external producers. The result is Amazon Marketplace, which
enables thousands of merchants to sell their products to millions of
consumers—with Amazon enjoying a small slice of revenue from every
transaction.
In the B2B space, Intel faced the same challenge in demonstrating the
value of wireless technology. No one wants a wireless laptop if no hosts
provide wireless service; no hosts will spend on wireless routers if no users
demand them. Intel partnered with the Japanese telecom company NTT to


---PAGE BREAK---

demonstrate that a market existed. Once NTT showed that money could be
made by catering to this market, dozens of other firms followed suit. Intel,
in fact, originated the term “follow the rabbit” to define this strategy.
It’s not always possible to use the follow-the-rabbit strategy. Sometimes
you have to start your platform from scratch, which means that finding a
way to attract a base of users on both sides of your market is an unavoidable
challenge.4 There are a number of specific, effective strategies that have
been developed and demonstrated for overcoming the chicken-or-egg
problem. In general, these strategies involve three techniques:
1.  Staging value creation. The platform managers arrange for the creation of value units that
will attract one or more sets of users and demonstrate the potential benefits of participating in
the platform.5 Those initial users create more value units, attract still other users, and set up a
positive feedback loop that leads to continuing growth.6 The Huffington Post followed this
strategy by hiring writers to create an initial array of high-quality blog posts for the site,
thereby attracting readers. Some of these readers began contributing blog posts of their own,
leading to the gradual development of a wider network of content creators and attracting even
more readers.
2.    Designing the platform to attract one set of users. The platform is designed to provide
tools, products, services, or other benefits that will attract one set of users—either consumers
or producers. The existence of a critical mass of users on one side of a marketplace attracts
users on the other side, leading to a positive feedback loop. As we’ll detail below, the
restaurant reservation platform OpenTable used this strategy by creating useful electronic tools
for restaurateurs. Once a large number of restaurants were on board, consumers began to
discover the site and started using it to make their dining plans.
3.  Simultaneous on-boarding. To start, the platform creates conditions such that value units can
be created that are relevant to users even when the overall size of the network is small. It then
strives to stimulate a burst of activity that will simultaneously attract consumers and producers
in sufficient numbers to create larger numbers of value units and value-producing interactions,
so that network effects can begin to kick in. Later in this chapter, we’ll show how Facebook
employed this strategy to make its fledgling social network attractive to users even when the
universe of potential members was very small—limited, in fact, to students at a single
university.
These three techniques can be used individually or together, and a
variety of combinations can work effectively under the right circumstances.
What follows are some of the specific variations that we’ve identified. If
you’re in the process of developing a new platform or hoping to launch one,
you may find one of these an inspiring model for your own chicken-or-egg
strategy.
2.  The piggyback strategy. Connect with an existing user base from a
different platform and stage the creation of value units in order to recruit


---PAGE BREAK---

those users to participate in your platform.
This is a classic strategy used in many successful platform launches. As
we’ve seen, PayPal used this strategy when it piggybacked on eBay’s online
auction platform.
Justdial is India’s largest local commerce marketplace, facilitating
consumer transactions with more than four million small businesses. It
seeded the initial database by borrowing listings from existing yellow pages
as well as by employing feet-on-street soldiers who went door to door
collecting business information. Using this data, Justdial was launched as a
phone directory service. A consumer would call in looking for service
providers—for example, caterers for a wedding banquet. Justdial would
pass on the lead to the producers—in this case, appropriate caterers in the
town where the consumer was located. Grateful for the lead, some of these
service providers would become subscribers to Justdial. To encourage more
active participation by local merchants, many of whom weren’t previously
listed anywhere online, Justdial made it easy for them to join the platform
through human interfaces, telephone connections, and text messaging.
After a successful IPO in May 2013, Justdial continues to be the
dominant platform in the local commerce space in India. Its humble origin
was in a collection of business listings “borrowed” from an existing
platform, the local telephone directory.
In the U.S., startups have used a similar strategy by piggybacking on
Craigslist. The new platform starts by “scraping” Craigslist, using
automated data-gathering software tools to obtain information about
merchants and service providers. It then posts this information on its
platform, giving consumers the impression that these merchants are actually
participating on the platform. When a consumer requests a certain service
provider, the platform passes on the lead while inviting the merchant to join
the platform.
As described earlier in this chapter, another compelling example of the
piggyback strategy is the way YouTube rode the Myspace growth wave by
offering its powerful video tools to attract indie bands that were members of
the social network. Once YouTube was exposed to millions of Myspace
members, its adoption rate grew virally. By 2006, YouTube’s reach outgrew
Myspace’s, and the adoption graphs have only diverged further since then.


---PAGE BREAK---

3.  The seeding strategy. Create value units that will be relevant to at
least one set of potential users. When these users are attracted to the
platform, other sets of users who want to engage in interactions with them
will follow.
In many cases, the platform company takes the task of value creation
upon itself by acting as the first producer. In addition to kickstarting the
platform, this strategy allows the platform owner to define the kind and
quality of value units they want to see on the platform, thereby encouraging
a culture of high-quality contributions among subsequent producers.7
When Google launched its Android smartphone operating system to
compete with Apple’s, it seeded the market by offering $5 million in prizes
to developers who came up with the best apps in each of ten categories,
including gaming, productivity, social networking, and entertainment.
Winners not only got the prize money but became market leaders in their
categories, attracting large numbers of customers as a result.
In other cases, the value units may be “borrowed” from another source
rather than created by the platform developer from scratch. Adobe launched
its now-ubiquitous PDF document-reading tool in part by arranging to make
all federal government tax forms available online. The size of this instant
market was huge, encompassing any individual or business that might need
to pay U.S. taxes. Adobe induced the IRS to cooperate by suggesting that
millions of dollars in printing and postage costs could be saved. Taxpayers,
in turn, got fast, convenient access to documents that everyone needs, at
least once a year. Impressed by the value provided, many adopted Adobe as
their document platform of choice.
In still other cases, seeding is done through simulated (“fake”) value
units. As we’ve seen, PayPal employed this strategy when it created bots
that made purchases on eBay, thereby attracting sellers to the PayPal
platform. This was especially clever, since a bot could then turn around and
list for sale the item it had just bought, thereby covering both sides of the
two-sided market—and precluding PayPal from ever having to warehouse
and ship the item itself.
Dating services often simulate initial traction by creating fake profiles
and conversations. Many skew their profiles to showcase attractive women,
in a bid to attract men to the platform. Users who visit the site see the
activity and are enticed to stay on.


---PAGE BREAK---

Reddit is a highly popular link-sharing community that circulates vast
amounts of Internet content. When it first launched, the site was seeded
with fake profiles posting links to the kind of content the founders wanted
to see on the site over time. It worked. The initial content attracted people
who were interested in similar content and created a culture of high-quality
contributions to the community. Over time, its members have learned to
rely on one another for guidance as to what’s worth scrutinizing and what is
not. (The success of Reddit’s launch and expansion have not shielded it
from controversy, of course, as the 2015 battles over allegedly racist and
bigoted content on the site made clear.)
Similarly, when Quora first started, the editors would ask questions and
then answer the questions themselves, to simulate activity on the platform.
Once users started asking questions, editors continued to answer them,
thereby demonstrating how the platform was intended to work. Eventually,
users themselves took over the process, and the “pump-priming” by Quora
personnel could cease.
4.  The marquee strategy. Provide incentives to attract members of a
key user set onto your platform.
In many cases, there’s a single group of users who are so important that
their participation can make or break the success of the platform. It may,
therefore, make sense for the platform manager to incentivize their
participation, either through a cash payment or through other special
benefits.
In the world of electronic gaming, companies like Microsoft (Xbox),
Sony (PlayStation), and Nintendo (Wii) create devices that serve as
platforms that connect consumers with content produced by game
developers. The dominant sports game developer is Electronic Arts (EA),
whose licensed games that simulate NFL football, NBA basketball, NHL
hockey, and other sports (such as its Tiger Woods pro golf tour game) are
annually updated and outsell all competitors. No producer of a gaming
device can hope to survive without having an attractive array of games from
EA available for its platform. Thus, Microsoft, Sony, and Nintendo have all
been willing to provide especially sweet partnership deals to entice EA to
develop or adapt games so as to be ready for release at the moment their
new platforms are released.


---PAGE BREAK---

In a variation on this strategy, a platform company may choose to
purchase a marquee participant in order to obtain exclusive access to the
seeds it produces. For a number of years, software producer Bungie
specialized in games, like the popular Marathon, for use on Apple
computers. In 2000, with the Xbox nearing launch, Microsoft bought out
Bungie and repurposed a game then in development under the title Halo:
Combat Evolved as an Xbox exclusive. Halo became the marquee app that
sold hundreds of thousands of Xbox devices, as well as a billion-dollar
franchise in its own right.
Sometimes, the marquee players whose participation is vital to platform
success are consumers rather than producers. That was the case with
PayPal, which is why the company gave cash incentives to entice shoppers
to adopt their online payment mechanism.
In 2009, the Swiss postal service made the decision to transform itself
into a digital message-delivery platform using scanning-and-archiving
technology provided by Seattle-based Earth Class Mail.8 Swiss Post soon
recognized the importance of capturing and converting thousands of
customers who were more comfortable with traditional mail delivery. To
attract those holdouts, Swiss Post gave away thousands of iPads to
households in remote neighborhoods. In the process, it encouraged these
rural Swiss families to switch from physical mail to electronic messaging,
thus greatly reducing the resources it had to dedicate to hand-delivering the
mail. It also, not so incidentally, positioned Swiss Post to become the
country’s largest retailer of Apple products—a significant secondary benefit
for the company.9
5.    The single-side strategy. Create a business around products or
services that benefit a single set of users; later, convert the business into a
platform business by attracting a second set of users who want to engage in
interactions with the first set.
Launching a service booking platform like  OpenTable, the restaurant
reservation system, poses a classic chicken-or-egg problem. Without a large
base of participating restaurants, why would patrons visit the OpenTable
site? But without a large base of patrons, why would restaurants choose to
participate? OpenTable solved the problem by first distributing booking
management software that restaurants could use to manage their seating
inventory. Once OpenTable had enough restaurants on board, they built out


---PAGE BREAK---

the consumer side, which allowed them to start booking tables and
collecting a lead generation fee from the restaurants.
The Indian bus reservation platform redBus gained traction in a similar
manner. It provided bus operators with a seating inventory management
system, then opened the platform to consumers once bus operators had
started using the software.
Delicious is a social networking site that allows users to share lists of
web bookmarks—links to Internet content that individuals love and that
they want to revisit again and again. Delicious gained initial traction by
allowing early users to produce valuable content in stand-alone mode, using
Delicious to store browser bookmark lists in the cloud for their personal
consumption. Once the user base hit critical mass, the social bookmarking
features started getting used, and the value of the network expanded rapidly
as the number of users increased. Now Delicious has become a popular tool
for spreading Internet memes and trends as people share their bookmark
lists.
6.  The producer evangelism strategy: Design your platform to attract
producers, who can induce their customers to become users of the platform.
Platforms that provide businesses with tools for customer relationship
management (CRM) can often solve the chicken-or-egg problem simply by
attracting one set of users—producers—who then take on the task of
bringing along the other set—consumers—from their own customer base.
The platform helps the producers cater to their existing set of consumers,
and over time, the producers benefit from data-driven cross-pollination as
other consumers on the network become interested in their products and
services.
Crowdfunding platforms such as Indiegogo and Kickstarter thrive by
targeting creators who need funding and providing them with the
infrastructure to host and manage the funding campaign, making it easier
for them to connect effectively with their customer base. Education
platforms such as Skillshare and Udemy also grow through producer
evangelism. They sign up influential teachers, allowing them to easily host
online courses and prompting them to get their students on board.
In a similar fashion, expert marketplaces can build their consumer base
by starting with customer lists provided by their producer members. For
example, Clarity, which bills itself as an online marketplace that provides


---PAGE BREAK---

expert advice for entrepreneurs, enables bloggers and other experts to
monetize their following through a Clarity widget that lets readers book
paid calls with them. With every call, the producer helps Clarity sign up a
new consumer who can then be directed to other producers.
Mercateo, a German B2B platform for business and industrial supplies,
employs a producer evangelism strategy with a novel twist. It shrewdly
offers producers this invitation: “Bring us your customers, and you will
have the last word in any bidding competition … but only for the customers
you bring.” Thus, suppliers are incentivized to invite their customers to join
Mercateo, and to do so promptly, before a competing company can claim
them and enjoy the advantage of final-offer bidding.
7.  The big-bang adoption strategy. Use one or more traditional push
marketing strategies to attract a high volume of interest and attention to
your platform. This triggers a simultaneous on-boarding effect, creating an
almost fully-developed network virtually instantaneously.
As we’ve noted, in today’s crowded, networked, and ultra-competitive
arena, push strategies have become increasingly ineffective at enabling
companies to achieve rapid, large-scale growth. But there are occasional
exceptions. Twitter’s breakout moment occurred at the 2007 South by
Southwest (SXSW) Interactive film, music, and tech festival. Twitter had
launched nine months earlier, but wasn’t getting heavy adoption. Jack
Dorsey and Twitter’s other founders needed a way to get a critical mass of
users on the platform. Given the real-time nature of activity on Twitter, they
realized they needed to build concentration in time as well as in space.
Twitter invested $11,000 to install a pair of giant flat-panel screens in the
main hallways at SXSW. A user could text “Join sxsw” to Twitter’s SMS
shortcode number (40404) and find his or her tweets instantly appearing on
the screens. Seeing the feedback on large screens in real time and watching
as thousands of new users jumped into the fray created enormous
excitement around Twitter and helped make it the hottest networking site in
cyberspace. Twitter received the festival’s Web Award for the year’s best
online innovation, and by the end of SXSW, Twitter usage had tripled, from
20,000 tweets per day to 60,000.
Other networks have modeled their breakout strategies on Twitter’s. Two
years later, blogging platform Foursquare achieved a comparable
breakthrough at the 2009 SXSW festival. In 2012, Tinder, a location-based


---PAGE BREAK---

dating app, achieved its breakout by launching during a frat party at the
University of Southern California—a hotbed of young men and women
who were already looking for ways to hook up. Tinder made the task easier
and, in the process, achieved critical mass during a live party in a small,
contained location.
Not every platform can take advantage of the big bang strategy, as
Twitter, Foursquare, and Tinder did. As South by Southwest has grown, the
number of companies trying to use it as a platform launch vehicle has
reached a point where there’s virtually no way to be heard above the roar of
the crowd.10 And there isn’t always a relevant opportunity for an explosion
of real-time publicity interest that is capable of attracting thousands of
potential users.
Nonetheless, when such an opportunity exists—as it did for Tinder—the
smart platform manager will grab it.
8.    The micromarket strategy. Start by targeting a tiny market that
comprises members who are already engaging in interactions. This enables
the platform to provide the effective matchmaking characteristic of a large
market even in the earliest stages of growth.
The odds were heavily stacked against Facebook. Friendster had
gathered more than three million users within a few months of its 2002
launch, and Myspace was growing fast. Of all platform businesses, social
networks are probably the least forgiving of late market entrants. Users
won’t readily move to a new social network unless it offers something
remarkably different. That’s the power of the network effect.
What’s more, because the value of a social network is so heavily based
on network effects, achieving critical mass is especially important. If
Facebook had launched worldwide and quickly achieved a few hundred
signups—or even a few thousand—it wouldn’t have taken off, since those
widely dispersed, random users coming in wouldn’t have interacted.
So Facebook’s decision to launch in the closed community of Harvard
University wasn’t simply a matter of convenience. It was a masterstroke
that enabled Facebook to solve the chicken-or-egg problem. Attracting an
initial five hundred users in the geographically and socially concentrated
community of Harvard University ensured the creation of an active
community at launch. Facebook leveraged Harvard as an existing
micromarket and gained traction by improving the quality of interactions


---PAGE BREAK---

among its members. Focusing on a micromarket reduces the critical mass
required to start interactions and makes matchmaking much easier.
When it expanded beyond Harvard, Facebook had to build a user base in
every new campus it opened up to, often competing with existing intra-
campus networks. Initially, these campuses were unconnected nodes on the
Facebook network. Growth took off when Facebook started allowing cross-
campus friend connections. This eliminated the need to solve the chicken-
or-egg problem afresh in every new campus. Users coming onto the
network at a new campus had an existing list of connections across other
campuses to keep them engaged while they waited for others from their
own campus to join.
Geographic focus isn’t the only way to define a micromarket. Stack
Overflow 
started 
out 
as 
a 
question-and-answer 
community 
for
programming topics (category focus). Later it expanded into a second
category that users requested—cooking. Now Stack Overflow has a voting
mechanism that allows the community to choose topics they are interested
in. 
VIRAL GROWTH:
THE USER-TO-USER LAUNCH MECHANISM
One of the most powerful ways to accelerate the growth of a platform is by
achieving viral growth. The viral growth strategy complements any of the
launch strategies we’ve discussed in this chapter.
Viral growth is a pull-based process based on encouraging users to
spread the word about the platform to other potential users. When users
themselves encourage others to join the network, the network becomes the
driver of its own growth.
The term “viral growth,” of course, contains a built-in metaphor: it
analogizes the growth of the platform to the spread of an infectious disease.
In nature, a disease spreads when four elements interact: a host, germs, a
medium, and a recipient. An infected host sneezes or otherwise spreads
germs that carry infection out into the environment. These germs are then
spread through a medium, such as the atmosphere. Then, a recipient inhales,
ingests, or otherwise absorbs the germs and becomes infected in turn. Now


---PAGE BREAK---

the recipient becomes the host, and the cycle repeats. If it happens often
enough, an epidemic results.
Similarly, four key elements are necessary to begin the process of viral
growth for a platform business—the sender, the value unit, the external
network, and the recipient. Let’s consider the viral growth of Instagram:
•    The sender. A user on Instagram shares a picture that he has just created. This launches the
cycle that will eventually bring in a new user.
•    The value unit. On Instagram, the value unit is the picture that the user shares with friends.
•    The external network. For Instagram, Facebook serves as a very effective external network,
allowing value units (photos) to spread and be exposed to potential users.
•        The recipient. Finally, a user from Facebook gets intrigued by the picture and visits
Instagram. This user may create her own photo and start the cycle all over again. Now the
recipient is acting as the sender.
Everyone has heard of Instagram’s rapid growth—over 100 million
active users in less than two years—which led to its billion-dollar
acquisition in April 2012 by Facebook. What is less well known is that
Instagram achieved this rapid growth without employing a single traditional
marketing manager. It happened because the company’s platform was
carefully designed to make viral growth organic and practically inevitable.
Unlike its competitor Hipstamatic, Instagram didn’t simply allow users
to save, organize, and filter pictures. It encouraged them to share their
photos on external networks like Facebook, converting a single-user
activity into a social, multi-user activity. Every time users engaged the app,
they shared their creations. Every point of app usage became an instance of
app marketing. In essence, Instagram converted all its users into marketers.
The same cycle of viral growth—a form of growth impossible in the
industrial economy of pipelines and products—helps to explain the success
of many other platform startups. Airbnb encouraged users with rooms to
rent (hosts) to list their offerings (value units) on Craigslist (external
network). Those who saw the room listings (recipients) and were motivated
to rent those rooms became Airbnb users—and many subsequently began
renting out rooms of their own, fueling the growth of the platform.
OpenTable similarly encourages diners (hosts) to share their dinner
reservations (value units) over email or Facebook (external networks) with
their friends and colleagues (recipients) who are joining them for dinner.
If you’re a platform manager hoping to achieve the same kind of viral
growth as Instagram, Airbnb, and OpenTable, you need to design rules and


---PAGE BREAK---

tools that will jumpstart the cycle. Your goal is to design an ecosystem
where senders want to transfer value units through an external network to a
large number of recipients, ultimately leading many of those recipients to
become users of your platform.
Let’s look at these four design elements in greater detail.
The sender. Getting senders to spread value units is not the same as
word of mouth, which is a familiar tactic in traditional marketing. Word of
mouth happens when users like your platform so much, they can’t stop
talking about it. When users become senders and spread value units, they
aren’t talking about your platform—they are spreading their own creations,
and indirectly generating awareness of and interest in your platform.
In general, users spread self-created value units to get social feedback,
which in turn may bring them fun, fame, fulfillment, or fortune—or some
combination of these rewards. Channel owners on YouTube spread the word
about their videos on multiple external networks in order to gain an
audience; survey developers on SurveyMonkey spread their surveys via
email, blogs, and social networks to get responses, which provide insight
into the question the survey developers are trying to answer; creators
seeking funding on Kickstarter spread their project page on their social
networks in order to attract the money they need to complete their works as
well as the audience they hope will appreciate the finished product.
These examples illustrate how well-designed platforms create natural
incentives for users to share. As a rule, platform designers must avoid
discouraging the spread of value units. The act of sending these units onto
an external network like Facebook should not distract a creator from using
the platform; instead, it should fit integrally into the workflow of the
platform. The more closely this is aligned to the main use of the platform,
the more likely the platform is to go viral.
A platform may also provide inorganic (artificial) incentives to
encourage value-spreading behavior, but these need to be carefully
structured. A monetary incentive, for example, can become a cash drain if
the platform achieves viral growth. Dropbox, the popular cloud-based
service for storing and sharing data files, does a good job of structuring
inorganic incentives; it offers free storage space to the sender as well as the
recipient when the recipient signs up to become a Dropbox user. Thus, the
perk for spreading the word about Dropbox is not a cash payment that


---PAGE BREAK---

would only serve to empty the company’s coffers, but rather an opportunity
to use Dropbox’s service even more, thereby stimulating further growth and
encouraging users to make ever greater use of the Dropbox platform.
The value unit. This is the fundamental unit of virality—an embodiment
of platform usage that can spread on an external network and demonstrate
the platform’s value. But not every value unit that exists on a platform is
spreadable. For example, the users of a business platform designed to
enable the exchange of proprietary documents among company partners
will not want to spread their confidential information the way Instagram
users share their snapshots. So designing spreadable value units is a crucial
step toward virality.
A spreadable value unit may be one that helps to start an interaction on
an external network, the way Instagram photos create conversations on
Facebook among users intrigued by the images they’ve seen. Or it may
create the opportunity to complete an incomplete interaction, the way an
unanswered question on Quora demands social feedback in the form of an
answer, or a fresh survey on Survey-Monkey invites responses. Making it
easy for users to create and disseminate spreadable value units helps you
build a platform that has high growth as well as high engagement.
Of course, as the example of a business platform for exchanging
confidential documents indicates, not every value unit is spreadable.
Platforms that don’t lend themselves to the creation of spreadable value
units are unlikely to go viral. Managers of such platforms will have to use
other approaches to achieve growth.
The external network. Many platforms grow on top of other networks.
Instagram, Twitter, Zynga, Slide, and other platforms have achieved viral
growth by leveraging Facebook as an underlying network. Airbnb spread on
Craigslist; OpenTable spreads on email.
However, leveraging an external network is not as simple as introducing
a “Share on Facebook” button and waiting for users by the million to show
up. External networks often introduce restrictions when more and more
applications use them for growth—for example, Facebook has enforced
limitations on the gaming apps that outside companies offer its users. In
other cases, users overwhelmed by a constant flow of invitations sent by
outside producers urging them to sample their goods or services become


---PAGE BREAK---

jaded over time and stop responding. To avoid this result, the managers of
startup platforms need to be strategic about identifying the external
networks they can use to build their growth and finding creative, value-
adding ways to connect with their users.
When LinkedIn was launched in 2003, most social networks gained
traction by integrating with a new user’s Hotmail or Yahoo contact list and
prompting him or her to send invites to the platform over email. Originally
devised by Michael Birch (best known as cofounder of the short-lived
social network Bebo), this simple hack helped generate growth for many
early social networks. LinkedIn chose instead to engineer a more
technologically challenging integration with Microsoft Outlook, the
software that housed most of the business connections that LinkedIn wanted
to access. The integration was time- and cost-intensive, but it helped
LinkedIn establish itself as the premier social network for business.
The recipient. When the user of a platform sends a value unit to a friend
or acquaintance, the recipient will respond if he or she finds the value unit
relevant, interesting, useful, entertaining, or otherwise valuable. When the
value units are intriguing enough, the recipients spread them further,
sometimes giving rise to new interactions on another network. Media
companies like Upworthy and BuzzFeed have grown almost entirely on the
strength of consumer-initiated viral spread.
Unfortunately, since value units are created by users, managers of
platforms have limited control over them. Instagram doesn’t select photos
or retouch them to make them more attractive, YouTube doesn’t direct or
edit user videos, and Facebook doesn’t curate member posts to eliminate
boring ones. However, sometimes a platform can nudge users in directions
that will make seeds more attractive to recipients. For example, Instagram
provides photo editing tools to help users enhance the attractiveness of the
images they post, and it encourages users to label their photos with hashtags
that are specific and relevant—#vwbus for a photo of a Volkswagen van
rather than the more generic #van or (worse yet) the self-explanatory
#photo.11
In addition, platform managers can connect the value unit to a call to
action—a message that ensures the recipient recognizes the platform from
which the value unit has been delivered and understands the opportunity to
join. When the communications platform Hotmail first went viral, it affixed


---PAGE BREAK---

to the bottom of every email the message, “P.S. I love you. Get your FREE
email at Hotmail.” Free email for consumers was a new and compelling
offer at the time, and this simple message attracted thousands of user
adoptions.
Not every budding platform has an opportunity to achieve viral growth.
But if it does, it can help turn slow but steady expansion into the kind of
skyrocket growth that makes a platform into a national or global
phenomenon with the potential to dominate its market for years to come.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER FIVE
    One difference between platform businesses and traditional pipeline businesses is that, in
the world of platforms, pull strategies designed to encourage virality are more important
than the push strategies (such as advertising and public relations) used in conventional
marketing.
    Successful platforms use one of eight proven strategies for solving the chicken-or-egg
problem: the follow-the-rabbit strategy; the piggyback strategy; the seeding strategy; the
marquee strategy; the single-side strategy; the producer evangelism strategy; the big bang
adoption strategy; and the micromarket strategy.
    The speed of a platform’s expansion can be accelerated through viral growth. This depends
on four key elements: the sender, the value unit, the external network, and the recipient.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

6
MONETIZATION
Capturing the Value
Created by Network Effects
Not long ago, one of the authors of this book—Marshall Van Alstyne—
was approached by a pair of company founders on their way to a meeting
with a group of venture capitalists. They’d created a new platform business
that, for the purposes of this story, we’ll give the fictitious name of Ad
World. They were hoping to impress the assembled VCs with an astute
business plan and thereby win a significant offer for funding.
“Here’s the idea,” one of the founders explained to Marshall. “Our new
platform Ad World will provide a listing service for firms to find ad
agencies. We’ll make it easy for companies that are ready to begin new
advertising campaigns to post requests for bids, and for ad agencies to post
proposals and offers that companies can look at and respond to. It’s just like
99designs, which lets graphic artists link up with consumers who want help
with artistic projects, only in the B2B space instead of the B2C space.”
“Okay,” Marshall said. “I get the idea. What’s your question?”
“Here’s what we want to know,” the founder replied. “We’re pretty sure
Ad World is going to provide value to our users and attract a fair amount of
interest. But we’re wondering how to generate revenues from it. Should we
charge the ad agencies to join the platform and put up their profiles? Should
we charge the firms that are seeking services? Or should we charge for
individual project listings? Or maybe for all three?”
“And we need an answer fast,” interjected his partner. “We need to
figure out our strategy so we can run the numbers and make our business


---PAGE BREAK---

case to the VCs.”
The aspiring platform moguls gazed at Marshall with such sincerity that
he almost hated to burst their bubble. But he had to do it. As gently as he
could, Marshall replied, “You’ve listed three possible ways to monetize Ad
World, and you’ve asked me to pick one of them—or maybe all three. My
answer is, none of the above.”
The two founders in this story were smart, talented, thoughtful business
leaders. They’d done a lot of homework on the nature of platform
ecosystems. They did understand, in a general way, how platform
businesses work and the challenges of attracting both sides of the market to
make a robust set of interactions possible. But when it came to
monetization, they were asking the wrong questions.
These founders shouldn’t charge either side to be listed on their
platform. Doing so would put terrible friction on entry into the ecosystem,
discouraging many potential participants from becoming users. To charge
for posting a deal simply means people post fewer deals. That’s bad. It
reduces potential interaction volume, not to mention realized interactions.
As a result, it also reduces the volume of data available to the platform—
data desperately needed to enable the platform to forge powerful matches
between consumers and producers.
In fact, rather than charging users to join the platform, the founders
should be subsidizing their participation—perhaps by providing tools and
services to make it easy, fast, and effective for them to complete their
profiles.
This wasn’t a complete surprise to the founders. They had partly intuited
this, as Marshall could tell by the fact that they’d used “scrapers”—
automated software tools for collecting data from the Internet—to produce
user profiles. They understood that building a base of users was their first
and biggest challenge, and that creating friction around the process by
charging money for it would be a serious mistake.
How, then, could the founders monetize their platform model? The
answer: They can charge users for the value they accrue from the
ecosystem, but the charge should be levied on deal completion, not at the
time of listing. They would make it possible for firms to post a deal risk-
free by charging a fee only once the firms get what they need. The fee
becomes performance-based, and it feels negligible because it simply skims
off a small fraction of a transaction that’s occurring anyway.


---PAGE BREAK---

What’s more, the best strategy may be one the founders didn’t even
consider. Why not charge ad agencies for a service that helps them do a
postmortem to discover why they lost a deal? Not only would this fee create
no friction on a deal, but it would reflect the value of the feedback
provided; it would be recurring revenue rather than one-time revenue; and it
could help ad agencies improve the quality of their offerings, thereby
encouraging a rise in the value of interactions over time.
The story of this fledgling platform and the strategic challenge its
founders faced illustrates some of the complexity of platform businesses—
as well as the creative thinking platform managers need to practice if they
are going to realize the full value-creating potential of the ecosystems they
are building. Monetization, in fact, is one of the most difficult—and
fascinating—issues that any platform company must address.
VALUE CREATION AND THE CHALLENGE OF
MONETIZING NETWORK EFFECTS
As we’ve explained, the inherent value of a platform business lies chiefly in
the network effects it creates. But monetizing network effects poses a
unique challenge. Network effects make a platform attractive by creating
self-reinforcing feedback loops that grow the user base, often with minimal
effort or investment by the platform manager. Higher value creation by
producers on the platform attracts more consumers, who, in turn, attract
more producers and further value creation.
Yet, ironically, this powerfully positive growth dynamic makes
monetization very tricky. Any charge levied on users is likely to discourage
them from participating on the platform. Charging for access may lead
people to avoid the platform altogether; charging for usage may inhibit
frequent participation; charging for production reduces value creation,
making the platform less attractive to consumers; and charging for
consumption reduces consumption, making the platform less attractive to
producers. This was the precise dilemma that the founders of Ad World
were grappling with.
How, then, do you monetize a platform without damaging or even
destroying the network effects you’ve worked so hard to create?


---PAGE BREAK---

Some students of platform businesses leap to the assumption that the
collaborative nature of value creation on the Internet means that the natural
price for goods and services distributed online must be free. But of course a
business that charges nothing for the benefits it offers is unlikely to survive
for very long, since it will not produce the resources needed to maintain or
enhance it, and investors will have no incentive to provide the capital
needed for its growth.
Some element of free pricing can be useful in building network effects
for a platform business. But it’s important to understand the different
models in which partially free pricing can power growth. As every business
student learns, the model behind the safety razor business that entrepreneur
King Gillette founded in 1901 involved distributing the razors for free—or
at a very low, subsidized cost—while charging for the blades.
As it happens, research by Randal C. Picker of the University of Chicago
Law School has called into question the traditional story of Gillette and the
razors-and-blades pricing strategy. Picker found that the timing of price
changes for Gillette razors and blades, as well as the expiration date on the
patent covering Gillette’s unique razor design, seems to undermine the
notion that the company was employing the razors-and-blades strategy as
commonly understood.1 Nonetheless, the familiar story remains a handy
symbol for a strategy that has been used in a number of markets, including,
for example, the printer market, where sales of high-priced toner cartridges
generate profits that the relatively cheap printers themselves don’t produce.
Another version of this strategy is the freemium model, in which a free
layer of service attracts users who eventually pay for an enhanced version.
Many online service platforms, including Dropbox and MailChimp, work
this way. Both the razors-and-blades model and the freemium model
monetize the same user base, or portions thereof.
Platforms may also offer free or subsidized pricing to one user base
while charging full price to an entirely different user base. This makes the
design of monetization models more complex, since the platform must
ensure that the value it gives away to one side can be used to capture value
on the other side. Significant scholarly work has been done in this area.
Two of this book’s authors (Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne) were
among the first scholars to lay out the theory of two-sided market pricing.2
And the theory was mentioned as part of the 2014 Nobel Prize awarded to
one of the other originators of two-sided market economics, Jean Tirole.3


---PAGE BREAK---

Achieving the right balance among the complex factors involved in two-
sided market pricing isn’t easy. Netscape, one of the pioneers of the Internet
era, gave away browsers for free in hopes of selling web servers.
Unfortunately, there was no proprietary connection between browsers and
servers that Netscape could reliably control. Anyone could just as easily use
Microsoft’s web server or the free Apache web server, which meant that
Netscape was never able to monetize the other side of its free browser
business. As this example illustrates, platform businesses that intend to use
free pricing as part of their strategy need to ensure that the value they create
and hope to ultimately monetize is fully controlled by the platform.
Meeting the monetization challenge must begin with an analysis of the
value created on the platform. Traditional non-platform businesses—
pipelines—deliver value to their customers in the form of a product or
service. They may charge for ownership of the product, as Whirlpool does
when it sells a dishwasher, or for utilization of the product, as GE Aviation
charges for installation and regular servicing of its aircraft engines.
Like Whirlpool and GE, platform companies are engaged in designing
and building technology. But rather than putting the technology in the hands
of customers in exchange for a fee, they invite users to join the platform—
and then they seek to monetize the platform by charging for the value that
the platform technology creates for those users. This value falls into four
broad categories:
•    For consumers: Access to value created on the platform. Video viewers find the videos on
YouTube valuable; Android users find value in the various activities made possible by the
apps; students on Skillshare find value in the courses made available through the site.
•    For producers or third-party providers: Access to a community or market. Airbnb is
valuable for hosts because it provides access to a global market of travelers. Company
recruiters find LinkedIn valuable because it enables them to connect to potential job-seekers.
Merchants find Alibaba valuable because it enables them to sell their products to customers
around the world.
•        For both consumers and producers: Access to tools and services that facilitate
interaction. Platforms create value by reducing the friction and barriers that prevent
producers and consumers from interacting. Kickstarter helps creative entrepreneurs raise
money for new projects. eBay, combined with PayPal, allows anyone to start an online store
that serves customers anywhere in the world. YouTube allows musicians to provide their fans
with performance videos, without having to produce physical products (CDs or DVDs) and
without having to sell through intermediary retailers.
•    For both consumers and producers: Access to curation mechanisms that enhance the
quality of interactions. Consumers value access to high-quality goods and services that
address their specific needs and interests, while producers value access to consumers who
want their offerings and are willing to pay a fair price for them. Well-run platforms build and


---PAGE BREAK---

maintain curation systems that connect the right consumers with the right producers quickly
and easily.
These four forms of value wouldn’t exist without the platform, and so
they may be described as sources of excess value that the platform
generates. Most well-designed platforms create far more value than they
directly capture—which is why they attract large numbers of users, who are
happy to enjoy the benefits of all the “free” value provided by the platform.
A smart monetization strategy begins by considering all four forms of
value, then determines which sources of excess value can be exploited by
the platform without inhibiting the continued growth of network effects.
NUMBERS ARE NOT ENOUGH: FINDING THE VALUE IN
NETWORK EFFECTS
Founded in 2005 by Ethan Stock, Zvents was originally an online guide to
local events in the Bay Area. It grew rapidly, expanding beyond California
and becoming the largest site of its kind, serving hundreds of markets and
attracting over 14 million visitors every month. It was a hit with both
producers—the local event organizers who posted their concerts, shows,
fairs, festivals, and other activities on the site—and consumers, who logged
on to Zvents to find something fun to do after work and on the weekend.
Stock seemed to be living the Silicon Valley dream. Having built a
platform that millions of people had come to rely on, his only remaining
challenge was to monetize it. But that proved to be far from simple.
“Once we reached critical mass,” Stock recalls, “and it was clear we
were becoming the market leader, we expected event organizers would start
paying. … But there is a fatal flaw in some businesses that can hogtie their
ability to make money—the expectation of completeness.”
The problem was that consumers who visited Zvents expected to find a
comprehensive listing of local events. If only a few of the available options
were included, the interest of users would quickly evaporate. Which meant
that Zvents didn’t have much leverage over the event organizers they hoped
to charge. If they’d threatened organizers with having their listings pulled,
the threats would have no teeth, since the whole value of Zvents lay in the


---PAGE BREAK---

completeness of its listings. Charging producers for access to the platform
wasn’t going to work.
Zvents experimented with another monetization technique that we’ll
discuss later in this chapter—charging producers for enhanced access. They
did manage to get a few organizers to pay for more prominent listings, but
the value of the enhancements in terms of improved attendance or ticket
sales proved small. Zvents ended up with a tiny trickle of revenue rather
than the gusher they’d hoped for. In June 2013, with his hopes of building a
lucrative platform empire to rival Google or Facebook dashed, Stock sold
his company to eBay, which now uses Zvents as a bulletin board for arts
and entertainment events in conjunction with its StubHub ticket resale
platform.
The lesson? Network effects as measured by numbers of visitors alone
don’t necessarily reflect the monetary value of a platform. The interactions
facilitated must generate a significant amount of excess value that can be
captured by the platform without producing a negative impact on network
effects. When that’s not the case, monetization may not be possible.
The paradoxical relationship between network size and monetization
potential doesn’t stop there. In some cases, the ability to monetize a
platform may actually increase dramatically when the number of users
declines—reflecting the power of negative network effects to impact the
value of a platform.
Meetup was launched in 2002 as a way for groups to organize offline
meetings (“meetups”) by connecting online. Its cofounder, Scott Heiferman,
said he was inspired by the way people in New York came together as a
community following the 9/11 terror attacks.
Meetup gained traction as a free platform, but the dot-com bust of the
late 1990s served as a constant reminder to its managers of the need to
develop a credible monetization model. They first tried to generate income
by using lead generation, charging fees to offline venues such as restaurants
and bars for the number of users that came in during a meetup. However, in
a pre-smartphone world, this monetization model didn’t work very well.
The number of people who actually showed up for events was different
from the number who signed up, and Meetup had no way of counting heads
to determine an appropriate fee.
Meetup abandoned the lead generation model and experimented with
other ways of monetizing its service. It tested advertising, but failed to


---PAGE BREAK---

attract significant numbers of advertisers. It tried offering a premium
product called Meetup Plus, but the additional value provided generated
little interest. (Perhaps understandably: years later, when asked in an
interview to explain the extra service included with Meetup Plus,
Heiferman responded with a laugh, “God, I don’t even remember what it
got you. It got you some kind of features where you would be able to … I
don’t know. I can’t remember.”) Meetup even tested charging fees to
political organizations, which were a growing portion of the platform’s user
base, but this, too, produced only modest revenue. Meetup’s options were
running out.
Meanwhile, Meetup found itself confronted with another problem—one
that, paradoxically, would help save the company. This was the growth of
negative network effects. As the platform grew, with low barriers to
planning a meetup, many meetups were being started without a clear
purpose or adequate planning. There was a lot of noise on the platform,
leading to disappointing experiences for users, who would sign up for a
meetup only to discover that attendance was small and activity minimal.
Meetup’s leaders made a risky decision. They decided to start charging
meetup organizers, despite the potential for drastically diminishing the scale
of the platform and weakening its network effects. They reasoned that
charging organizers would help them solve their monetization problem
while weeding out organizers who weren’t serious about their goals. A letter
went out to all organizers informing them that they would henceforth be
asked to pay $19 per month for the right to keep using Meetup’s service.
The backlash was huge. After Businessweek ran an article on Meetup’s
new strategy, the magazine received emails from countless platform users
predicting the service’s demise. One user from London wrote, “I think it’s
fair to say most organisers were shocked, and most of the ones I’ve spoken
to will simply cease organising for their groups … There isn’t anything
Meetup is doing these days that users can’t simply do on their own and
more effectively, and there’s plenty of open source software to make use of
and create your own website.”4
But despite the backlash, the strategy worked. The number of meetups
promoted on the site fell drastically, but their quality, and therefore the
quality of the interactions generated, improved significantly. As Heiferman
explained in an interview five years later, “The big headline, by the way, in
going from free to fee for us is: Yeah, we lost 95% of our activity but now


---PAGE BREAK---

we have much, much, more going on than we ever did before and half the
Meetups are successful, as opposed to 1–2% being successful.”5
As we’ve discussed, a platform’s goal is not simply to pump up the
numbers of participants and interactions. It must also take steps to
encourage desirable interactions and discourage undesirable ones. Meetup’s
monetization model helped it achieve exactly that. By discouraging
organizers who weren’t serious about their objectives, the pricing
mechanism created a culture of quality on the platform.
It’s a mistake to assume that network effects can always be optimized by
simply refraining from charging users. A better approach to analyzing the
monetization challenge is to ask these questions: How can we generate
revenues without reducing our positive network effects? Can we devise a
pricing strategy that strengthens our positive network effects while reducing
our negative network effects? Can we create a strategy that encourages
desirable interactions and discourages undesirable ones?
WAYS TO MONETIZE (1):
CHARGING A TRANSACTION FEE
To begin exploring some of the ways that an effective monetization strategy
can be developed, let’s look back at the four forms of excess value created
by platforms—access to value creation, access to the market, access to
tools, and curation. All four culminate in some kind of interaction. In many
cases, this interaction involves an exchange of money, as when an Uber
customer pays a driver for a ride, an eBay buyer pays a seller for a product,
or a company using Upwork pays a freelancer for a completed project.
Platforms that facilitate such monetary transactions can monetize the value
created by charging a transaction fee, which may be calculated as either a
percentage of the transaction price or a fixed fee per transaction. The latter
system, which is simpler to administer, is particularly appealing when a
high frequency of transactions is expected without a significant variation in
the transaction size.
Charging a transaction fee is a powerful way of monetizing the value
created by the platform without hampering the growth of network effects.
Because buyers and sellers are charged only when an actual transaction
occurs, they are not discouraged from joining the platform and becoming


---PAGE BREAK---

part of the network. Of course, if the transaction fee is excessive, it may
discourage transactions. Platform managers may need to experiment with
various levels of fee to find the rate that captures a fair percentage of the
value created without driving users away.
A more serious and persistent challenge is to capture on the platform
itself all the interactions facilitated by the platform. Buyers and sellers who
find each other on the platform are naturally incentivized to take the
interaction off the platform if they can, in order to avoid paying the
transaction fee.
This problem is especially rampant with platforms that connect service
providers with service consumers. With the rise of the freelancer economy
and the spread of the online sharing economy, platform businesses from
Airbnb and Uber to TaskRabbit and Upwork have sprung up to facilitate
service interactions. However, most of them are faced with the challenge of
capturing the interaction on-platform. In most cases, the interaction can’t
occur until the producer (in this case, the service provider) and the
consumer (the purchaser of the service) agree on the terms of the service,
which usually requires the two to interact directly. Furthermore, the actual
exchange of money often follows the delivery of the service, which also
requires the two participants to interact directly. These direct interactions
weaken the platform’s ability to capture value by creating an opportunity
for the parties to make a deal off-platform. As a result of avoiding the
transaction fee, the consumer can obtain a discount on the service, while the
provider gets to keep more of the total service charge. The only loser is the
platform company itself.
Platforms like Fiverr, Groupon, and Airbnb solve this problem by
temporarily preventing participants from connecting. These platforms try to
provide all the information a consumer needs to make an interaction
decision, 
without 
connecting 
the 
consumer 
directly 
with 
the
producer.  Groupon does this by featuring services that are largely
standardized, while the less-standardized Airbnb and Fiverr provide rating
mechanisms and other social metrics that indicate the reliability of a service
provider, making direct contact between the parties less necessary.
Sometimes strategies like these are insufficient. This is especially the
case with platforms that create a market for professional services, which
often require discussions, exchanges, and workflow management before
and during the provision of services. As a result, it may not be possible for


---PAGE BREAK---

the platform to retain control of all communications between the producer
and the consumer, and charging the consumer ahead of the interaction may
not be an option.
In cases like these, the platform must extend its role as an interaction
facilitator to include more value-creating activities. For example, Upwork
provides tools for monitoring the service provider remotely. This enables
consumers of professional services to monitor projects and make payments
based on actual delivery of work.
The Clarity platform for connecting advice seekers with experts retains
control of the interaction through a similar mechanism. In the past, expert-
matching platforms connected the two sides, charged a lead generation fee,
and allowed the transaction to occur off-platform. Clarity provides
additional call management and invoicing capabilities that serve to capture
the interaction on the platform. To benefit producers, Clarity offers
integrated payments and invoicing, making it simple for advice givers to
generate income through small, one-off engagements. To benefit
consumers, the call management software provides per-minute billing,
which gives them the option to opt out of a call that isn’t proving useful.
Both sides receive enough additional value to keep them connected to
Clarity, with minimal incentive to take their interaction off-platform.
As these examples illustrate, service provider platforms that want to
capture and monetize interactions must create tools and services that benefit
both parties by removing friction, mitigate risk, and otherwise facilitate
interactions.
However, additional benefits like these may not be sufficient to enable
all service provider platforms to thrive. Local service platforms that connect
consumers with relatively simple services like plumbing and house painting
continue to struggle with the challenge of owning the interaction. The risks
involved in such interactions are lower than when hiring a professional
freelancer: the two sides get to meet in person, the work is simpler, its
quality is less variable, and, since the work itself happens off-platform,
usually under the direct supervision of the consumer, the consumer can
monitor the service provider without having to rely on software tools. Some
of these local service platforms may need to move to the enhanced access
monetization model, which we’ll describe in a later section of this chapter.


---PAGE BREAK---

WAYS TO MONETIZE (2):
CHARGING FOR ACCESS
In some cases, it’s possible to monetize a platform by charging producers
for access to a community of users who have joined the platform not in
order to interact with producers but for other, unrelated reasons.
Dribbble has rapidly gained prominence in the design community as a
high-quality platform for designers—artists, illustrators, logo creators,
graphic designers, typographers, and others—to show off their work,
thereby gaining exposure, credibility, and valuable feedback from their
peers. Adapting the jargon of basketball, Dribbble users call new images
“shots,” image groups “buckets,” and reposts of favorite images
“rebounds.” This unique lingo has helped foster a highly engaged
community that includes many of today’s best designers.
Dribbble’s managers are eager to protect the long-term value of this
specialized community. For this reason, they do not charge members for
access to the platform, which could weaken network effects. They’ve also
opted not to permit sponsored images that provide enhanced access to the
community (for example, by popping up, uninvited, on users’ home pages),
since these could reduce the prestige of the site and its perceived value to its
users. (We’ll describe the enhanced access strategy in more detail a bit later
in this chapter.) So to monetize the site, Dribbble has invited third parties to
pay for access to the community. In this case, companies looking for
designers are charged to post employment listings on the site’s jobs board.
This form of monetization creates interactions that benefit both parties.
Designers are motivated to put up their best work on Dribbble, since these
may generate leads to new gigs, while companies get access to top-flight
designers whose portfolios have already been curated by the creative
community.
Dribbble’s monetization method can be described by the simple
shorthand term “advertising.” But notice that, unlike most advertising,
Dribbble’s highly targeted job listings generate value for the community,
enhance the core interaction, and strengthen network effects rather than
adding noise and depleting value.
In a similar fashion, LinkedIn allows recruiters to present job
opportunities to its members and offers companies the ability to compare


---PAGE BREAK---

and target professionals based on their résumés and professional brands.
LinkedIn’s power as a recruiting platform encourages users to update their
profiles more often, thereby keeping the platform active and healthy.
As we’ve observed throughout this chapter, a monetization model is
sustainable only when it strengthens network effects (rather than weakening
them). Charging third-party producers for community access is effective if
and only if the newly added contents—such as the job listings on Dribbble
—enhance the value of the platform to its users.
WAYS TO MONETIZE (3):
CHARGING FOR ENHANCED ACCESS
Sometimes a platform that facilitates a monetary transaction may be unable
to own, and hence to monetize, the transaction. Such platforms may instead
charge producers for enhanced access to consumers. This refers to the
provision of tools that enable a producer to stand out above the crowd and
be noticed on a two-sided platform, despite an abundance of rival producers
and the resulting intense competition to attract consumer attention.
Platforms that charge producers fees for better targeted messages, more
attractive presentations, or interactions with particularly valuable users are
using enhanced access as a monetization technique.
The system of monetizing enhanced access generally doesn’t harm
network effects, since all producers and consumers are permitted to
participate in the platform on an open, non-enhanced basis. But those for
whom the additional value of enhanced access is particularly great can pay
for that extra value—allowing a portion of that value to be captured by the
platform business.
The traditional classified advertisement model, for example, supported
local newspapers for decades through paid placement of commercial
messages. Today, online platforms use a similar model, asking producers to
pay for more prominent placement of their messages. Yelp, for example,
offers restaurants enhanced visibility and better branding on its platform by
charging for a premium listing in search results. Restaurants pay for this
service, since it makes it easier for them to break through the noise and
attract the attention of the most valuable potential consumers.


---PAGE BREAK---

Google search may also be seen through a similar lens. Every website
publisher can achieve higher placement for its site through search engine
optimization, a self-managed website design and coding process that
produces no revenue for Google. However, some publishers choose to buy
premium placement through Google Adwords. In a similar fashion, Tumblr,
a micro-blogging platform acquired by Yahoo in 2013, allows users to
promote their posts to a larger audience for a fee. Twitter, too, promotes
sponsored content at the top of its feed.
Another way of monetizing enhanced access is by charging users for
lowering barriers that otherwise exist between users. Dating websites, for
example, often allow men to see profiles of women without revealing
identifying details. Users who pay a subscription fee are allowed access to
additional information that enables them to connect directly with other
users who interest them.
Monetizing enhanced access to users needs to be done with care. If not
done right, it can increase the noise level on the platform and decrease the
relevance of content for consumers, leading to negative network effects, as
described in chapter 2.
One important principle is to ensure that consumers can easily
distinguish between content that has been elevated or highlighted as part of
a paid access program and content whose high ranking or prominence is
organic. Premium listings on Yelp and ads associated with Google’s search
results look different from organic results, creating a sense of transparency
that enhances user trust. Most search engines before Google that failed to
follow this principle ended up confusing and annoying users and damaging
the value of their platforms. So-called native advertising techniques, where
paid content on the Internet is designed to resemble unpaid content, run the
risk of appearing deceptive and alienating users.
Platform managers must also be careful not to allow monetization of
enhanced access to create the impression that user access is being restricted.
As the world’s largest social network, Facebook creates tremendous value
for brands that want to engage with current and potential customers. Some
consumer brands have grown massive followings on Facebook. However,
during 2014 and 2015, Facebook was widely criticized for making curation
changes that limit the reach of brands on the platform—except for those
that pay extra for access to a wider audience. The perception was that
Facebook was reducing services available to platform participants in order


---PAGE BREAK---

to facilitate a revenue grab. Facebook’s massive size and the powerful
network effects it generates have enabled it to shrug off these complaints—
at least, so far. But few other platforms would be able to get away with
actions like these.
Finally, platform managers must ensure that their usual curation
principles are applied rigorously to content from producers who pay for
enhanced access. Facebook’s value is based on the relevance of its news
feed, and a torrent of sponsored posts that lack such relevance could
eventually drive consumers away from the platform.
WAYS TO MONETIZE (4):
CHARGING FOR ENHANCED CURATION
When we think of network effects, we often assume that more is better.
However, as we noted in chapters 2 and 3, positive network effects are
driven not simply by quantity but also by quality. When the quantity of
content on a platform becomes overwhelmingly great, consumers may find
it increasingly difficult to find the high-quality content they want, thereby
reducing the platform’s value for them. When this happens, consumers may
be willing to pay for access to guaranteed quality—in other words, for
enhanced curation.
Sittercity, a platform we’ve mentioned elsewhere in this book, charges
parents to access the platform. To ensure quality and choice, it performs
rigorous curation and screening of the babysitters who get access to the
platform—a source of significant additional value to parents who worry
about the well-being of their children. This extra value allows Sittercity to
charge a subscription fee to parents instead of the transaction fee usually
associated with a service provider platform.
As an advisor at Skillshare, an education platform, Sangeet Choudary
has helped the platform transition from a transaction-fee-only model to a
model that provides enhanced value upon payment of a subscription charge.
Skillshare allows students to pay separately for each course taken. But once
the platform managers had curated a sizeable amount of high-quality
courses, Skillshare began to allow students access to multiple courses via a
monthly subscription fee. Teachers are paid “royalties” based on the
number of subscription-paying students who sign up for their classes. The


---PAGE BREAK---

growing number of students who choose this model get better value per
course consumed, while generating recurring revenues for the platform.
WHOM SHOULD YOU CHARGE?
A typical platform supports multiple types of users performing multiple
roles. Given the differences among the users, their economic status, their
motivations, their objectives, their incentives, and the differing forms and
amounts of value they derive from the platform, decisions about whom you
should charge and whom you should not can be complex—especially since
every decision you make about one user category impacts others in ways
that may not be obvious.
However, the general goal of encouraging positive interactions that will
create value for all participants—together with observations from the
histories of successful platform businesses—enables us to develop a few
useful heuristics about when particular pricing choices are appropriate and
when they are not.
•    Charging all users. As we’ve noted, platform businesses rarely charge all their users the way
pipeline businesses generally do. Charging all users would, in most cases, discourage
participation, thereby reducing or destroying network effects. However, in a few cases,
charging all users actually enhances network effects. In the offline world, for instance,
prestigious membership organizations like country clubs charge all members. High
membership dues (along with vetting processes such as requiring recommendations from
existing members) serve as curating techniques to guarantee member quality. Some online
platforms use this model—for example, Carbon NYC, a platform for multimillionaire
residents of New York City. However, in many social and business settings, “willingness to
pay” and “quality” are far from synonymous, so this pricing system must be used very
carefully and selectively.
•    Charging one side while subsidizing another. Some platforms are able to charge members
of one category of users (call them A) provided they allow members of another category of
users (B) to participate for free—or even subsidize or incentivize them. This works when
users from category A highly value the opportunity to make contact with users from category
B—but the feeling is not equally reciprocated. As we’ve noted, bars and pubs in the offline
world have long used this strategy by offering women free or discounted drinks on Ladies’
Nights. Many online dating websites follow a similar strategy, incentivizing memberships for
women as a way of attracting male members who will pay full freight.
•        Charging most users full price while subsidizing stars. Certain platforms choose to
subsidize or incentivize stars—super-users whose presence attracts large numbers of other
users. In offline business, malls have been known to offer attractive lease terms to popular
large retailers like Target, whose presence guarantees the customer traffic that other mall
occupants will readily pay a premium for. In a similar way, online platforms like Skillshare


---PAGE BREAK---

and Indiegogo go to great lengths to court celebrity teachers and campaign creators, whose
star power attracts other producers as well as large numbers of curious consumers. Microsoft
learned this lesson when creating its Xbox gaming platform. Its initial monetization strategy
paid game developers (producers) a one-time purchase fee while channeling ongoing user fees
to Microsoft. But superstar game developer Electronic Arts refused to work on these terms and
threatened to develop for Sony instead. Microsoft eventually had to succumb and agree to
special terms for EA, though the details have not been publicly disclosed.
•        Charging some users full price while subsidizing users who are price-sensitive. The
category of users that is most sensitive to pricing is more likely to abandon the platform when
charged, killing the network effect. Thus, it generally makes sense to discount or subsidize
users who are price-sensitive while charging others the full freight. Real-world experience
shows that it can be difficult to predict which side of a platform market is likely to be more
price-sensitive. During the 1990s, the Denver real estate market experienced a glut of
properties, making property owners desperate for rentals. Real estate agents charged owners
broker fees, while tenants paid nothing. By contrast, during the same period, Boston had a
scarcity of available properties, making would-be renters desperate to find places to stay; real
estate agents charged potential tenants, while allowing owners to list their properties without
paying a fee.
As you can see, deciding whom to charge is a delicate balancing act. The
need to monetize the platform must be carefully weighed against the
friction invariably produced by imposing a cost. Deciding precisely where
the system can afford to create some friction—and how much friction can
be tolerated without crippling the growth of network effects—is no easy
matter.
Sometimes, a less-than-optimal monetization strategy can be made
workable through ingenuity. During its early years, Alibaba, the e-
commerce platform company that has been called China’s eBay and
Amazon rolled into one, was unable to charge transaction fees simply
because its primitive software had trouble tracking the flow of online deals.
CEO Jack Ma was forced to charge membership fees instead—an option he
would have preferred to avoid because of the entry friction it creates.
Alibaba managed to overcome this problem by offering sizeable
commissions to salespeople who convinced others to sign on to the
platform. When word got around that some Alibaba sales agents were
earning commissions in excess of a million Chinese yuan, equivalent to
well over $100,000, the drive to enlist members shifted into high gear
despite the friction caused by the entry fees. To this day, Alibaba charges no
transaction fees, having managed to monetize the platform through
advertising—as if a company that facilitated transactions, like Amazon and
eBay, were to generate its profits by selling ads like Google.


---PAGE BREAK---

FROM FREE TO FEE: HOW DESIGN DECISIONS IMPACT
THE TRANSITION TO MONETIZATION
As many of the cases mentioned in this chapter suggest—and as plenty of
familiar real-world examples illustrate—the imperative to create and grow
network effects often leads platform founders to begin by offering their
services for free. Creating value for users while asking nothing in return is
often a great way to attract members and encourage participation. “Users
first, monetization later,” as the slogan goes. Or, in a variant that we heard
from the executive in charge of platform strategy for Haier Group, a
Chinese manufacturing company, “You never take first money.” In other
words, only after a value unit has been created and exchanged with results
that are satisfactory to both the producer and the consumer should the
platform business itself seek to capture a share of that value.
A number of highly promising platforms have foundered because they
ignored this rule and instead rushed to monetize their offerings prematurely.
Sean Percival, the former vice president of online marketing for the failed
social network Myspace, recalls the dire effect of financial pressures
following the acquisition of the platform by Rupert Murdoch’s News
Corporation. The “last nail in the coffin,” Percival says, was when Murdoch
promised stock analysts in an earnings call that Myspace would generate a
billion dollars in revenue that year—at a time when the true revenue figure
was a tenth of that. As a result, Myspace managers began scrambling to sign
up any program or service that someone was willing to sponsor—no matter
how inane or annoying it might be. This was one of the factors that
ultimately led users to abandon Myspace in favor of Facebook.6
As we’ve observed, there are a number of ways to shift later to a
monetization model that lets the platform business capture some fraction of
the value created. However, the transition is often fraught with difficulty.
These key principles of platform design help ensure that the transition to
monetization—from free to fee, as Meetup’s Heiferman put it—can be
managed successfully.
•        If possible, avoid charging for value that users previously received for free. People
naturally resent being told that they have to pay for a good or service they’ve previously
received for free—as we saw in the case of Meetup. And not all platform businesses have been
as successful as Meetup at navigating such a transition. Some, like Zvents, either died or were
forced to dramatically alter the nature of their offering.


---PAGE BREAK---

•    Also, avoid reducing access to value that users have become accustomed to receiving. As
we noted, Facebook was offering tremendous value for free and actually needed to cut down
on that organic value when it decided to provide premium content promotion to paying
producers. This led to complaints from both producers and consumers. Facebook’s enormous
network effects enabled it to survive this course correction, but for many lesser platforms it
might have been fatal.
•    Instead, when transitioning from free to fee, strive to create new, additional value that
justifies the charge. Of course, you must ensure that, if you charge for enhanced quality, you
control for it and guarantee it. Critics have assailed Uber for charging a Safe Rides fee to pay
for drivers’ background checks and other safety measures while apparently cutting corners on
those same steps.
•    Consider potential monetization strategies when making your initial platform design
choices. From the time of launch, a platform should be architected in a manner that affords it
control over possible sources of monetization. This directly impacts how open or closed the
platform is. For example, if platform managers hope to monetize through a transaction fee,
they need to ensure that the platform design makes it possible for them to capture control of
transactions. If platform managers hope to monetize by charging for access to their user base,
the platform should be designed to control the avenues through which content reaches the
users as well as the flow of data about users.
As this chapter has shown, monetization is a complicated challenge—
and a crucial one that may determine the ultimate viability of a platform.
Those seeking to launch a successful platform can’t afford to ignore the
issues surrounding monetization or defer thinking about them until after
network effects have been established. Instead, platform managers should
be thinking about potential monetization strategies from day one, and plan
their design decisions so as to keep as many monetization options as
possible open for as long as possible.


---PAGE BREAK---

TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER SIX
    A well-managed platform can create excess value in four ways: access to value creation,
access to the market, access to tools, and curation. Monetization is about capturing a
portion of the excess value created.
    Techniques for monetizing a platform include charging a transaction fee, charging users for
enhanced access, charging third-party producers for access to a community, and charging a
subscription fee for enhanced curation.
    One of the most crucial monetization choices is deciding whom to charge, since the
difference in roles played by various platform users means that charging them can have
widely differing network effects.
    Given the complexity of the monetization challenge, platform managers should take
potential monetization strategies into account in every decision they make regarding
platform design.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

7
OPENNESS
Defining What Platform Users
and Partners Can and Cannot Do
Wikipedia is a marvel of the world of platforms—an open-sourced
encyclopedia that, within a few years, eclipsed traditional purveyors of
information to become the most popular reference site in the world.
Millions of people have come to rely upon Wikipedia as a useful,
universally accessible, virtually unlimited source of data that is generally
highly reliable.
Except when it isn’t. And when it isn’t, the results can be horrific.
Many users of Wikipedia will be able to point to their own favorite tale
of bizarre misinformation popping up on the site. Perhaps the most famous
is the entry titled “Murder of Meredith Kercher”—better known by the
names of the two people widely suspected of the crime, the American
student Amanda Knox and her Italian boyfriend Raffaele Sollecito. Under
Wikipedia’s policy of largely open editing by any interested party, this entry
has now been edited over 8,000 times by over 1,000 people—almost
entirely by people who have been convinced of the guilt of Knox and
Sollecito ever since the crime was committed back in 2007. Throughout
their complicated legal ordeal, including one conviction, its overturning by
a second court, and another conviction, these self-appointed editors
continually revised the page to eliminate any potentially exculpating
evidence and to emphasize the likelihood of guilt.
The controversy over the entry grew so intense that Wikipedia founder
Jimmy Wales got involved. Wales studied the matter and issued a statement:


---PAGE BREAK---

“I just read the entire article from top to bottom, and I have concerns that
most serious criticism of the trial from reliable sources has been excluded
or presented in a negative fashion.” Shortly thereafter, he wrote, “I am
concerned that, since I raised the issue, even I have been attacked as being
something like a ‘conspiracy theorist.’” Perhaps most disturbing, some of
the editors involved in slanting the Kercher page were found to be
contributors to other websites dedicated to “hating” Amanda Knox, thereby
shattering any illusion of objectivity.1
The problems Wikipedia faces in maintaining high quality while
maximizing its accessibility to all the users who want to contribute to its
content illustrate the challenges inherent in managing an open platform
model. Yet the obvious solution—to close down the model and institute
strict controls over participation—has a huge downside. Increasing the
friction involved in actively using any platform inevitably reduces
participation and can even destroy the value-creation potential of the
platform altogether.
HOW OPEN? HOW CLOSED?:
WALKING THE TIGHTROPE
In one of the first discussions of platform openness back in 2009, two of the
authors of this book (Geoffrey Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, in
collaboration with Thomas Eisenmann) provided a basic definition of
openness:
A platform is “open” to the extent that (1) no restrictions are placed on participation in its
development, commercialization, or use; or (2) any restrictions—for example, requirements to
conform with technical standards or pay licensing fees—are reasonable and non-discriminatory,
that is, they are applied uniformly to all potential platform participants.2
Being closed isn’t simply a matter of absolutely forbidding outside
participants on the platform. It may also involve creating such onerous
participation rules that would-be users are discouraged, or charging such
excessive fees (or “rents”) that the profit margins of potential participants
are reduced below sustainable levels.3 The choice between open and closed
isn’t a choice between black and white; there is a spectrum between the two
extremes.


---PAGE BREAK---

Calibrating the right level of openness is undoubtedly one of the most
complex as well as one of the most critical decisions that a platform
business must make.4 The decision affects usage, developer participation,
monetization, and regulation. It’s a challenge that Steve Jobs struggled with
throughout his career. In the 1980s, he got it wrong by choosing to keep the
Apple Macintosh a closed system. Competitor Microsoft opened its less
elegant operating system to outside developers and licensed it to a host of
computer manufacturers. The resulting flood of innovation enabled
Windows to claim a share of the personal computer market that dwarfed
Apple’s. In the 2000s, Jobs got the balance right: he opened the iPhone’s
operating system, made iTunes available on Windows, and captured the
lion’s share of the smartphone market from rivals like Nokia and
Blackberry.5
Jobs liked to recast the open/closed dilemma as a choice between
“fragmented” and “integrated,” terms that subtly skewed the debate in favor
of a closed, controlled system. He wasn’t completely wrong: it’s true that,
the more open a system becomes, the more fragmented it becomes. An open
system is also more difficult for its creator to monetize, and the intellectual
property that defines it is more difficult to control. Yet openness also
encourages innovation.
It’s a difficult tradeoff to master. And the consequences of choosing the
wrong level of openness in either direction can be severe, as the rise and
fall of the social network Myspace suggests.
Although the history is now sometimes forgotten, Myspace was the
dominant social network before Facebook was launched in 2004, and
remained so until 2008. Even in its early days, it had much of the
functionality that would be familiar to users of today’s social networks. Its
internal staff created a wide variety of features, such as instant messaging,
classified ads, video playback, karaoke, “self-serve advertising” easily
purchased through the use of simple online menus, and more.
However, because of limited engineering resources, these features were
often buggy, leading to a poor user experience.6 And an ill-considered
decision to keep the site closed to outside developers made solving the
problem practically impossible. Chris DeWolfe, cofounder of Myspace,
recalled the company’s flawed thinking in a 2011 interview: “We tried to
create every feature in the world and said, ‘O.K., we can do it, why should
we [open up to] let a third party do it?’ We should have picked 5 to 10 key


---PAGE BREAK---

features that we totally focused on and let other people innovate on
everything else.”
Facebook didn’t make the same mistake. Like Myspace, it was initially
closed to outside innovators. It opened to dot-com users in 2006. This
helped Facebook begin a slow climb toward competitiveness with Myspace.
The trend is reflected in Figure 7.1, which shows the average daily reach of
the two platforms in terms of percentage of Internet users during 2006 and
early 2007, when Myspace was still king.
When Facebook launched Facebook Platform to help developers create
apps in May 2007, the big shift began. An ecosystem of partners willing to
extend the capabilities of Facebook quickly took root.7 By November 2007,
there were 7,000 outside applications on the site.8 Recognizing how this
flood of new apps was enhancing its rival’s appeal, Myspace responded by
opening to developers in February 2008. But the tide had already turned, as
shown in Figure 7.2. Facebook overtook Myspace in April 2008, and today
it enjoys unquestioned supremacy in the social networking space.
FIGURE 7.1. The market dominance of Myspace over Facebook during 2006 and early 2007. ©
2015, Alexa Internet (www.alexa.com).


---PAGE BREAK---

FIGURE 7.2. Facebook rapidly overtakes Myspace after opening its platform to developers in
May 2007. © 2015, Alexa Internet (www.alexa.com).
Had Myspace opened itself earlier to contributions from a wider
community of outside developers—especially those who had world-class
technology for specific functions that Myspace wanted to build out, such as
classified advertising, an effective spam filter, and user-friendly
communication tools—they might have had a more robust product offering.
Perhaps today Myspace and Facebook would still be competing on an
almost equal footing.
At first glance, then, it would appear that Myspace’s problems arose
from precisely the opposite direction as Wikipedia’s: the collaborative
encyclopedia is struggling with the consequences of too much openness,
while Myspace foundered as a result of too little. That’s true to some extent
—but the story is more complicated than that. Along some other important
dimensions, Myspace was actually too open.
For example, Myspace’s self-serve advertising feature created an all-too-
accessible pathway for a significant amount of inappropriate content,
including pornography available to platform users of any age. The lack of
control over such material made Myspace less attractive to many users and
even triggered investigations by a number of state attorneys general. In
combination with Myspace’s slowness to accommodate outside app


---PAGE BREAK---

developers, this failure to adequately curate its content helped accelerate the
platform’s competitive collapse.
It might seem impossible for a platform to be both too closed and too
open simultaneously, but Myspace managed the feat.
THE PLATFORM ECOSYSTEM AND THE VARIETIES OF
OPENNESS
How can we make sense of the openness decisions that platform managers
must make? It’s helpful to start by recalling the key elements of a platform
as discussed in chapter 3. As we explained there, a platform is
fundamentally an infrastructure designed to facilitate interactions among
producers and consumers of value. These two basic types of participants use
the platform to connect with each other and to engage in exchanges—first,
an exchange of information; then, if desired, an exchange of goods or
services in return for some form of currency. These participants come
together on the platform to engage in a core interaction that is at the heart of
the platform’s value-creating mission. In time, other kinds of interactions
may be layered onto the platform, increasing its usefulness and attracting
other participants.
Given this basic design, it’s axiomatic that a vibrant and healthy platform
is dependent on the value created by partners who are outside of the
platform itself. If a platform is too closed, then partners cannot or will not
contribute the value required to make mutually rewarding exchanges
possible.9
Consider Google’s YouTube. Because the system is highly open, it has
become a viable outlet for commercial as well as amateur videos, delivering
a wide array of content, ranging from the silly to the practical to the
political and the inspirational. Without its vast array of user-supplied
content, YouTube would be dependent on one or a few corporate sources of
video material. Over time, it would likely evolve into more of a distribution
system—similar to Hulu, for instance—than a true platform.
However, as we’ve noted, and as the examples of Wikipedia and
Myspace illustrate, openness is not a black-or-white area. Decisions about
degrees and kinds of openness are critical and often challenging.


---PAGE BREAK---

There are three kinds of openness decisions that platform designers and
managers need to grapple with. These are:
•    Decisions regarding manager and sponsor participation
•    Decisions regarding developer participation
•    Decisions regarding user participation
Each type of decision has unique ramifications and implications. Let’s
consider them in turn.
MANAGER AND SPONSOR PARTICIPATION
Behind any platform, with responsibility for its structure and operation, are
two entities: the firm that manages the platform and directly touches users,
and the firm that sponsors the platform and retains legal control over the
technology. In many cases, these two entities are one and the same.
Companies like Facebook, Uber, eBay, Airbnb, Alibaba, and many others
are both platform managers and platform sponsors. In this situation, control
of the platform, including decisions about openness, rests completely with
the manager/sponsor firm.
In other cases, however, the platform manager and the platform sponsor
are not identical. In general terms, the platform manager organizes and
controls producer/consumer interactions, while the platform sponsor
controls the overall architecture of the platform, the intellectual property
that underlies the platform (such as the software code that controls its
operations), and the allocation of other rights. When the manager and the
sponsor are separate, the manager is closest to the customer/producer
relationship as well as to outside developers who may contribute to the
platform. This gives the manager considerable influence over the daily
operations of the platform. But, in general, the sponsor has greater legal and
economic control over the platform and therefore a larger measure of power
over its long-term strategy.
In some cases, both the platform manager and the platform sponsor can
be either a single company or a group of companies—with further
implications for issues of control and openness.10
Figure 7.3 illustrates four models for managing and sponsoring
platforms. In some cases, a single firm both manages and sponsors the


---PAGE BREAK---

platform. We call this the proprietary model. For example, the hardware,
software, and underlying technical standards for the Macintosh operating
system and mobile iOS are all controlled by Apple.
Sometimes a group of firms manages the platform while one firm
sponsors it. This is the licensing model. Google, for example, sponsors the
“stock” Android operating system, but it encourages a number of hardware
firms to supply devices that connect consumers to the platform. These
device makers, including Samsung, Sony, LG, Motorola, Huawei, and
Amazon, are licensed by Google to manage the interface between producers
and consumers.


---PAGE BREAK---

FIGURE 7.3. Four models for managing and sponsoring platforms. Adapted from “Opening
Platforms: How, When and Why,” by Thomas Eisenmann, Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall Van
Alstyne.11
In still other cases, a single firm manages the platform while a group of
firms sponsors it—the joint venture model. The Orbitz travel reservations
platform was launched in 2001 as a joint venture sponsored by a collection
of major airlines in order to compete with upstart Travelocity. Similarly, the
job search platform CareerBuilder was created jointly in 1995 (under the
original name of NetStart) by three newspaper groups as a platform for
help-wanted advertising.
Finally, in some cases, a group of firms manages the platform while
another group sponsors it—the shared model. For example, there are both
many sponsors and many managers of the open source Linux operating
system, which, like the Mac and iOS systems, serves as a platform
connecting app developers and other producers to millions of consumers.
Corporate sponsors of Linux include IBM, Intel, HP, Fujitsu, NEC, Oracle,
Samsung, and many other companies, while the manager companies include
dozens of device makers—TiVo, Roomba, Ubuntu, Qualcomm, and many
others.
Sometimes, a particular platform may migrate from one model to
another as business demands and the structure of the marketplace evolve.
Consider, for example, the Visa credit card operation, which is a platform
that permits merchants and consumers to engage in payment transactions
with one another. It originated in 1958 as a proprietary platform under the
name of BankAmericard, sponsored and managed by the Bank of America.
In the 1970s, it took on the Visa brand name and morphed into a joint
venture, independently managed while being sponsored by a number of
banks. In 2007, Visa became a freestanding corporate entity and reverted to
the proprietary model. It is now self-sponsoring rather than being supported
by an outside institution.
As you can see, these four models of manager and sponsor participation
are, in effect, variant patterns of openness. The proprietary model provides
the greatest control and facilitates the most closed system of operation, as
exemplified by Apple’s management of the Mac operating system. The
licensing and joint venture models are, in effect, open at one end and closed
on the other, while the shared model, exemplified by Linux, leads to a


---PAGE BREAK---

platform that is open to both a wide array of sponsors and a wide array of
managers.
Who wins? Who loses? Which of these four models is most
advantageous to platform sponsors? Which works best for platform
managers? Which model generates the greatest flow of predictable,
controllable profits? It would be nice to offer definitive, one-size-fits-all
answers to these questions—but, as is usually the case in business, the
answer is, “It depends.”
The proprietary model, used with enormous success by Apple, might
seem to be every platform company’s dream. After all, it allows you to
capture an entire market and to realize all the profits it generates. The
logical way to accomplish this is by developing a new technology standard
and maintaining sole control of it. And this is not impossible—but in the
real world, it doesn’t always produce lasting economic returns.
A classic illustration is the so-called VCR war of the 1970s and 1980s,
which pitted two technology platforms against each other: the Betamax
videotape standard sponsored by Sony, and the VHS standard sponsored by
JVC. Unlike most platforms of today, these standards from the pre-Internet
era did not create an online venue in which producers and consumers could
meet to conduct interactions together. However, they qualified as platforms
because they established technology systems that would allow multiple
producers (chiefly movie and TV studios) to sell products to consumers.
Thus, they faced many of the same kinds of strategic challenges that today’s
Internet-based platforms must confront.
From a technical quality standpoint, the Betamax platform was slightly
better, providing sharper images and longer recording times. But the
outcome of the war was decided by the varying sponsorship/management
strategies chosen by the rivals.
Sony chose the proprietary platform model, retaining control of the
Betamax standard on the theory that, in the long run, its better quality
would win out in the marketplace. But that never happened. JVC followed
the licensing model, enlisting many manufacturers to produce VHS
recorders and players. As manufacturing volume increased, prices fell,
making VHS devices more attractive to consumers. With more device
makers supporting the VHS standard and with more consumers owning
VHS players, movie studios and other content providers issued more


---PAGE BREAK---

products in VHS format than in Betamax. A feedback loop set in that gave
VHS a large, steadily growing advantage over Betamax. By the mid-1980s,
manufacturers that embraced the VHS standard came to dominate the VCR
arena. Ironically, however, JVC itself enjoyed only modest profits from this
victory; its development of the original VHS standard didn’t lead to a large
or lasting stream of income.
Years later, Sony became embroiled in a new format war with a different
outcome—though one that proved to be no more satisfactory in the long run
to the Japanese giant. In the mid-2000s, when videotape gave way to digital
video discs (DVDs), Sony’s Blu-ray high-definition video standard
competed against the HD-DVD standard pioneered by Toshiba. Sony
decided to pursue the same sole proprietorship model it had chosen for
Betamax. In this case, Sony won the battle, thanks largely to its successful
introduction of the PlayStation 3 gaming device, which included Blu-ray
video and made it instantly available to millions of consumers.
Unfortunately for Sony, this victory proved short-lived. Today, a few
years after the triumph of Blu-ray, the migration of consumers away from
DVD to streaming video is well under way, making Bluray’s dominance
increasingly irrelevant. The lesson? If, like Sony, you choose to fight a
standards battle in quest of proprietary control of a market, you’d better win
it—and win it fast, before the next big thing supersedes the very technology
you seek to dominate.
The story of Visa—another platform that originated in the pre-digital era
—illustrates some of the other challenges faced by different management
and sponsorship models. During its years of sponsorship by a consortium of
big banks, Visa achieved significant success as a leading credit card
company. But over time, this management model proved cumbersome.
When a platform is sponsored—and therefore owned—by a number of
companies, key decisions must be approved by a committee of owners with
varying goals and preferences, which is an inherently inefficient
management system. This is why Visa’s owners ultimately agreed to spin
off the business as a self-contained entity, granting it the capability to make
competitive moves more nimbly.
The inherent awkwardness of multi-sponsor decision-making can affect
the elegance, simplicity, and ease of use of technology. The long history of
the personal computer wars between Apple’s proprietary model and
Microsoft’s so-called Wintel standard clearly illustrates the fact that a


---PAGE BREAK---

standard controlled by a single company with a unified esthetic and
technical vision can produce more attractive, intuitive tools and services
than a collection of competing companies, each with its own design
approach. Apple has also become far more profitable and valuable than any
single company in the Wintel universe—despite the fact that its market
share of computer sales has never approached that of the PC.
Similarly, Apple’s iPhone is generally considered more elegant and user-
friendly than any smartphone created using Google’s less tightly controlled
Android standard. This is particularly so today, with the Android Open
Source Platform (AOSP) permitting experimentation and change by any
interested company. AOSP is the platform used by Amazon in its Kindle
Fire and by China’s Xiaomi in its mobile phones.
This doesn’t mean that Apple’s proprietary iPhone strategy is necessarily
“better” than Google’s more open strategy. In fact, the story is a
complicated one. Even though Apple’s iPhone continues to be a more
elegant device than competing Android phones, by 2014, open innovation
by multiple phone manufacturers had earned Android about 80 percent of
the smartphone market, as compared with just 15 percent for Apple.12
A big win for Google? Not really. The AOSP operating system doesn’t
automatically channel user traffic to Google’s online services—which
means that Google, despite being the progenitor of Android, receives no
revenue or data flow from AOSP devices. In response, Google has reversed
course and closed Android in an effort to reassert its control over the
system.13 (We’ll return to this story later in the chapter.)
In the end, of course, the choice of a sponsorship/management model
comes down to the purposes for which the platform is being developed and
the goals of those designing it. The wireless radio frequency identification
(RFID) technology is used to create smart tags that can be attached by the
millions to products for inventory control. In effect, the RFID system is an
inventory management platform that retailers can access to interact with the
goods they distribute.
The RFID platform was sponsored by a huge consortium of retailers, and
the tags themselves are now manufactured by many companies which
compete on the basis of price as well as design. The shared model of
sponsorship and management means that the RFID technology itself doesn’t
generate enormous profits for anyone—the tags sell for just a few cents


---PAGE BREAK---

apiece. But this suits the sponsors perfectly, since their goal all along was to
make the technology as simple, accessible, and affordable as possible.
DEVELOPER PARTICIPATION
As you’ve seen, designing and building a platform generally starts with a
core interaction. But over time, many platforms expand to include other
kinds of interactions that create additional value for users and attract new
kinds of participants. These new interactions are created by developers who
may be afforded more or less open access to the platform and its
infrastructure. We refer to the three kinds of developers as core developers,
extension developers, and data aggregators.
Core developers create the core platform functions that provide value to
platform participants. These developers are generally employed by the
platform management company itself. Their main job is to get the platform
into the hands of users and to deliver value through tools and rules that
make the core interaction easy and mutually satisfying.
Core developers are responsible for basic platform capabilities. Airbnb
provides an infrastructure that allows guests and hosts to interact with each
other using system resources, including the search capabilities and data
services that allow guests to find attractive properties as well as the
payment mechanisms necessary to conclude a transaction. In addition,
Airbnb manages behind-the-scenes functions that reduce transaction costs
for guests and hosts. For example, the platform provides default insurance
contracts for both parties, protecting guests in the event of accident or crime
and protecting hosts from negligent guest behavior (though, as we’ll discuss
in chapter 11, this insurance coverage is not without its shortcomings). It
also verifies the identity of participants in order to make its reputation
system a meaningful measure of user behavior. Designing, fine-tuning,
maintaining, and continually improving systems like these are all elements
of the work of Airbnb’s core developers.
Extension developers add features and value to the platform and enhance
its functionality. They are normally outside parties, not employed by the
platform management firm, who find ways to extract a portion of the value
they create and thereby profit from the benefits they offer. A familiar group
of extension developers is the individuals and companies that produce apps


---PAGE BREAK---

sold via the iTunes store—games, information and productivity tools,
activity enhancers, and so on. One of the crucial decisions a platform
manager must make—and often reconsider as the market evolves—is the
extent to which the platform will be open to extension developers.
A number of extension developers have enhanced the value of the
Airbnb platform. For example, Airbnb’s own research reveals that
properties listed with professional-quality photographs are viewed by
prospective renters twice as often as those with lower-quality images. In
response, an extension developer now offers professional support under the
rubric of “Airbnb photography service” to create compelling images that
should make an Airbnb host more successful.
Extension developer Pillow (formerly known as Airenvy) supports hosts
on the platform by providing tools to simplify property listing, guest
checkin, and cleaning and linen delivery. Other developers, including Urban
Bellhop and Guesthop, make travel arrangements for guests, such as dining
reservations and babysitting services. With the assistance of outside firms,
an Airbnb host can offer a suite of services that compares to those provided
by a full-service hotel.
In order to facilitate this extension of its platform’s functionality, Airbnb
must open its business to participation by these extension developers. But
calibrating its degree of openness is a challenge for Airbnb. If the platform
is too closed—if it is too onerous for extension developers to hawk their
wares on the site—it will lose the opportunity to provide valuable extra
services to platform users, perhaps alienating participants in the process.
But if the platform is too open—if it is too easy for extension developers to
appear on the site—then it’s likely that poor-quality service providers will
join the platform, tarnishing the reputation of the other developers as well
as that of Airbnb itself. Furthermore, excessive openness may lead to too
many providers of the same type of service, which will reduce the profit
earned by any one provider and reduce the incentive to extension
developers to customize services for Airbnb users.
Platforms that choose to encourage extension developers by granting a
high degree of openness will usually create an application programming
interface. This is one of the control points that a platform manager can use
to manage open access to its system. An application programming interface
(API) is a standardized set of routines, protocols, and tools for building


---PAGE BREAK---

software applications that makes it easy for an outside programmer to write
code that will connect seamlessly with the platform infrastructure.
Currently, although Airbnb has developed an API, it is not generally
available to all developers that wish to connect to the platform—an
indication of the middle way the platform managers want to tread when it
comes to developer participation.
Some companies erect steep barriers against extension developers not
just to protect the quality of platform content but also in an effort to retain
control of the revenue streams their platforms generate. We’ve already seen
how this strategy backfired on Myspace. Today, a similar fate may be
hitting Keurig, the popular maker of coffee machines—which, for this
purpose, may be viewed as a platform dedicated to brewing hot beverages.
We’ll consider Keurig’s story in chapter 8.
The Guardian, a British daily newspaper, has gone in the opposite
direction. The paper’s website enjoys significant international readership
and has always been open to users, who are free to read its content, as
written and edited by the newspaper’s staff. However, the site was formerly
closed to extension developers. Recognizing the value of the Guardian’s
vast trove of information and ideas, and the potential benefit to be derived
from transforming the paper’s website into an open platform, the company’s
management went through a months-long strategic exercise in which they
discussed and analyzed the implications of such a shift. Having studied both
the possible risks and the likely rewards, the Guardian’s managers decided
both to “open in” the website, by bringing in more data and applications
from the outside, and to “open out” the site, by enabling partners to create
products using Guardian content and services on other digital platforms.
To work toward the “open out” goal, the Guardian created a set of APIs
that made its content easily available to external parties. These interfaces
include three different levels of access. The lowest access tier, which the
paper calls Keyless, allows anyone to use Guardian headlines, metadata,
and information architecture (that is, the software and design elements that
structure Guardian data and make it easier to access, analyze, and use)
without requesting permission and without any requirement to share
revenues that might be generated. The second access tier, Approved, allows
registered developers to reprint entire Guardian articles, with certain time
and usage restrictions. Advertising revenues are shared between the
newspaper and the developers. The third and highest access tier, Bespoke, is


---PAGE BREAK---

a customized support package that provides unlimited use of Guardian
content—for a fee.
Some of the first products released under the Guardian’s new open
platform model include a Content API, which provides access to over a
million articles; a Politics API, which provides election results and
candidate information; a Data Store, which provides access to data sets and
visualizations, ranging from a table of country-by-country laws and
practices regarding the death penalty to a colorful graph depicting all of the
time-travel journeys of TV sci-fi hero Doctor Who; and an App Framework,
which facilitates app development, aimed at making the system easy to
experiment with and build applications for. In response, over 2,000
extension developers signed up in the first twelve months.
The power of APIs to attract extension developers and the value they can
create is enormous. Compare the financial results experienced by two major
retailers: traditional giant Walmart and online platform Amazon. Amazon
has some thirty-three open APIs as well as over 300 API “mashups” (i.e.,
combination tools that span two or more APIs), enabling e-commerce,
cloud computing, messaging, search engine optimization, and payments. By
contrast, Walmart has just one API, an e-commerce tool.14 Partly as a result
of this difference, Amazon’s stock market capitalization exceeded that of
Walmart for the first time in June 2015, reflecting Wall Street’s bullish view
of Amazon’s future growth prospects.15
Other platform businesses have reaped similar benefits from their APIs.
Cloud computing and computer services platform Salesforce generates 50
percent of its revenues through APIs, while for travel platform Expedia, the
figure is 90 percent.16
The third category of developers who add value to the interactions on a
platform are data aggregators. Data aggregators enhance the matching
function of the platform by adding data from multiple sources. Under
license from the platform manager, they “vacuum up” data about platform
users and the interactions they engage in, which they generally resell to
other companies for purposes such as advertising placement. The platform
that is the source of the data shares a portion of the profits generated.
When the services provided by data aggregators are well designed, they
can match platform users with producers whose goods and services are
interesting and potentially valuable to them. For example, if a Facebook
user has been posting information about plans for a vacation in France, a


---PAGE BREAK---

data aggregator might sell that data to an advertising agency that, in turn,
would generate messages about Paris hotels, tour guides, discount airfares,
and other topics likely to be of interest.
Data aggregation is now practiced by many kinds of businesses, both on
and off digital platforms. When it works well, it produces results that
consumers experience as seamless and even delightful: “How did they
know I’ve been looking for kitchen tiles in exactly that shade of blue!” But
when it is ham-fisted—as is too often the case—the results feel intrusive
and sometimes creepy.
A story—possibly apocryphal—recounted by Charles Duhigg in the New
York Times describes the angry father of a teenage girl marching into a
Target store to ask why his daughter had been receiving coupons for baby
products. “Are you trying to encourage her to get pregnant?” he demanded.
The store manager apologized, but when he called the family to discuss the
matter a few days later, the father was embarrassed and apologetic. “I had a
talk with my daughter,” he said. “She’s due in August.”
How did Target “know” about the girl’s pregnancy before her family
did? Duhigg describes Target’s system for analyzing customer behaviors in
an effort to anticipate future needs and purchasing activities. Thus, when a
(hypothetical) female consumer visits her local Target store and buys cocoa
butter lotion, a diaper bag–sized purse, zinc and magnesium supplements,
and a bright blue rug, Target’s algorithm calculates an 83 percent chance
that she is pregnant. Cue the coupons for baby clothes.17
Perhaps for obvious reasons, data aggregation systems such as these are
little discussed by the platform businesses that provide them access.
Knowing the degree to which their personal behavior is being monitored
makes many consumers queasy. Because data aggregation is a large and
growing source of revenue for platform companies, managing it
appropriately poses an enormous ethical, legal, and business challenge.
We’ll delve into this topic in more detail in chapters 8 and 11, which deal
with platform governance and regulation.
WHAT TO OPEN AND WHAT TO OWN
As we’ve seen, innovations that are valuable to platform users can come
from many sources. Some are created by core developers and therefore are


---PAGE BREAK---

owned and controlled by the platform company itself. Others are created by
extension developers and therefore are owned and controlled by outside
businesses. This raises the question: when does the power of an outside
developer threaten that of the platform itself? And when this happens, how
should the platform manager respond?
The answer to these questions depends on the amount of value created
by a particular extension app. If you are a platform manager, you don’t want
to let an outside firm control a primary source of user value on your
platform. When this happens, you need to move to take control of the value-
creating app—most often by buying the app or the company that created it.
On the other hand, when an extension app adds a modest amount of
additional value, then it’s perfectly safe and generally very efficient to allow
the outside developer to retain control of it.
Consider, for example, the ownership and control decisions Apple has
made in regard to its mobile phone operating system. Apple has been
careful to own most of the applications that come preloaded with the
iPhone, such as music playing, photography, and voice recording. It bought
SRI International, the company that developed the technology behind the
iPhone’s “virtual personal assistant,” Siri.18 All of these are all-high-value-
adding features with significant impact on the market for the iPhone, which
is why Apple is eager to own and control them.
By contrast, YouTube is content to own its video distribution and playing
technology while leaving control of the millions of video clips available on
the platform in the hands of the people and organizations that uploaded
them. One might assume that globally popular videos like the Korean pop
hit “Gangnam Style” generate significant value for YouTube consumers.
But that value is ephemeral (this year’s favorite video is quickly displaced
by next year’s) and represents just a tiny fraction of the total value of
YouTube’s video content. In a case like this, the platform owner has no
need to own or control the individual element of value.
There are two other principles that platform managers should consider
when weighing whether an extension app represents a threat to their
economic power.
First, if a particular app has the potential to become a powerful platform
in its own right, the manager of the platform that hosts the app should seek
to own it—or to replace it with an app controlled by the platform itself.


---PAGE BREAK---

In 2012, Google Maps had become the premier provider of mapping
services and location data for mobile phone users. It was a popular feature
on Apple’s iPhone. However, with more consumer activity moving to
mobile devices and becoming increasingly integrated with location data,
Apple realized that Google Maps was becoming a significant threat to the
long-term profitability of its mobile platform. There was a real possibility
that Google could make its mapping technology into a separate platform,
offering valuable customer connections and geographic data to merchants,
and siphoning this potential revenue source away from Apple.
Apple’s decision to create its own mapping app to compete with Google
Maps made sound strategic sense—despite the fact that the initial service
was so poorly designed that it caused Apple significant public
embarrassment. The new app misclassified nurseries as airports and cities
as hospitals, suggested driving routes that passed over open water (your car
had better float!), and even stranded unwary travelers in an Australian
desert a full seventy kilometers from the town they expected to find there.
iPhone users erupted in howls of protest, the media had a field day
lampooning Apple’s misstep, and CEO Tim Cook had to issue a public
apology.19 Apple accepted the bad publicity, likely reasoning that it could
quickly improve its mapping service to an acceptable quality level—and
this is essentially what has happened. The iPhone platform is no longer
dependent on Google for mapping technology, and Apple has control over
the mapping application as a source of significant value.
Second, if particular functionality is reinvented by a number of extension
developers and gains widespread acceptance by platform users, the manager
of the platform should acquire the functionality and make it available
through an open API. Widely useful functions such as video and audio
playback, photo editing, text cutting-and-pasting, and voice commands have
often been invented by extension developers. Recognizing their broad
applicability, platform managers have moved to standardize these functions
and incorporate them into APIs that all developers can use. This accelerates
innovation and enables improvements in service for everyone who uses the
platform.
USER PARTICIPATION


---PAGE BREAK---

The third kind of openness that platform managers need to control is user
participation—in particular, producer openness, which is the right to freely
add content to the platform. Remember, many platforms are designed to
facilitate side switching, which enables consumers to become producers,
and vice versa; so the same individual users who consume value units on
the platform can also create value units for others to consume. YouTube
users can both view others’ videos and upload videos of their own; Airbnb
guests can become hosts; Etsy customers can sell their own craft products
on the site.
The platform’s objective in opening to these users is to facilitate the
creation and provision of as much high-quality content as possible. Of
course, this stipulation—that the objective is the development of high-
quality content—is the reason most platforms reject absolute openness as a
strategy for managing user participation.
When it was launched, Wikipedia aspired to a condition of complete
openness. Maintenance of quality would be entrusted solely to the users of
the platform, who would take it upon themselves to monitor the content of
the site, fix errors, and challenge biases.
This was a utopian vision that assumed good intentions on the part of all
Wikipedia users; or, a trifle less idealistically, it assumed that the varying,
sometimes conflicting motivations and attitudes of users would eventually
balance one another, producing content that represented the combined
wisdom of the entire community, much as, in capitalist theory, the “invisible
hand” of the market is supposed to maximize the benefits for all through the
interaction of countless self-interested participants.
However, reality teaches us that democracy—like free markets—can be
messy, especially when intense passions and partisanship are involved.
Hence the episode we recounted at the start of this chapter, in which the
Wikipedia article about the death of Meredith Kercher was hijacked by
“haters” of Amanda Knox who were determined to make sure the page
should assert her guilt and were prepared to eradicate any signs of
dissension.
The Kercher killing is not the only instance in which Wikipedia is
embroiled in controversy—far from it. An article on the platform headed
“Wikipedia: List of controversial issues” lists over 800 topics that “are
constantly being re-edited in a circular manner, or are otherwise the focus of
edit warring or article sanctions.” Organized under headings that include


---PAGE BREAK---

“Politics and economics,” “History,” “Science, biology, and health,”
“Philosophy,” and “Media and culture,” they include everything from
“Anarchism,” “Genocide denial,” “Occupy Wall Street,” and “Apollo moon
landing hoax accusations” to “Hare Krishna,” “Chiropractic,” “SeaWorld,”
and “Disco music.”
Limiting openness through artful curation. How can Wikipedia
establish high standards for the quality of the platform’s content when some
of its users are determined to manipulate it for their own purposes? That is
not easy. Those who manage the platform try hard to rely primarily on
community standards and social pressure. Guidelines are promulgated
through articles like “Wikipedia: five pillars,” which explains one of the
platform’s “fundamental principles” this way:
Wikipedia is written from a neutral point of view: We strive for articles that document and explain
the major points of view, giving due weight with respect to their prominence in an impartial tone.
We avoid advocacy and we characterize information and issues rather than debate them. In some
areas there may be just one well-recognized point of view; in others, we describe multiple points
of view, presenting each accurately and in context rather than as “the truth” or “the best view”. All
articles must strive for verifiable accuracy, citing reliable, authoritative sources, especially when
the topic is controversial or is on living persons. Editors’ personal experiences, interpretations, or
opinions do not belong.
Yet there are times when community pressure is not enough. When the
quality of particular articles is repeatedly degraded by biased or dishonest
content, other methods and tools for protecting Wikipedia’s integrity kick
in. These include VandalProof, a software program written especially for
Wikipedia that highlights articles edited by users with a track record of
unreliable work; tagging tools that draw attention to potentially problematic
articles so that other editors can review and, if necessary, improve them;
and a range of blocking and protection systems that can only be employed
by users who have earned special privileges through the general consensus
of the Wikipedia community.
This complex, largely self-organized set of interlocking systems for
ensuring the quality of Wikipedia content is a form of curation—the crucial
content protection process that must be fine-tuned to ensure the right degree
and kind of producer openness.
Curation usually takes the form of screening and feedback at critical
points of access to the platform. Screening decides who to let in, while


---PAGE BREAK---

feedback encourages desirable behavior on the part of those who have been
granted entry. A user’s reputation, as shaped by past behavior both on and
off the platform, is usually a key factor in curation: users rated positively by
the rest of the community are more likely to pass through the screening
process and to receive favorable feedback than those with poor reputations.
Curation can be managed through human gatekeepers—moderators who
personally screen users, edit content, and provide feedback designed to
promote quality. Media platforms such as blogs and online magazines often
use this kind of system. But employing moderators who are trained and paid
by the platform company is time-consuming and costly. A better system—
though one that can be challenging to design and implement—relies on
users themselves to curate the platform, generally through software tools
that quickly gather and aggregate feedback and apply it to curation
decisions.
As we’ve seen, user-driven curation facilitated by software tools is the
method Wikipedia employs. Similarly, Facebook relies on users to flag
objectionable content such as hate speech, harassment, offensively graphic
images, and threats of violence. Service platforms like Uber and Airbnb
incorporate user ratings into their software tools so consumers and
producers can make informed choices about whom they choose to interact
with.
No system of curation is foolproof. When curation tools err on the side
of openness, potentially offensive or even dangerous content can slip
through. When the tools are overly restrictive, valuable users and
appropriate content may be screened out or discouraged—as when social
networking algorithms intended to eliminate pornography end up blocking
educational materials on topics like breast cancer awareness. Platform
managers need to devote significant time and resources—including human
eyeballs and informed judgment—to continually monitoring their
platforms’ boundaries between openness and closedness and ensuring they
are set appropriately.
SIMILAR PLATFORMS CAN COMPETE THROUGH
DIFFERING LEVELS OF OPENNESS


---PAGE BREAK---

Platforms that operate in similar arenas may choose to differentiate
themselves by adapting different levels and kinds of openness. These
variant openness regimes will attract different kinds and numbers of
participants, generate distinct ecosystem cultures, and may ultimately
produce divergent business models.
As we’ve previously observed, two platforms that made very different
openness 
decisions 
are Apple’s 
Mac 
operating 
system/hardware
combination and Microsoft’s Windows operating system in the 1980s and
1990s. Although some critics describe Windows as a closed system, by
comparison to Apple it has been much more open. Apple made the decision
to charge extension developers a relatively high $10,000 for system
development kits (SDKs), thereby ensuring a small, select pool of outside
software developers. Microsoft, by contrast, basically gave the developer
SDKs away and consequently attracted a much larger developer pool.
Meanwhile, IBM lost control of the hardware standard, partly as the
result of regulatory action, making it possible for any manufacturer to enter
the PC market, which drove costs rapidly down. The combination of a large
developer pool with inexpensive hardware was compelling to consumers,
and the so-called Wintel platform dominated the market for nearly twenty
years—while the share of the industry enjoyed by the closed Apple system
steadily dwindled. In this case, it seems clear that the open path was far
more successful than the closed path.
More recently, as we’ve seen, Google and Apple made differing
openness decisions regarding their mobile platforms. Google allowed the
development of an open-source version of Android, which is freely
available to any manufacturer, while Apple sponsored the proprietary iOS
operating system and tightly controlled the hardware so that it is the sole
device provider and therefore the sole manager of the system.
At first, this might look like a repeat of the Microsoft/Apple PC
operating system battle. However, although Apple is much more closed than
Google—for example, retaining control of the vital device manufacturing
function rather than opening it to other companies—it is more open than it
was in the previous technological generation. Having opened its system just
enough to encourage developers, Apple now assists them with strong
developer toolkits and gives them access to its user base through the iTunes
store. A multitude of apps has appeared as a result.


---PAGE BREAK---

Google, meanwhile, needed to be more open because it entered the
market after Apple. As a result, AOSP quickly grew beyond Google’s
control, prompting Google to seek to restrict access to its platform through
a variety of mechanisms. Because the underlying operating system is free to
all, Google cannot easily close AOSP, but almost the same goal can be
achieved by exerting control over critical functions. Journalist Ron Amadeo
has described how Google closed the Android applications for functions
such as search, music, calendar, keyboard, and camera, while also working
hard to encourage handset manufacturers to join its so-called open handset
alliance, dedicated to developing and maintaining open software and
hardware standards for mobile devices. Amadeo explains the impact of
Google’s move toward closing AOSP on extension developers:
If you use any Google APIs and try to run your app on a Kindle, or any other non-Google version
of AOSP: surprise! Your app is broken. Google’s Android is a very high percentage of the Android
market, and developers only really care about making their app easily, making it work well, and
reaching a wide audience. Google APIs accomplish all that, with the side effect that your app is
now dependent on the device having a Google Apps license.20
By requiring a license to access Google Play, the official app store for
AOSP, the firm is able to control access to the platform even though the
underlying technology is open source. In this way, Google can manage
potential competition as well as ensure a more orderly technology
environment for users and developers.
Stories like these illustrate the complicated competitive factors that
impact openness decisions—as well as the never-ending balancing act that
platform sponsors and managers need to practice to ensure that their
platforms remain relevant, vibrant, and valuable to a growing base of users.
OPENING OVER TIME:
THE BENEFITS AND THE RISKS
As we’ve seen, platforms can expand and develop stronger network effects
by opening out over time. More rarely, as in the case of Android, they can
choose to become more closed over time.
The choice to become more open or more closed depends on whether a
platform was originally structured as a proprietary or shared platform.


---PAGE BREAK---

Naturally, a proprietary platform, which is sponsored, managed, and
completely controlled by a single company, can only become more open.
By contrast, a fully open, shared platform (Linux, for example) can only
become more closed.
As we noted in chapter 5, which deals with launching a platform, a new
platform will often choose to execute virtually all of its processes internally
simply because there are no partners willing to make the necessary
investment. In these cases, employees must provide both content and
curation. Over time, as the platform grows and outside developers are
attracted, the openness pattern may change, which means that curation
processes need to evolve as well.
A forward-looking platform management team must design ways to
continually evaluate the platform’s openness level. Preferably, the platform
will use a consistent strategic framework to make decisions for opening
over time. Eventually, as the maturing platform moves processes outside the
firm from employees to partners, it may need to develop algorithms to
automate curation or to decentralize curation to the entire base of users.
YouTube now depends upon its large user base to evaluate content, provide
feedback, and flag content that should not be on the platform.
As the platform’s openness policies evolve, the challenge is always to
find balance. If a platform is too closed—for example, if it extracts
excessive rents in the form of unreasonable and arbitrary fees—its partners
may refuse to make platform-specific investments. On the other hand,
platforms face trouble when extension developers begin to insert
themselves too aggressively between the platform and its users. If a
particular developer successfully displaces other competitors, a platform
manager should be careful to ensure that the developer does not seek to
displace the platform itself.
There are a number of examples of such struggles for control of a
particular platform’s user base. Consider SAP, the German-based
multinational giant that produces software for large enterprises to use in
managing their internal operations, customer relationships, and other
processes. SAP, which operates a large business processes platform, has
partnered with the U.S.-based firm ADP to provide payroll processing
services to its users, partly in order to take advantage of ADP’s superior
access to cloud computing capabilities. However, ADP has substantial
customer relationships of its own and can serve as the platform host linking


---PAGE BREAK---

customers to a number of data/computing/storage partners. Thus, the
partnership creates an opportunity for ADP to displace SAP as the primary
manager of the customer relationship. This is an instance in which the
platform manager (SAP) is in danger of losing control of the customer
connection to an extension developer (ADP).
The unique power and value of the platform lies in its ability to facilitate
connections among participants from outside the platform itself. But
defining exactly who should have access to the platform and precisely how
they can participate is an enormously complex issue with ever-changing
strategic implications. That’s why the question of openness needs to be at
the top of every platform manager’s agenda—not just during the initial
design process, but throughout the life of the platform.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER SEVEN
    There are three kinds of openness decisions that managers face: those regarding
manager/sponsor participation, developer participation, and user participation.
    Management and sponsorship of a platform may be controlled by a single firm, by different
firms, or by groups of firms. The four possible combinations lead to differing patterns of
openness and control, with various advantages and disadvantages.
    The open/closed dichotomy isn’t black or white. There are shades of gray, and benefits and
drawbacks to every point on the spectrum. Sometimes, similar platforms choose to compete
on the basis of differing openness policies.
    Maturing platforms often evolve in the direction of greater openness. This demands
continually reevaluating and adjusting curation processes to ensure consistently high
quality of platform content and service value.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

8
GOVERNANCE
Policies to Increase Value
and Enhance Growth
In the first quarter of 2015, Brian P. Kelley, the CEO of Keurig Green
Mountain coffee company, had some explaining to do. The company had
just launched the Keurig 2.0, a next-generation coffee brewer touted as the
future king of brewing. The reigning king, the Keurig 1.0, had become
ubiquitous in homes, offices, and hotels, and Green Mountain’s expensive
coffee cartridges had helped fuel the growth of what had been a regional
brewer into a firm worth more than $18 billion.
Yet with the launch of Keurig 2.0, sales did not rise further. Instead, they
fell by 12 percent.
The problem had its origins back in 2012, when key patents on Keurig’s
coffee pod design expired. Taking advantage of this change, competing
coffee makers began selling pods that were compatible with Keurig’s
machines and significantly cheaper. These rivals were like extension
developers offering new sources of value to Keurig users. Of course, their
existence, and the competition they presented to the official Keurig pods,
caused an erosion of Keurig’s market share.
To fight back, Keurig included in its brewer version 2.0 a scanning
device that prevented the use of any pods not marked with a special
proprietary emblem. Consumers were furious. Many denounced Keurig on
shopping websites; thousands watched YouTube videos purporting to
demonstrate how to hack the system, tricking it into accepting coffee pods
unauthorized by Keurig. Buyers lamented the firm’s “ridiculous corporate


---PAGE BREAK---

greed” and bemoaned the fact that the Amazon rating system made it
impossible for them to give the new Keurig a zero star rating.1
By attempting to grab an even bigger share of the profits from its coffee-
making platform, Green Mountain had angered its community and forfeited
profits. The king of coffee had violated three fundamental rules of good
governance:
•    Always create value for the consumers you serve;
•    Don’t use your power to change the rules in your favor; and
•    Don’t take more than a fair share of the wealth.
Governance is the set of rules concerning who gets to participate in an
ecosystem, how to divide the value, and how to resolve conflicts.2 To
understand good community governance is to understand the set of rules for
orchestrating an ecosystem.3
Green Mountain failed at the task of ecosystem governance. The Keurig
in all its incarnations is simply a product platform, a single one-sided
market serving a community of coffee drinkers. It could be much more
successful as a beverage ecosystem with other value-adding options, a
range of vetted suppliers, and an array of other high-quality services that
customers would appreciate. Instead, Green Mountain chose to exclude
suppliers that its customers found valuable, eliminating variety and freedom
of choice in order to retain control. It overreached for a share of the value
produced by its system. And it unilaterally placed its interest ahead of all
others. Keurig users were the losers—and soon enough, so was Green
Mountain.
WHY GOVERNANCE MATTERS:
PLATFORMS AS STATES
The goal of good governance is to create wealth, fairly distributed among
all those who add value. As we saw in chapter 2, the new technology-driven
communities known as platform businesses are creating a vast amount of
new wealth outside the firm, and these external benefits must be designed
and managed fairly. Because these value-creating networks grow faster
outside the firm than inside, ruling the ecosystem wisely puts a premium on
not ruling it selfishly.


---PAGE BREAK---

If navigating the rules for governance is hard for one-sided platforms
like the Keurig brewing system, it’s exponentially harder when platforms
are multisided. After all, multisided platforms involve numerous interests
that don’t always align. This makes it difficult for platform managers to
ensure that various participants create value for one another, and it makes it
likely that conflicts will emerge that governance rules must resolve as fairly
and efficiently as possible.
This is a juggling act that even giants and geniuses often get wrong.
Facebook, for example, has alienated users with its privacy policies.4
LinkedIn has angered its developers by turning off their access to APIs.5
And Twitter has expropriated technologies developed by other members of
its ecosystem while permitting Twitter users to harass one another. As
Twitter’s CEO Dick Costolo said, “We suck at dealing with abuse.”6
In the complexity of the governance issues they face, today’s biggest
platform businesses resemble nation-states. With more than 1.5 billion
users, Facebook oversees a “population” larger than China’s. Google
handles 64 percent of the online searches in the U.S. and 90 percent of
those in Europe, while Alibaba handles more than 1 trillion yuan ($162
billion) worth of transactions a year and accounts for 70 percent of all
commercial shipments in China.7 Platform businesses at this scale control
economic systems that are bigger than all but the biggest national
economies. No wonder Brad Burnham, one of the lead investors at Union
Square Ventures, responded to the introduction of Facebook Credits—a
short-lived system of virtual currency for use in playing online games—by
wondering what the move said about Facebook’s monetary policy.8 In a
similar vein, we might ask: In choosing to apply unilateral software
standards as opposed to multilateral standards (as we saw in chapter 7),
what kind of foreign policy is Apple pursuing? Is Twitter following an
industrial policy based on investment in “state-owned” services or one
relying on decentralized development by others? What does Google’s
approach to censorship in China tell us about the company’s human rights
policy?
Like it or not, firms like these already serve as the unofficial and
unelected regulators of millions of lives. For this reason, platforms have
much to learn from cities and states, which have had thousands of years to
evolve principles of good governance. Like the platform businesses of
today, cities and states have long had to wrestle with the question of how


---PAGE BREAK---

best to create wealth and distribute it fairly. Increasing evidence suggests
that just governance is a crucially important factor in the ability of a state to
create wealth—even more important than such obviously valuable assets as
natural resources, navigable waterways, and favorable agricultural
conditions.
Consider the modern city-state of Singapore. In 1959, when Lee Kuan
Yew became prime minister, it had almost no natural resources. For defense
and clean water, it relied on the Federation of Malaya, the predecessor of
the nation of Malaysia (established in 1963). Corruption was rampant. Per
capita GDP hovered below $430.9 Ethnic strife between Malays and
Chinese, religious strife between Muslims and Buddhists, and political
strife between capitalists and communists hamstrung progress.
Lee Kuan Yew brought economic vitality to Singapore by changing its
system of governance. Having studied at the London School of Economics
and with a law degree from Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge, Yew
introduced the British system of justice and rule by law. Then he attacked
corruption. To make graft less attractive, he raised the salaries of civil
servants to match those of similar workers in the private sector. New public
servants had to wear white as a sign of purity when they assumed office.
The anti-corruption rules were enforced strictly: the minister of state for the
environment, a staunch supporter of Yew, committed suicide rather than
face prosecution on bribery charges.10 Fairer, more open government was
encouraged by the creation of multicultural councils empowered to give
voice to religious and ethnic groups willing to work within the system.
Singapore now boasts a government that ranks with those of New Zealand
and the Scandinavian countries as one of the least corrupt in the world. This
is significant, in part, because each 1 percent drop in corruption and misuse
of public power for private gain is associated with a 1.7 percent rise in
GDP.11
Although Yew has been criticized in the West for throttling political
dissent, the economic results produced by his good-governance campaign
are impressive. By 2015, Singapore’s per capita GDP was $55,182, higher
than that of the United States. During the fifty-five years from 1960 to
2015, Singapore’s annual growth rate was 6.69 percent, almost 2 percent
higher than that of Malaysia, from which it separated in 1965.12
Similar evidence of the importance of good governance to wealth
creation can be seen by comparing the GDP growth and innovation rates in


---PAGE BREAK---

communist East Germany and North Korea with those in their near-twin
siblings, West Germany and South Korea.13 Good governance matters.
MARKET FAILURE AND ITS CAUSES
Good governance is important in both nation-states and platform businesses
because absolutely free markets, in which people and organizations interact
with no rules, restrictions, or safeguards, can’t always be relied upon to
produce results that are fair and satisfactory to those involved.
An example can be seen on eBay, where some participants inevitably
have greater knowledge, market savvy, and bargaining skill than others. In
most cases, the interactions that result are basically fair, even when a
particular interaction produces a “winner” and a “loser.” But sometimes,
outcomes that appear manipulative or even deceptive occur. For example, a
group of eBay members, noticing that some inexperienced sellers were
prone to misidentifying goods—for example, by misspelling Louis Vuitton
with one “T” or Abercrombie and Fitch as “Abercrombee” or “Fich”—
began taking advantage of these errors as middlemen. They would actively
seek out mislabeled items, which were usually languishing unnoticed on the
auction site, snatch them up at bargain prices, and then resell them for a
huge markup under their proper names.
In one celebrated example, the owner of an antique beer bottle that had
been kept in his family for fifty years decided to list it on eBay.
Unfortunately, the seller had no idea of the true value of his heirloom. The
beer had been produced in the 1850s as the result of a brewing contest
intended to provide “life-sustaining ale” to a crew navigating the Arctic in
hopes of discovering the fabled Northwest Passage from the Atlantic to the
Pacific. (At the time, it was believed—erroneously—that ale could prevent
scurvy.)14 The expedition failed, but a little of the original brew survived,
and by the time of the eBay sale, two bottles were known to exist, both
eagerly sought after by beer collectors and history buffs.
Unaware of all this—and careless to boot—the seller listed the precious
bottle on eBay under the heading “Allsop’s Arctic Ale—full and corked
with wax seal,” and proposed an opening bid of $299. The brand name
should have been spelled “Allsopp’s,” with an extra P—a tiny error, but one
big enough to confuse the serious collectors who would have been


---PAGE BREAK---

interested in the item. A shrewd scavenger for mislabeled bargains spotted
the listing and jumped in as the sole bidder. He bought the bottle for $304
and relisted it on eBay three days after receiving it. When collectors heard
about it, the brew fetched bids exceeding $78,100.15
The Case of the Ambiguous Ale is an example of market failure—a
situation in which “good” interactions (fair and mutually satisfactory) fail to
occur, or “bad” interactions do. If you can’t find an item you want on eBay,
then a good interaction has failed to occur. If you did find an item you
wanted but got cheated, abused, or deceived, then a bad interaction has
occurred. In general, there are four main causes of market failures:
information asymmetry, externalities, monopoly power, and risk.
Information asymmetry arises whenever one party to an interaction
knows facts that other parties don’t and uses that knowledge for personal
advantage. Consider the problem of counterfeit goods, when the seller
knows that the goods are fake but does not inform the buyer. Fakes account
for Skullcandy headphones with lousy sound quality, Gucci handbags with
broken stitching, Duracell batteries that don’t hold a charge, OtterBox
mobile phone cases that are not drop-proof, and Viagra that provides no lift.
Estimated at more than $350 billion worldwide, the size of the counterfeit
goods market exceeds the trade in illegal drugs (estimated at $321 billion).16
Externalities occur when spillover costs or benefits accrue to anyone not
involved in a given interaction. Imagine that one of your friends provides
your private contact information to a gaming company in exchange for a
few digital points. This would be a bad interaction because it violates your
privacy rights, and so it is an example of a negative externality.
The concept of a positive externality is a bit more ambiguous. Consider
what happens when Netflix analyzes the movie-watching behavior of
someone whose tastes match yours and uses this data to give you a more
accurate movie recommendation. This would be a positive externality,
because it provides you with a benefit based on an interaction in which
you’re not directly involved. Individuals who benefit from positive
externalities aren’t likely to complain about them—but they are considered
problems from a business design standpoint, since they reflect value that is
not being fully captured by the platform. In an ideal world—at least,
according to economic theory—every value created would somehow be
accounted for and credited accurately to the entity responsible for it.


---PAGE BREAK---

A concept closely related to the positive externality is the public good,
whose value is not fully captured by the party that created it. Individuals
generally create too few public goods unless some governing mechanism is
designed to recognize and reward them.
Monopoly power arises when one supplier in an ecosystem becomes too
powerful because of its control of the supply of a widely sought good, and
uses this power to demand higher prices or special favors. At the height of
its popularity (2009–10), game-maker Zynga became excessively powerful
on Facebook, leading to conflicts over issues such as the sharing of user
information, the split of gaming revenues, and the cost to Zynga of ads on
the social network. eBay has experienced similar problems dealing with so-
called power sellers.
Risk is the possibility that something unexpected and essentially
unpredictable may go wrong, turning a good interaction into a bad one.
Risk is a perennial problem in all markets, not just on platforms. A well-
designed market generally develops tools and systems that serve to mitigate
the effects of risk, thereby encouraging participants to engage in more
interactions.
TOOLS FOR GOVERNANCE: LAWS, NORMS,
ARCHITECTURE, AND MARKETS
The literature on corporate governance is vast, especially in the field of
finance. However, platform governance involves design principles that
traditional finance theory overlooks. The single most heavily cited article
on corporate governance is a literature survey that considers only “the ways
in which suppliers of finance to corporations assure themselves of getting a
return on their investment.”17 The focus here is on the information
asymmetry arising from the separation of ownership and control—a critical
element of governance design, but far from sufficient.18 Information
asymmetry between the community of users and the firm also matters, and
their interests too must be aligned.
Additionally, platform governance rules must pay special heed to
externalities. These are endemic in network markets, since, as we’ve seen
when examining network effects, the spillover benefits users generate are a
source of platform value. Understanding this forces a shift in corporate


---PAGE BREAK---

governance from a narrow focus on shareholder value to a broader view of
stakeholder value.
Market designer and Nobel Prize-winning economist Alvin Roth
described a model of governance that uses four broad levers to address
market failures.19 According to Roth, a well-designed market increases the
safety of the market via transparency, quality, or insurance, thereby enabling
good interactions to occur. It provides thickness, which enables participants
from different sides of a multisided market to find one another more easily.
It minimizes congestion, which hampers successful searches when too
many people participate or low quality drives out high. And it minimizes
repugnant activity—which explains why platform designers forbid porn on
iTunes, human organ sales on Alibaba, and child labor on Upwork.
According to Roth, good governance occurs when market managers use
these levers to address market failures.
A broader view of platform governance uses insights borrowed from the
practices of nation-states as modeled by constitutional law scholar
Lawrence Lessig. In Lessig’s formulation, systems of control involve four
main sets of tools: laws, norms, architecture, and markets.20
A familiar example can be used to clarify these four kinds of tools.
Suppose leaders of a particular ecosystem want to reduce the harmful
effects of smoking. Laws could be passed to ban cigarette sales to minors or
forbid smoking in public spaces. Norms—informal codes of behavior
shaped by culture—could be applied by using social pressure or advertising
to stigmatize smoking and make it appear “uncool.” Architecture could be
used to develop physical designs that reduce the impact of smoking—for
example, air filters that clean the air, or smokeless devices that substitute
for cigarettes. And market mechanisms could be used by taxing tobacco
products or subsidizing “quit smoking” programs. Historically, those who
want to control social behavior—including platform managers—have
employed all four of these tools.
Let’s consider some of the ways in which these four kinds of tools can be
used by platform managers as part of a governance system.
Laws. Of course, many laws created and enforced by nation-states—
laws, in the traditional sense of the term—apply to platform businesses and
their participants. Sometimes, the application of such laws can be tricky.
For example, legal sanctions that punish bad actors offer one traditional


---PAGE BREAK---

way of addressing the problem of risk. However, applying these sanctions
requires determining who is responsible for problems that arise and who
should bear the blame when they do—something that is not always simple
or straightforward.
When it comes to platform businesses, this is far from a purely
theoretical issue. We’ve mentioned some of the serious legal problems
faced by platforms earlier: individuals who listed properties on Airbnb had
their homes used for brothels and raves; people offering personal services
on Craigslist have been murdered.21 Case law does not generally hold
platforms accountable for misdeeds of platform users, even though the
owners of the platform may be reasonably well positioned to regulate and
control the behavior of the users. Thus, individual platform participants
usually have to bear the downside risk, at least as far as national and local
laws are concerned. (We’ll return to this topic in chapter 11, on regulation.)
Applying Lessig’s concept of “law” to governance within the platform
business takes us into a different arena. The “laws” of a platform are its
explicit rules—for example, the terms of service drafted by lawyers or the
rules of stakeholder behavior drafted by the platform’s designers. These
laws moderate behavior at both the user and the ecosystem level. For
example, at the user level, the Apple rule that allows a user to share digital
content among up to six devices or family members prevents unlimited
sharing while nonetheless providing economic incentives for the purchase
of Apple services and making a reasonable amount of sharing convenient.22
At the ecosystem level, the Apple rule compelling app developers to submit
all code for review, combined with the rule that releases Apple from any
duty of confidentiality, allows Apple to proliferate best practices.23
Platform laws should be, and usually are, transparent. Stack Overflow,
the most successful online community for answering programming
questions, offers an explicit list of rules for earning points as well as the
rights and privileges those points confer. One point confers the right to ask
and answer questions. Fifteen points confers the right to vote up someone
else’s content. At 125 points, you gain the right to vote down content—
which also costs one point. And at 200 points, you’ve added so much value
that you earn the privilege to see fewer ads. This system of explicit,
transparent laws solves a public goods problem by encouraging members to
share their best insights with everyone else on the platform.24


---PAGE BREAK---

An exception to the principle of transparency applies to laws that might
facilitate bad behavior. Dating sites discovered this the hard way. When the
sites applied laws that gave stalkers a quick “hand slap” when they
misbehaved, the stalkers soon learned to avoid the specific trigger that
flagged them. If, instead, the platform delayed the negative feedback, the
stalker had a harder time learning how he’d been caught, which led to a
more powerful and lasting disincentive.
Similarly, when a troll on a user-generated content site has his account
deleted, he often returns under a new identity. Smart platform managers
started making nuisance posts invisible to everyone but the troll. Unable to
inflame community sentiment, the troll retreated.
The underlying principle: Give fast, open feedback when applying laws
that define good behavior, but give slow, opaque feedback when applying
laws that punish bad behavior.
Norms. One of the greatest assets any platform—indeed, any business—
can have is a dedicated community. This doesn’t happen by accident.
Vibrant communities are nurtured by skilled platform managers in order to
develop norms, cultures, and expectations that generate lasting sources of
value.
iStockphoto, today one of the world’s largest markets for crowdsourced
photographs, was originally founded by Bruce Livingstone to sell CD-ROM
collections of images by direct mail. As that business tanked, Bruce and his
partners hated the thought that their work might go to waste. So they began
giving away their images online.25 Within months, they were discovered by
thousands of people who not only downloaded images but asked to share
their own images as well. To maintain the quality Bruce prided himself on
and to eliminate spam, pornography, and copyright infringement, he made
sure that every image was scrutinized by an iStockphoto inspector. This was
a painstaking and costly process. Bruce found himself working sixteen-hour
days.26
Realizing that individual human inspection could not scale, Bruce turned
to crowd curation. He devised a system under which people who uploaded
quality content could earn their way to becoming inspectors and community
organizers. Groups emerged to handle specific categories of images—for
example, images linked to locations like “New York” or categories like
“Food.” Bruce himself worked relentlessly to praise, give feedback, and


---PAGE BREAK---

build his community. Under the online name Bitter, he regularly posted
comments on the platform’s homepage promoting members and their work,
such as when he noted “great new stuff from Delirium, also tasty food
series from Izusek.”27
These efforts established a powerful set of norms that came to govern the
iStockphoto community. These norms included feedback, high-quality
content, open engagement, and a natural role progression to greater levels
of authority. Applying these norms, the community produced a remarkable
body of stock photos, a classic and valuable public good.
As the story of iStockphoto suggests, norms do not arise in a vacuum.
They reflect behaviors, which means that they can be constructed through
the intelligent application of the discipline of behavior design.
Nir Eyal, who has worked in both advertising and game development,
describes behavior design as a recurring sequence of trigger, action, reward,
and investment.28
The trigger is a platform-based signal, message, or alert such as an
email, a web link, a news item, or an app notification. This prompts the
platform member to take some action in response. The action, in turn,
produces a reward for the member, usually one with some variable or
unanticipated value, since variable reward mechanisms like slot machines
and lotteries are habit-forming. Finally, the platform asks the member to
make an investment of time, data, social capital, or money. The investment
deepens the participant’s commitment and reinforces the behavior pattern
platform managers want to see.
Here’s an example of how the process works. Barbara is a member of
Facebook. One day, an interesting photo shows up in Barbara’s news feed—
perhaps a picture of a gorgeous sunlit beach in Maui, Barbara’s favorite
vacation spot. This is the trigger. The action in response is designed to be as
easy as possible (frictionless), which encourages Barbara to take the next
step. In this case, the next step is clicking on the photo, which takes Barbara
to Pinterest, the photo-sharing platform, which happens to be entirely new
to Barbara. There she receives her reward: a variety of additional
tantalizing, carefully curated photos selected specifically to engage her
curiosity. (Imagine a photo collection titled “Ten Best Unknown Beaches of
the South Pacific.”) Finally, Pinterest asks Barbara, whom they just
rewarded, to make a small investment. She may be asked to invite friends,
state preferences, build virtual assets, or learn new Pinterest features.29 Any


---PAGE BREAK---

of these actions will set up a new set of triggers for Barbara and others, and
the cycle starts over.
In the case of Pinterest, the norms fostered by this system of behavior
design have produced a body of content that is a valuable public good. Of
course, behavior design is not always used to benefit participants. It can
also be used as a tool of selling and manipulation—which is one reason
why users themselves should be aware of how such governance
mechanisms work.
As a rule, it’s desirable to have users participate in shaping the systems
that govern them. Elinor Ostrom, the first woman ever to receive the Nobel
Prize in Economics, observed that successful creation and policing of public
goods by communities follows several regular patterns. Clearly defined
boundaries delineate who is and who is not entitled to community benefits.
People affected by decisions regarding how community resources will be
appropriated have recognized channels they can use to influence the
decision-making processes. People who monitor community member
behavior are accountable to the community. Graduated sanctions apply to
those who violate community rules. Members have access to low-cost
dispute resolution systems. And, as community resources grow, governance
should be structured in nested tiers, with certain simple issues controlled by
small, local groups of users, and increasingly complex, global problems
managed by larger, more formally organized groups.30 Norms that emerge in
successful platform communities generally follow the patterns outlined by
Ostrom.
Jeff Jordan, former senior vice president at eBay, recounts the problems
the company encountered when it sought to add a fixed-price sale format to
the traditional auction format.31 The two main categories of market
participants reacted quite differently to the plan. Buyers liked the idea of
fixed prices, but the sellers who paid eBay’s marketplace fees feared that
fixed-price listings would effectively kill the golden goose of auction-
driven price escalation.
The process Jordan used to resolve the dispute paralleled several of
Ostrom’s ideas. eBay used focus groups and a “Voices” program to reflect
user perspectives and gauge the strength of their feelings. Jordan’s team
deployed thoughtful communications to alert buyers and sellers about
proposed rule changes. They tested programs on smaller groups and pulled
back if changes turned out badly. Ultimately, eBay’s leadership sided with


---PAGE BREAK---

the buyers, reasoning that the sellers would ultimately remain loyal to the
platform because “merchants go where the consumers are.”32 The decision
succeeded. Today, “Buy it Now” fixed-price listings account for about 70
percent of eBay’s $83 billion in gross merchandise volume.
Architecture. In the world of platform businesses, “architecture” refers
basically to programming code. Well-designed software systems are self-
improving: they encourage and reward good behavior, thereby producing
more of the same.
Online banking platforms such as peer-to-peer lending businesses are
using software algorithms to displace traditional, labor-intensive, and
expensive loan officers. They calculate a borrower’s likelihood of repaying
using both conventional data such as credit scores and nontraditional data
such as a Yelp rating (for a restaurant), the stability of the borrower’s email
address, her connections on LinkedIn, and even how thoroughly she
interacts with the loan assessment tools before applying.33 As the platform
architecture becomes better at predicting borrower behavior, participation
risk declines, attracting more lenders. Meanwhile, the low overhead costs
allow the platform to offer lower rates, which attracts more borrowers.
Greater participation further improves the data flow, and the cycle repeats.
No wonder peer-to-peer lending platforms like the British firm Zopa
have been enjoying such notable success. When Zopa proudly announced
that it had provided more than $1 billion in loans, one of this book’s
authors, Sangeet Choudary, congratulated the company leaders and politely
asked, “Wouldn’t your loan default rate be a more significant measure of
success?” Zopa responded by publicizing the fact that its loan default rate
had fallen to 0.2 percent from 0.6 percent three years earlier.34 Such is the
power of well-designed platform architecture.
Architecture can also be used to prevent and correct market failures.
Recall the middlemen on eBay who took advantage of seller misspellings.
Although one might lament the lost opportunity for the hapless sellers to
complete the deal, these middlemen provided market liquidity (“thickness”
in Alvin Roth’s formulation) through the process known as arbitrage. If no
one bids on misspelled items, the interaction never happens—so
arbitrageurs can be viewed as providing a valuable service. Yet the
existence of arbitrage opportunities also highlights market inefficiencies.
eBay now uses automated systems to provide spelling assistance, so sellers


---PAGE BREAK---

can have more confidence that they’ll receive what their items are worth. In
a case like this, wise governance may disenfranchise a specific group of
stakeholders, such as arbitrageurs, in order to increase the overall health of
the ecosystem.
High-speed trading on the New York Stock Exchange offers another
example. Firms like Goldman Sachs use supercomputers to determine when
an order placed in one market will spill over to another market. Then they
swoop in to intercept the deal, buying low, selling high, and skimming the
margin. This methodology gives a few market participants who can afford
massive computing power an unfair advantage over others.35 Such
asymmetric market power risks driving away players who feel cheated. To
solve this problem, competing exchanges, such as the alternative trading
system IEX, are using their own supercomputers to precisely time the order
of bids, thereby eliminating the advantages of a Goldman Sachs.36
Architecture can level the playing field, making markets more competitive
and fair for all.
One of the most innovative forms of architectural control ever invented
made its appearance in 2008, when an anonymous coding genius known as
Satoshi Nakamoto published a paper on the Cryptography mailing list
defining the Bitcoin digital currency and the so-called blockchain protocol
governing it. Although Bitcoin is notable as the world’s first unforgeable
digital currency that cannot be controlled by a government, bank, or
individual, the blockchain is truly revolutionary. It makes possible fully
decentralized, completely trustworthy interactions without any need for
escrow payments or other guarantees.
The blockchain is a distributed public ledger that enables storage of data
in a container (the block) affixed to other containers (the chain).37 The data
can be anything: dated proof of an invention, a title to a car, or digital coins.
Anyone can verify that you placed data in the container because it has your
public signature, but only your private key can open it to see or transfer the
contents. Like your home address, a blockchain container is publicly,
verifiably yours, but only people you authorize have a key that permits
entry.38
The blockchain protocol makes decentralized governance possible.
Normally, when you sign a contract, you must either trust the other party to
honor the terms or rely on a central authority such as the state, or on an
escrow service like eBay, to enforce the deal. Public blockchain ownership


---PAGE BREAK---

empowers us to write self-enforcing smart contracts that automatically
reassign ownership once contract terms are triggered. Neither party can
back out because the code, running in a decentralized public fashion, is not
under anyone’s control. It simply executes. These smart, autonomous
contracts can even pay people for the output of their work—in effect,
machines hiring people, not the other way around.
For example, imagine a smart contract between a wedding photographer
and a couple planning their nuptials. The blockchain-stored contract could
specify that payment of the final installment of the photographer’s fee will
be made promptly when the edited photo files are delivered electronically to
the newlyweds. The automatic digital trigger ensures that the photographer
is incentivized to deliver the photos promptly, while it also relieves her of
any concern that her clients might fail to pay.
Nakamoto’s invention has given birth to a new kind of platform—one
with open architecture and a governance model but no central authority.
Having no need for gatekeepers, it will put serious pressure on existing
platforms that rely on costly gatekeepers. Financial services that claim 2–4
percent of transactions simply for passing them may in the future be hard
pressed to justify their rake.
Furthermore, while most platforms address the problem of the market
power of particular participants, Nakamoto’s platform addresses the
problem of monopoly power of the platform itself. Not even Nakamoto,
whose real identity remains a mystery, can remake the rules of the open
source code to favor one participant over another.
Markets. Markets can govern behavior through the use of mechanism
design and various incentives—not money alone, but the trifecta of human
motivations that may be summarized as fun, fame, and fortune. In fact, on
many platforms, money is far less important than the more intangible,
subjective form of value known as social currency.
The idea behind social currency is to give something in order to get
something. If you give fun in a photo, you can get people to share it. Social
currency, measured as the economic value of a relationship, includes
favorites and shares.39 It also includes the reputation a person builds up for
good interactions on eBay, good news posts on Reddit, or good answers on
Stack Overflow. It includes the number of followers a user attracts on
Twitter and the number of skill endorsements she garners on LinkedIn.


---PAGE BREAK---

iStockphoto evolved a useful market mechanism based on social
currency to manage exchange of photos. Every photo download cost the
downloader one credit and earned one credit for the person who’d originally
uploaded the photo.40 Credits could also be purchased for 25 cents each, and
photographers received cash payment for accumulated credits valued at
$100 or more. This system created a fair social exchange that allowed
professional photographers and non-photographers to participate in the
same market. The mechanism simultaneously encouraged supply and
market “thickness,” giving birth to the micro stock photo industry.
Social currencies have a number of remarkable and underappreciated
properties. We can even use them to answer Brad Burnham’s interesting
question about the “monetary policy” of a platform.
The enterprise management platform company SAP uses a social
currency like that of iStockphoto or Stack Overflow to motivate developers
to answer one another’s questions. Points earned when the employee of a
development company answers a question are credited to a company
account; when the account reaches a specified level, SAP makes a generous
contribution to a charity of the company’s choice. The system has saved
SAP $6–8 million in tech support costs, generated numerous new product
and service ideas, and reduced average response time to thirty minutes from
the one business day that SAP promises.41 SAP estimates that knowledge
spillovers from these activities account for a half-million-dollar gain in
annual productivity for a typical enterprise software partner.42
Even more interesting, SAP has used the social currency supply to
stimulate its developer economy in the same way as the Federal Reserve
uses the money supply to stimulate the U.S. economy. When SAP
introduced a new customer relationship management (CRM) product, it
offered double points on any answer, code, or white paper relating to CRM.
During the two-month duration of this “monetary expansion” policy,
developers found gaps in the software and devised new features at a vastly
higher rate.43 Used as a money supply, the increased flow of social currency
caused overall economic output to rise. In effect, SAP employed an
expansionary monetary policy to stimulate growth—and it worked.
In addition to promoting economic growth, well-designed market
mechanisms can incentivize the creation and sharing of intellectual property
and reduce the riskiness of interactions on the platform.


---PAGE BREAK---

Beautiful, useful ideas are public goods. Which raises the question: what
is the optimal intellectual property policy for a platform business? If a
developer working on a platform invents a valuable idea, who should own
it, the developer or the platform? It’s possible to imagine arguments on both
sides of the issue. Giving ownership to the developer provides incentives
for idea creation. Giving ownership to the platform facilitates
standardization and sharing, and enriches the platform ecosystem as a
whole. State-mandated laws regarding patents and other forms of
intellectual property protection are clumsy and expensive to enforce. A
more elegant platform-based solution is required.
SAP has tackled this problem through two practices. First, it publishes an
18–24-month advance road map indicating what new products and services
it intends to build to enhance its offerings to its corporate clients. This not
only tells SAP’s outside developers what digital real estate will be available
for their own innovations but also gives them up to two years before they
face competition. The two-year window thus serves as a metaphorical
patent period.44 Second, SAP has made a policy of partnering with
developers financially or buying them out at a fair price. This assures
developers that they will be fairly compensated for their work, reduces
partner risk, and encourages outside investment in the SAP platform.
The issue of risk reduction on a platform is a perennial one. History
shows that platform owners generally seek to avoid responsibility for the
risks faced by platform participants, especially in the early days of the
platform. For example, in the 1960s, credit card companies, which host the
two-sided merchant and cardholder platform, resisted insuring cardholders
against fraud on their cards. They argued that insurance would promote
fraud as consumers would become careless with their cards, and that banks
forced to absorb more risk would become more reluctant to extend credit,
hurting low-income consumers.
Over the vigorous objections of major banks, the Fair Credit Reporting
Act (1970) and a subsequent amendment required fraud insurance,
imposing a limit of $50 on consumer liability for fraudulent use of a credit
card. The disaster predicted by the credit card companies did not occur.
Freed from the fear of fraud, consumers used their cards so much more
often that the increase in interaction volume more than offset the increase in
fraud. The business benefit from fraud insurance is so powerful that, in


---PAGE BREAK---

order to encourage adoption and use, many banks now waive the $50
charge if consumers report a lost or stolen card within twenty-four hours.45
In recent years, new platform businesses have made the same mistake as
credit card companies did in the 1960s. Initially, Airbnb refused to
indemnify hosts against bad guest behavior, and Uber refused to insure
riders against bad driver behavior.46 Eventually, both companies realized
that this refusal was hurting the growth of their platforms. Today, as we’ve
noted, Airbnb offers its host members $1 million in homeowners’
protection, and Uber is partnering with insurance firms to create new types
of policies to protect its drivers.47
Rather than seeking to minimize their own risk, platforms should use
market mechanisms such as risk pooling and insurance to reduce risk for
their participants and thereby maximize overall value creation. Good
governance means looking after the health of one’s ecosystem partners.
PRINCIPLES OF SMART SELF-GOVERNANCE
FOR PLATFORMS
Kings and conquerors like to make the rules; they don’t always like to abide
by them. Yet results improve when smart rules of governance are applied to
platform companies themselves as well as to platform partners and
participants.
The first big principle of smart self-governance for platforms is internal
transparency. In platform companies, as in virtually all organizations,
there’s a tendency for divisions or departments to become “siloed”—to
develop unique perspectives, languages, systems, processes, and tools that
are difficult for outsiders to understand, even those in another department of
the same company. This makes it extremely hard to solve complex, large-
scale problems that span two or more divisions, since it means that
members of different work teams lack a shared vocabulary and tool set. It
also makes it much harder for outsiders—including platform users and
developers—to work effectively with the platform management team.
To avoid this kind of dysfunction, platform managers should strive to
give all their business divisions a clear view across the entire platform.


---PAGE BREAK---

Such transparency promotes consistency, helps others develop and use key
resources, and facilitates growth to scale.
The so-called Yegge Rant, executive Steve Yegge’s attempt to
summarize a mandate issued by Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, captures the spirit of
this principle very effectively. Bezos insisted that all members of the
Amazon team must learn to communicate with one another using “service
interfaces”—data communication tools specifically designed to be clear,
understandable, and useful to everyone in the organization as well as to
outside users and partners. The idea is to treat everyone you do business
with—including your colleagues in other departments and divisions of the
organization—as customers with legitimate and important information
needs that you are responsible to meet. Hence the seven rules presented in
the Yegge Rant:
1.  All teams will henceforth expose their data and functionality through service interfaces.
2.  Teams must communicate with each other through these interfaces.
3.  There will be no other form of interprocess communication allowed: no direct linking, no
direct reads of another team’s data store, no shared-memory model, no back-doors whatsoever.
The only communication allowed is via service interface calls over the network.
4.  It doesn’t matter what technology they use. HTTP, Corba, Pubsub, custom protocols—doesn’t
matter. Bezos doesn’t care.
5.    All service interfaces, without exception, must be designed from the ground up to be
externalizable. That is to say, the team must plan and design to be able to expose the interface
to developers in the outside world. No exceptions.
6.  Anyone who doesn’t do this will be fired.
7.  Thank you; have a nice day!
Astute application of this principle of transparency underlies the success
of Amazon Web Services (AWS), the platform’s giant cloud services
company. Andrew Jassy, Amazon’s vice president of technology, had
observed how different divisions of Amazon kept having to develop web
service operations to store, search, and communicate data.48 Jassy urged that
these varied projects should be combined into a single operation with one
clear, flexible, and universally comprehensible set of protocols. Doing this
would make all of Amazon’s vast body of data accessible and useful to
everyone in the organization.
Even more important, Jassy recognized that solving this problem for
Amazon could have broader external applications. He reasoned that if
multiple business units within Amazon had to solve this problem, then a
reliable data management service that had solved the problem effectively


---PAGE BREAK---

might well be useful to outside firms with similar needs. AWS was born—
one of the first businesses to offer cloud-based information storage and
management services and expertise to companies with massive data
challenges. Thanks to Jassy’s vision, AWS today has more market capacity
than the next dozen cloud services combined.49
By contrast, companies that limit their own ability to see across business
units are likely to fail to establish viable platforms or to build their platform
businesses to scale.
Sony Corporation provides a sobering example. The Sony Walkman had
dominated portable music since the 1970s. In 2007, when the Apple iPhone
was introduced, Sony’s dominance of the world of electronic devices
seemed unshakeable. Sony had a world-class MP3 player, it had a
pioneering e-reader, and it made some of the best cameras. In the fall of that
year, Sony introduced the next-generation PlayStation Portable (PSP), the
best gaming device in the world. Sony even owned Time Warner movie and
television studios, giving it the opportunity to offer unique content. Yet
despite these piecemeal advantages, Sony never developed the vision to
offer a platform. Instead, the firm embraced separate product lines and
focused on individual systems.
Sony’s siloed business vision prevented it from creating a unified
platform ecosystem. Within a few years, Apple’s iPhone and the apps built
on its growing platform had swept the field. Two years after the crash of
2008, Sony’s stock price was still almost one-third below its prior value,
while Apple’s price had soared to historic highs.
The second big principle of platform self-governance is participation.
It’s crucial for platform managers to give external partners and stakeholders
a voice in internal decision processes equal to that of internal stakeholders.
Otherwise, the decisions made will inevitably tend to favor the platform
itself, which will eventually alienate outside partners and cause them to
abandon the platform.
In their book Platform Leadership, Annabelle Gawer and Michael A.
Cusumano offer a vivid example of how giving partners a voice can be
great platform governance. The ecosystem built around the universal serial
bus (USB), promoted by Intel, was one of the first standards to facilitate
data and power transfer between peripherals—keyboards, memory devices,
monitors, cameras, network connectors, and so on—and computers. Yet
peripherals were outside Intel’s core microchip business.50 This meant that


---PAGE BREAK---

Intel faced a particularly acute version of the chicken-or-egg launch
problem that we discussed in chapter 5. No one wants to produce
peripherals for a computer standard no one else has adopted, but no one
wants to buy a computer for which no one else has made peripherals. And
potential hardware partners were reluctant to link with Intel since, as the
owner of the standard, Intel would have the option of making future
changes to the standard that could render competing products incompatible,
thereby capturing all the long-term value of partner investments.
Intel cracked the chicken-or-egg conundrum by entrusting USB to its
Intel Architecture Labs (IAL) division. As a new business unit, IAL did not
fall under the authority of any internal product line. Its job was to serve as a
neutral negotiator between ecosystem partners and internal business units,
which it could only achieve through independence. IAL earned the trust of
partners by advocating and enacting policies that advanced the health of the
ecosystem even at the occasional expense of Intel business units. Over the
course of a year, the IAL team visited over fifty companies, inviting them to
help define the standard and design licenses that made them comfortable.
Through IAL, Intel also committed not to trample partner markets. Intel
used both reputation and contracts to limit its own future behavior. (See the
sidebar here for a summary of IAL’s self-governance principles.)
These efforts paid off. A consortium of seven companies—Compaq,
DEC, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, NEC, and Nortel—united behind USB,
producing an ecosystem standard that has evolved successfully for more
than a decade.
This returns us to the deep design principle we introduced early in this
chapter: Just and fair governance can create wealth. We saw this principal
operate in the story of Singapore’s rise; we see it here in the story of IAL
and the launch of the USB standard.
SELF-GOVERNANCE RULES FOLLOWED BY INTEL ARCHITECTURE LABS IN
LAUNCHING THE USB STANDARD
  1. Give customers a voice in key decisions. Use a separate business unit, with a “Chinese
wall,” to handle conflicting agendas.
  2. For trusting relationships, open standards must remain open.
  3. Treat IP [intellectual property] fairly, yours and theirs.
  4. Communicate a clear road map and stick to it. Commitments to act or not act must be
credible.


---PAGE BREAK---

  5. Reserve the right to enter strategically important markets with notice. Don’t surprise
people and don’t play favorites with news.
  6. In case of big investments, share risk and bet your own money.
  7. Do not promise to not change the platform. Do promise early notice. Have skin in the
game, so change bites the platform, not just the partner.
  8. It’s okay to offer differential benefits to partners with differentiated assets. Just make sure
everyone understands how to qualify.
  9. Promote the long-term financial health of partners, especially smaller ones.
10. As the business matures, decisions increasingly favor outward progression from core
platform, to complements, to new businesses that cannibalize the platform.51
Fairness helps create wealth in two ways.52 First, if you treat people
fairly, they are more likely to share their ideas. Having more ideas creates
more opportunity to mix, match, and remake them into new innovations.
Second, one of this book’s authors (Marshall Van Alstyne) has shown
formally that fair governance leads participants in a market to allocate their
resources more wisely and productively.53 Consider the USB standard. If
each of the seven firms involved in creating the standard is sure to get a fair
share of the value created, then each will willingly participate. By contrast,
if five of the firms could gang up to steal the value of the other two—and
those two know this could happen—the two may never join the coalition.
This fracturing caused by the possibility of unfairness could have split the
USB standard into competing standards, or, worse, prevented the
development of any standard at all.
This is not to say that fairness always creates wealth or that wealth can
never be created without it. Keurig, Apple, Facebook, and others have all, at
times, treated their communities badly yet thrived financially. But in the
long run, designing fair participation into ecosystem governance prompts
users to create more wealth than if the rules grant a platform owner the
ability to make arbitrary decisions without accountability. Many platform
managers choose governance principles that favor themselves over their
users. Yet platforms that respect their users more can expect more from
their users—with benefits ultimately accruing to all.
Governance will always be imperfect. Whatever the rules, partners will
find new forms of private advantage. There will always be information
asymmetries and externalities. Interactions lead to complications, which
lead to interventions, which lead to new complications. Indeed, if good
governance allows third parties to innovate, then, as they create new


---PAGE BREAK---

sources of value, they will simultaneously create new struggles to control
that value.
When such conflicts arise, governance decisions should favor the
greatest sources of new value or the direction where the market is headed,
not where it used to be. Firms that choose only to guard their aging assets,
as Microsoft has done, stagnate. The governance mechanism must therefore
be self-healing and promote evolution. Sophisticated governance achieves
efficiency at the level of “design for self-design”—that is, it encourages
platform members to collaborate freely and experiment fearlessly in order
to update the rules as necessary. Governance should not be static. When
signs of change appear on the horizon—such as new behaviors by platform
users, unanticipated conflicts among them, or encroachments by new
competitors—information about the change should spread rapidly through
the organization, encouraging creative conversations about how the
governance system may need to evolve in response.
No matter what kind of business or social ecosystem your platform
inhabits, it will always include both fast-moving parts and slow-moving
parts. Smart governance systems are flexible enough to respond to both.54
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER EIGHT
    Governance is necessary because absolutely free markets are prone to failures.
    Market failures are generally caused by information asymmetry, externalities, monopoly
power, and risk. Good governance helps prevent and mitigate market failures.
    The basic tools for platform governance include laws, norms, architecture, and markets.
Each must be designed and implemented with care in order to encourage platform
participants to engage in positive behaviors, incentivize good interactions, and discourage
bad interactions.
    Self-governance is also crucial to effective platform management. Well-run platforms
govern their own activities following the principles of transparency and participation.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

9
METRICS
How Platform Managers
Can Measure What Really Matters
Leaders have always needed to focus on a handful of key metrics to guide
them. This has been true for thousands of years in every domain of human
activity, from business to government to warfare. Consider Jonathan Roth’s
description of the key factors for Julius Caesar’s army in the Gallic
campaigns (58–50 BCE):
The Roman army took a vast array of materiel into the field: clothing, armor, edged weapons,
missiles, tents, portable fortifications, cooking gear, medical supplies, writing materials, and much
more … Yet, approximately ninety percent of the weight of the supplies needed by an ancient
army was made up of only three elements: food, fodder and firewood. All military decisions from
the basic strategic concept to the smallest tactical movements were affected by, and often
determined by, the need to provide these supplies to the army.1
Given a certain number of soldiers and animals, Caesar’s quartermaster
could quickly determine how far the army could march and how long it
could campaign before reprovisioning, simply by tabulating the quantity of
food for the men, fodder for the animals, and firewood for warmth and
cooking. These three key metrics shaped many of Caesar’s most
fundamental strategic choices.
Leaders of traditional for-profit companies that have linear value chains
(pipelines) have, similarly, achieved success by working with a relatively
limited set of standard metrics. For example, firms that manufacture goods
such as automobiles or washing machines must source raw materials or
subassemblies and then assemble these into complete products that are


---PAGE BREAK---

offered for sale to end customers through a variety of sales and marketing
channels. The details of the work may be very complex, but as long as the
revenue exceeds the total cost of compensating pipeline participants, along
with a margin to justify the risk and cover future development costs, all is
well. While line workers and middle managers all along the pipeline need to
be immersed in the fine points of design, manufacturing, production,
marketing, and delivery, leaders at the C-suite level, as well as board
members and outside investors, can focus on a few key numbers to get a
quick sense of the relative health of the business.
Traditional measures from pipeline businesses, which are familiar to
most managers, include cash flow, inventory turns, and operating income.
These work in combination to create a useful, broad-brush picture of a
business, and their simplicity and clarity helps company leaders stay
focused on the factors that are crucial to long-term success rather than
getting distracted by secondary details.
FROM PIPELINE TO PLATFORM: THE NEW
MEASUREMENT CHALLENGE
Unfortunately, the traditional metrics used in organizing and running
pipeline businesses quickly break down in the context of a platform—and
developing alternative metrics that effectively measure the true health and
growth prospects of a platform business is far from easy.
Consider the story of BranchOut. Launched in July 2010, BranchOut
was a professional networking platform based mainly on an app that
enabled users to make job-hunting connections via Facebook. Think of
BranchOut as a variant of LinkedIn piggybacked on the vast Facebook
network. In a world where the majority of jobs are filled not through help-
wanted ads or Internet postings but through friend-to-friend word of mouth,
BranchOut struck many people as a brilliant innovation. Its founder and
CEO Rick Marini managed to attract $49 million in three rounds of
investment.
The company’s rocket-propelled ride to the top of the professional
networking world was astonishing. BranchOut’s user base expanded from
fewer than a million to a whopping 33 million between the spring and
summer of 2012. But its implosion occurred as quickly. Before another four


---PAGE BREAK---

months had passed, the number of members had plummeted to fewer than
two million. And by the following summer, the company was groping for an
entirely new business strategy, hoping to become a “workplace chat”
platform that teams of coworkers could use to stay in touch. Rich Marini
admitted to reporters that “active users aren’t very big right now,” while
saying that BranchOut was “not a failure, it’s still alive.”2
Postmortems pointed to a variety of reasons for BranchOut’s collapse.
Some blamed changes in Facebook’s app developer platform, which put a
crimp in BranchOut’s communications system. Others pointed out that the
whole notion of blending job search capabilities with Facebook’s social
networking ambience was misguided. “Looking for a job is stressful,” as
one observer put it. “It’s a lot of work. When I hang out with my friends,
the last thing I want to do is talk about my job search. I want to escape it.”3
These may have been factors in BranchOut’s failure. But the most
significant mistake BranchOut made appears to have been focusing on—and
measuring—the wrong things. Flush with investment capital and riding an
incredible upsurge in “active user” enrollments, during those fateful months
in the middle of 2012, BranchOut kept directing its efforts to boosting
membership numbers. It incentivized users to invite as many friends as
possible, and made it easy for Facebook members to invite everyone in their
network to join BranchOut. As hundreds of millions of invitations flooded
cyberspace, BranchOut’s enrollment figures skyrocketed.4
Having a person’s name and email address on a membership list doesn’t
promise success for a platform. What matters is activity—the number of
satisfying interactions that platform users experience. If BranchOut had
tracked the activity numbers as diligently as it tracked membership, it might
have realized that its millions of members weren’t finding much value in
the service—which led, of course, to plummeting membership rolls.
The BranchOut story illustrates a vital truth about the world of
platforms. Just as platforms transform traditional value chains, competitive
strategy, and management techniques, they also demand new forms of
internal measurement.
Let’s return for a moment to the metrics that are most commonly used by
pipeline managers: key numbers like cash flow, inventory turns, and
operating income, as well as ancillary metrics like gross margin, overhead,
and return on investment. These tools, in their varied ways, help to measure
the same thing: the efficiency with which value flows through the pipeline.


---PAGE BREAK---

A successful pipeline business is one that produces goods and services with
minimal waste of resources and then delivers a large quantity of these goods
and services to customers through well-managed marketing, sales, and
distribution systems, thereby generating revenues that are more than
sufficient to recoup costs and produce profits to reward investors and
finance future growth.
Pipeline metrics are designed to gauge the efficiency of this value flow
from one end of the pipeline to the other. They help managers recognize
bottlenecks, logjams, and breakdowns in the flow that require improved
process efficiencies or system enhancements that will facilitate a larger,
faster, and more rewarding stream of value through the pipeline. Thus,
when a statistic like inventory turns unexpectedly plummets, it’s generally a
sign of overstocking, product obsolescence, or marketing failure, while an
excessively high rate of turnover may indicate understocking and
consequent loss of sales. Carefully monitoring this metric can help
managers make necessary adjustments to keep the business humming.
This kind of (admittedly simplified) analysis doesn’t work when we shift
our focus to a platform business. As we’ve seen, platforms create value
primarily through the impact of network effects. Platform managers in
search of metrics that reveal the true health of their business need to focus
on positive network effects and on the platform activities that drive them.
In specific, platform metrics need to measure the rate of interaction
success and the factors that contribute to it. Platforms exist to facilitate
positive interactions among users—particularly between producers and
consumers of value. The greater the number of positive interactions the
platform creates, the more users will be drawn to the platform, and the more
eager they will be to engage in activities and interactions of various kinds
on the platform. Thus, the most important metrics are those that quantify the
success of the platform in fostering sustainable repetition of desirable
interactions. The end result: positive network effects and the creation of
enormous value for everyone involved, including the users of the platform
as well as the sponsors and managers of the platform.
Note the difference between this core metric and the core metric of the
pipeline. Whereas a pipeline manager is concerned with the flow of value
from one end of the pipeline to the other, the platform manager is concerned
with the creation, sharing, and delivery of value throughout the ecosystem
—some occurring on the platform, some elsewhere. For a platform


---PAGE BREAK---

manager, process efficiencies and system enhancements may be quite
important—but only insofar as they facilitate successful interactions among
users. The big goal on which platform managers must remain focused is the
creation of value for all users of the platform, which strengthens the
community, improves its long-term health and vibrancy, and encourages the
continual growth of positive network effects.
DESIGNING METRICS THAT TRACK
THE LIFE CYCLE OF THE PLATFORM
In this chapter, we’ll consider some of the key issues related to developing
and using appropriate metrics for platform businesses, following the life
cycle of a platform from startup to maturity. In the startup phase, it is
critical to have simple measures to guide decision-making around key
questions of platform design and launch, including the design of the core
interaction; the development of effective tools to pull users, facilitate
interactions, and match producers with consumers; the creation of effective
systems of curation; and decisions about how open the platform should be
to various kinds of participants.
In particular, firms in the startup phase must track the growth of their
most important asset: active producers and consumers who are participating
in a large volume of successful interactions. These users and the
interactions they engage in are the key to generating the positive network
effects that will ultimately make the platform successful. Notice that some
of the traditional metrics generally regarded as crucial in the early years of a
pipeline business—revenues, cash flow, profit margins, and the like—are
largely irrelevant when evaluating a platform during the startup phase.
Once the platform has reached critical mass and users are gaining
significant value from the platform, the focus of metrics can shift to
customer retention and the conversion of active users to paying customers.
This is the phase in which monetization becomes a crucial issue. As we
explained in chapter 6, decisions about how to monetize the platform are
fraught. Platform managers will need to devise metrics that focus on some
of the key issues related to monetization, for example: Which user groups
are enjoying the greatest value from platform activities? Which user groups
may need to be subsidized to ensure their continued participation? What


---PAGE BREAK---

fraction of the value creation unleashed by the platform is occurring on the
platform rather than outside it? How much additional value can be created
through services such as enhanced curation? Which groups outside the
platform might find value in access to specific user groups on the platform?
And most important, how can the platform capture and retain a fair share of
the value being created on the platform without impeding the continued
growth of network effects? During the growth phase, thoughtfully designed
metrics can help platform managers develop accurate answers to questions
like these.
Finally, as the platform matures and a self-sustaining business model has
been developed, the challenge of user retention and growth requires the
platform to innovate. This is the best way to maintain and enhance the
business’s value proposition relative to competing platforms. Metrics then
must sensitively gauge the ongoing engagement of users and the degree to
which they continue to discover new ways to create value on the platform.
It’s crucial to measure and track the degree to which both producers and
consumers are repeatedly participating in the platform and increasing their
participation over time.
Other competitive concerns include attempts by adjacent platforms to
drain users and reduce the platform’s comparative advantage, as well as the
possibility that participants in the platform (such as extension developers)
may create platforms of their own that could eventually pull users away.
These, too, call for the development of metrics that will enable platform
leaders to recognize such threats and respond to them in time.
STAGE 1:
METRICS DURING THE STARTUP PHASE
At startup companies—whether they operate as pipelines or as platforms—
resources are usually stretched. With money, time, and talent at a premium,
people find themselves doing multiple jobs, often in domains far from their
expertise. In this kind of environment, deciding the categories of
information to which to dedicate resources in collection and processing can
be both critically important and challenging.
Furthermore, the kinds of metrics that work in a startup context may be
quite different from those that apply to a conventional, mature business.


---PAGE BREAK---

Entrepreneur Derek Sivers describes the problem:
Most tools from general management are not designed to flourish in the harsh soil of extreme
uncertainty in which startups thrive. The future is unpredictable, customers face a growing array
of alternatives, and the pace of change is ever increasing. Yet most startups—in garages and
enterprises alike—still are managed by using standard forecasts, product milestones, and detailed
business plans.5
So what kinds of metrics are most valuable during the startup phase of a
platform business? Platform managers should focus on the core interaction
and the benefits it creates for both producers and consumers on the
platform. To define success or failure for a platform, and to identify how to
improve it, there are three main metrics: liquidity, matching quality, and
trust.
Liquidity in a platform marketplace is a state in which there are a
minimum number of producers and consumers and the percentage of
successful interactions is high. When liquidity is achieved, interaction
failure is minimized, and the intent of users to interact is consistently
satisfied within a reasonable period of time. Achieving liquidity is the first
and most important milestone in the life cycle of a platform. Therefore, the
most valuable metric in the early months of a platform is one that can help
you determine when liquidity is reached. Depending on the precise
workings of the platform and the nature of its user base, the formula for this
metric may vary.
One reasonable way to measure liquidity is by tracking the percentage of
listings that lead to interactions within a given time period. Of course, both
the definition of “interactions” and the appropriate time period will vary
depending on the market category. On an information and entertainment
platform, an interaction might be the click-through that takes a consumer
from a headline to a complete story; on a marketplace platform, it might be
the purchase of a product; on a professional networking platform, it might
be the offer of a recommendation, the swapping of contact information, or a
posted response to a question on a discussion page. Any of these
interactions would signify a greater degree of engagement by the user and
represent the moment when the user has recognized, used, and enjoyed a
value unit available on the platform.
On the negative side, it’s important to look for and track the occurrence
of illiquid situations. These are circumstances in which a desired transaction
is impossible—for example, when an Uber user opens the app and


---PAGE BREAK---

discovers that no car is available. Illiquid situations discourage users from
participating in the platform and so must be kept to a minimum.
Note that user commitment and active usage of the platform are the vital
metrics of platform adoption, not sign-ups. That’s why our definition of
liquidity includes both user totals and the level of interactions occurring.
New reports and investor pitches that emphasize impressive raw numbers of
platform members can be very misleading and may be a sign that the
platform, far from flourishing, is struggling to convert curiosity-seekers into
active participants and value creators.
Also note that the most meaningful metrics are comparative ones, which
draw helpful distinctions between groups of users or over periods of time (a
useful recommendation from Alistair Croll and Benjamin Yoskovitz,
authors of Lean Analytics). A good example of an inherently comparative
measure is a ratio or rate, which is calculated by dividing one number by
another—for example, the ratio of active users, which is calculated by
dividing the number of active users by the number of total users, or the rate
of growth in active users, which is calculated by dividing the number of
new active users by the number of total active users.6
A second crucial category of metric for the startup platform is matching
quality. This refers to the accuracy of the search algorithm and the
intuitiveness of the navigation tools offered to users as they seek other users
with whom they can engage in value-creating interactions. Matching quality
is critical to delivering value and stimulating the long-term growth and
success of the platform. It is achieved through excellence in product or
service curation.
As the definition implies, matching quality is closely related to the
effectiveness with which products or service offerings on the platform are
curated. Users generally participate in a platform with highly interactional
intent; they want to find what they’re looking for as quickly as possible.
Precision in matching leads to lower search costs for users—that is, they
need to invest less time, energy, effort, and other resources in finding the
matches they want. Thus, if the platform does a great job of linking users to
one another quickly and accurately, those users are likely to become active
participants and long-term members of the platform; if matching quality is
poor, slow, and disappointing, users will soon dwindle in number,
interactions will slow to a trickle, and the platform may be doomed to an
early demise.


---PAGE BREAK---

Of course, it’s necessary to translate the abstract term “matching quality”
into a concrete quantity with a clear operational definition in order to make
it the basis of a meaningful metric. One way to measure the efficiency of
the platform in successfully matching producers to consumers is by tracking
the sales conversion rate, which can be expressed as the percentage of
searches that lead to interactions.
Obviously, the higher the percentage, the better—but where does the
threshold between “poor” and “good” matching quality lie? There’s no
single answer that applies to every kind of platform. However, the manager
of a particular platform may be able to develop a useful rule of thumb by
correlating the interaction percentage for particular users with the long-term
rate of activity of those users—say, over a period of one to three months.
Calculations like these may enable you to determine, for example, that an
interaction percentage of 40 percent appears to represent a significant cutoff
point for users of your platform: the majority of users who experience
interaction percentage higher than 40 percent during their first week on the
platform remain active members for at least three months, while a majority
of those with an interaction percentage lower than 40 percent stop
participating in activities on the site.
Once you’ve calculated a number of this kind—whether it is 40 percent,
higher, or lower—you can use it as a working target that serves as one
measure of the health of your site. The daily interaction percentage can be
measured, its trend over time can be observed, and improvements to the
platform’s matching system can be developed, tested, and evaluated based
on changes in this metric.
The third crucial category of startup metric is trust. Trust refers to the
degree to which users of a platform feel comfortable with the level of risk
associated with engaging in interactions on the platform. It is achieved
through excellent curation of participants in the platform.
Building trust, of course, is central to marketplaces, especially those in
which interactions carry some level of risk—and in the world of online
platforms, where initial connections among users as well as many
interactions are conducted entirely in cyberspace, the perception of risk may
be even more significant. A well-run platform is one in which participants
on both sides have been successfully curated so that users are comfortable
with the level of risk involved in engaging in interactions on the platform.
As we’ve noted, Airbnb is an example of a player in a high-risk category


---PAGE BREAK---

that has succeeded so far because of its ability to curate its participants
successfully. It allows hosts and guests to review each other and has one of
the highest review rates among platforms. It also takes additional measures
to build trust, including having photographers certify the accuracy of the
information contained in a host’s listing. By contrast, Airbnb’s competitor
Craigslist has earned relatively low scores on the trust metric and has
experienced a number of embarrassing scandals involving apparently sleazy
platform users engaged in disreputable, even illegal activities.
These three crucial categories of metrics—liquidity, matching quality,
and trust—combine to provide the managers of startup platforms with an
accurate picture of the platform’s rate of interaction success and the key
factors that contribute to it. As we’ve noted, this measurement is at the heart
of the platform’s purpose and plays a central role in determining its ability
to create positive network effects.
The specific formulas you use to define the metrics for a particular
platform business need to be carefully devised to be appropriate for the kind
of platform business involved—the nature of the platform, the types of
users, the forms of value being created and exchanged, the variety of
interactions performed, and so on.
There are a number of specialized metrics that are potentially valuable
for particular platform businesses. You might choose to measure
engagement per interaction, time between interactions, and percentage of
active users, all of which focus on the degree of user commitment to the
ecosystem.
Alternatively, you might choose to measure number of interactions, as,
for example, the graphics and design platform Fiverr does. Since Fiverr has
a fixed value per interaction—every “gig” traded on the site is priced at five
dollars—the sheer number of interactions is a perfectly adequate and
complete measurement of the current activity flow on the site.
Other platforms need to develop more sophisticated interaction metrics.
Airbnb, for example, tracks the number of nights booked, which is a better
indicator of value creation for this platform than simply recording the
number of interactions. The freelance work marketplace Upwork measures
interaction volume by counting the hours of work delivered by a particular
freelancer, which is a key measure of value creation in that ecosystem. In a
similar fashion, Clarity can track the duration of a consulting call between
an expert and the information seeker.


---PAGE BREAK---

Platforms whose revenue is based on claiming a share of the value of
any interaction—a commission fee based on a percentage of the interaction,
for example—may choose to measure interaction capture, which will
reflect the value of interactions that occur on the platform. Amazon
Marketplace, for instance, uses this metric, tracking the gross value of
interactions processed by the platform as a key indicator of its activity level.
Platforms that focus on content creation require different metrics. For
example, some measure co-creation (the percentage of listings that are
consumed by users) or consumer relevance (the percentage of listings that
receive some minimum level of positive response from potential
consumers). These metrics focus on interaction quality and reflect the skill
with which production is being curated.
Finally, other platforms focus on market access—the effectiveness with
which users have been able to join the platform and find or connect with
one another, regardless of whether a complete interaction has occurred.
Some measure producer participation—that is, the rate at which producers
join the platform and the growth of this rate over time. Dating and
matrimonial sites often talk about number of women registered, since this
metric serves as a useful proxy for the value that other users of the site can
expect to receive. In a somewhat different fashion, OpenTable tracks
restaurant reservations. These are not the actual interactions, in which
restaurants are paid for meals served (information not readily available to
the platform), but they serve as a fairly accurate proxy for the value created.
The three key factors of liquidity, matching quality, and trust remain
crucial to measuring the health of virtually any kind of newly launched
platform. But as you can see, specific characteristics of a particular platform
may dictate the need for additional, more specialized measurement tools.
The variety and range of metrics that may be suitable during a platform’s
startup phase is limited only by your ingenuity and the nature of the
activities occurring in your burgeoning ecosystem.
STAGE 2:
METRICS DURING THE GROWTH PHASE
The metrics that best measure the number and quality of interactions in
your ecosystem will change over the life cycle of the platform, and it’s


---PAGE BREAK---

critical to identify points at which these transitions occur. Companies often
make the mistake of clinging to metrics that their business has outgrown.
Identifying and vetting the core metrics that are most relevant to the
decisions you face today is important at every point in the platform’s
development.
For example, once the platform reaches a critical mass of users, new
issues arise. Managers must still ensure that the core interaction is creating
value and that the inflow of engaged users exceeds the outflow so that the
platform is still growing. However, as growth continues, the platform must
monitor the change in size of the user base over time. In particular, platform
managers will want to work to ensure balance on the two sides of its
market. This balance can be monitored by calculating the producer-to-
consumer ratio, with an adjustment to include only active platform users—
those who’ve engaged in interactions on the platform at a specific minimum
rate of frequency that you consider appropriate. Experience shows that this
ratio is a crucial factor in the rate of interaction success achieved by the
platform.
Consider the core interaction that the dating website OkCupid is
facilitating: introductions between men and women. As we noted in chapter
2, one of the critical things for this platform to manage is the access of
straight men (who may be considered “consumers” in this context) to
straight women (who play the role of “producers”).* As a result, OkCupid
tracks the ratio of straight women to straight men, and platform managers
work hard to adjust that ratio when it diverges from the level they deem
optimal. They manage these adjustments by asking users to rate the
attractiveness of those on the opposite side of the platform.7 The website
then introduces a filter to reduce the number of men who can participate in
the platform by seeing women’s profiles—especially women who are rated
as particularly attractive.8 In this way, the OkCupid platform is helping to
maintain positive network effects and fostering market liquidity by avoiding
an imbalance that might otherwise alienate a segment of its female users.
Continually measuring and monitoring the male–female ratio makes this
maintenance possible. In similar fashion, the freelance platform Upwork
focuses on keeping the number of freelancers proportional to the number of
job postings, since a surfeit on either side causes participants to leave.
For a traditional two-sided platform with producers on one side and
consumers on the other, it is best to find ways to calculate the value of each


---PAGE BREAK---

user type. In Lean Analytics, the entrepreneur/author team of Alistair Croll
and Benjamin Yoskovitz provide a useful illustration of metrics for a two-
sided platform, which we adapt below.9
On the producer side, the platform should monitor figures that include
the frequency of producer participation, listings created, and outcomes
achieved. The platform should also monitor interaction failure—the
percentage of cases in which interactions, such as sales, are initiated but fall
through for some reason. This is a crucial metric that many platform
managers overlook. If users are being retained but the rate of successful
interaction is falling, there is a serious problem.
It’s especially important to monitor instances of producer fraud—for
example, the failure of a producer to describe a product offering accurately
or to deliver it in a timely fashion. Producer fraud is, of course, a
particularly egregious, painful, and costly form of interaction failure.
Examination of the characteristics of users and interactions repeatedly
linked to fraud may be used to create predictive models that can help the
platform prevent future fraud.
Combining all these forms of data, the value of a producer can be
calculated using traditional lifetime value (LTV) models used in many kinds
of businesses. These models capture the mechanism by which repeat
producers provide recurring platform revenues without incurring additional
acquisition costs—that is, expenses incurred by the platform in attracting
and engaging these producers. Because repeat producers are especially
profitable to a platform, well-managed platform firms will work hard to
create active repeat producers, just as subscriber-based services like
magazines and cell service providers work to keep the rates of subscriber
turnover (or churn) as low as possible.
On the consumer side, the growing platform should monitor the
frequency of consumption, searches, and rate of conversion to sale (the
percentage of click-throughs that result in completed interactions). This
information, along with the likelihood of repeat interactions, provides the
data necessary to calculate each consumer’s LTV. Once both producer and
consumer LTV measures have been created, the platform can run
experiments in an effort to impact the critical determinants of LTV—churn
rate, for example.10
Most of today’s successful platform businesses have programs designed
to encourage loyalty on the part of the most valuable active users and to


---PAGE BREAK---

discourage those who are less valuable. If you’ve ever had a platform like
Facebook or LinkedIn ping you with an invitation to return to the platform
after a falloff in your usage, you’ve been targeted by such a program.
Similarly, Twitter has introduced the “popular in your network” feature to
alert you to content that might be particularly relevant even if you have not
subscribed to those authors’ feeds—another activity-building program that
is driven by metrics and designed to stimulate more interactions around
users with a proven track record of value-creating activity.11
A critical variable from the startup phase that remains highly relevant
during the growth phase is the interaction conversion rate—that is, the
percentage of searches or queries that result in interactions. Well designed
and consistently monitored metrics focusing on the sales conversion rate
can help platform managers develop smart strategies that will enhance the
platform’s continued growth—as when Airbnb introduced its professional
photography service after discovering that high-quality photos increase
property rental rates.12
Interestingly, Airbnb has also discovered that its best source of hosts is
people who have been guests. Consequently, it is now working hard to
convert consumers on its platform into producers. In this case, the side
switching rate—the rate at which people convert from one type of user to
another—offers an important metric that the platform can use to track the
health of its user base and to maintain balance across its network.
New metrics are continually being devised by platform managers based
on their specific objectives and interests as well as the unique
characteristics of their users. Haier Group is a rapidly growing
manufacturing company based in Qingdao, China. It is currently building a
platform to connect its customers with the design and production teams,
both inside and outside the organization, that create the products, which
include home appliances and electronics. Haier’s CEO, Ruimin Zhang,
spoke with the authors about a unique metric that the company is eager to
capture and use—namely, the distance between consumers and producers.13
In this case, the word “distance” is metaphorical, not literal; it refers to the
frequency of direct interaction and the size, reach, and influence of the
social networks that connect producers of Haier products to their users.
To measure this distance, Haier has devised metrics based on
interactions on WeChat, a social instant messaging and photo sharing tool
developed by the Chinese company Tencent. The goal: to minimize the


---PAGE BREAK---

distance between Haier and its customers, thereby improving the fit
between products and consumer needs, enhancing the company’s innovative
capacities, and making its marketing and promotional efforts less costly and
more effective.
As CEO Zhang pointed out to us, the size of a company’s advertising
budget might be viewed as a reflection of the distance between the
company and its customers. For example, the annual brand value report
issued in 2013 by the consulting firm Interbrand noted that Google’s
advertising budget is just a tiny fraction of Coca-Cola’s. The likely reason:
Google is deeply integrated into people’s lives through its many
productivity and social applications, giving it constant user feedback that
Coca-Cola doesn’t receive.
Based on analogies like this, Haier’s leadership team hypothesizes that a
reduction in its user distance measure may improve its product design,
customer service, and marketing efficiency. Thus, a seemingly abstract
metric like user distance may have a highly practical, dollars-and-cents
impact on your bottom line.
STAGE 3:
METRICS DURING THE MATURITY PHASE
Once a platform business has moved past the phases of startup and early
growth, new challenges and issues emerge. Eric Ries, the writer and
entrepreneur known for pioneering the “lean startup” movement,
emphasizes that, for the mature company, incremental innovation and
metrics must be closely related to each other. “When making improvements
to your product,” Ries observes, “the only arbiter of whether or not it was
successful is the metrics. And, when you are implementing an improvement
to your product, you should be testing that improvement against a baseline.”
Somewhat in line with Ries’s thinking, Amrit Tiwana, a professor at the
University of Georgia, suggests that metrics suitable for information
technology platforms that have reached the maturity phase should meet
three major requirements: they should drive innovation, have a high signal-
to-noise ratio, and facilitate resource allocation.14


---PAGE BREAK---

First, let’s focus on the role of metrics in driving innovation. In order to
remain vibrant, a platform must be able to adapt to the needs of its users
and to changes in the competitive and regulatory environment. One way for
a platform to identify necessary adaptations is by studying the extensions
provided by developers. These innovations may represent functionalities
missing from the core platform, which the platform may choose to absorb.
For example, during the era of the desktop computer, Microsoft Windows
absorbed a number of applications that were once provided by stand-alone
companies, such as disk defragmentation, file encryption, media playing,
and more.15
Cisco has followed the same absorption strategy in the router business,
where it operates a platform known as the Cisco Application Extension
Platform. The Cisco AXP (as it is called) is a Linux-based platform that
allows third-party developers to create applications that work on Cisco
routers, providing new capabilities that Cisco customers find useful—for
example, enhanced security measures and customized monitoring systems.
When we asked Cisco’s chief technology officer, Guido Jouret, how the
company decided which functions to bundle into the Cisco AXP, his answer
was illuminating:
The issue is to embed into the platform multiple independent solutions to the same problem. Then
this becomes common for everyone else. It’s a question of timing. If you do it right away, your
ecosystem is scared that you’ll cannibalize their cash cows. If one provider builds a particular
functionality, you don’t want to co-opt it. But if a whole slew of them have [developed the same
capability], then competition reduces benefits anyway, and you can fold it in.16
To enable this strategy, Cisco employs metrics that seek out instances in
which the same capability is provided across multiple industry verticals—
health care or the automotive business, for example. That is a sign that the
platform is missing important features that should be part of the next round
of continuous platform innovation.
A platform may also choose to innovate when features provided by third
parties become a large part of the overall value enjoyed by users. As we saw
in chapter 7, this helps to explain Apple’s 2012 introduction of Apple Maps
in response to the enormous popularity of Google Maps.
Some kinds of platforms need still other customized metrics during their
maturity phase. These include labor platforms such as Upwork, data
platforms such as Thomson Reuters, connection platforms such as Skype,
and platforms that connect machines such as GE’s Industrial Internet.


---PAGE BREAK---

Although these are distinct platform types with disparate needs, they all
face the challenges of facilitating a core interaction, measuring the drivers
of value, and innovating to maintain the platform’s ability to produce
significant value for users.
ELEMENTS OF SMART METRICS DESIGN
The metrics dashboard you develop for your platform can be quite complex,
allowing you to get a real-time glimpse of activities at a very fine level.
However, simplicity is a virtue when developing metrics for your platform
business. Overcomplex metrics make management less effective by
introducing noise, discouraging frequent analysis, and distracting from the
handful of data points that are most significant.
At one time, oDesk (now known as Upwork) had so many metrics
(measuring job postings, registered workers, service variety, and many
other factors) that one board member complained, “You’re over-measured
and under-prioritized.” Having learned from this mistake, Gary Swart,
former CEO of oDesk, writes eloquently about the need for highly focused
metrics, especially in the critical early period of a startup:
As a business leader you need to figure out the metric that matters most for your company and
understand that the more you measure, the less prioritized you’ll be. Don’t fall into the trap of
trying to measure everything. What I’ve learned is that in the early days, what matters most is
having customers who love and use your product. Figure out the one or two best measures to
determine this.17
Lean startup guru Eric Ries echoes the need to be selective in the design
and use of metrics. In particular, he cautions against what he calls “vanity
metrics,” such as total sign-ups—a relatively meaningless statistic that often
increases even as the volume of interactions is flat or actually declining.
Vanity metrics fail to indicate accurately whether the business is really
achieving critical mass or the liquidity it needs.
Instead, Ries suggests, “you should make sure your metrics meet the ‘3
A’s test’ where your metrics are actionable, accessible, and auditable.” They
must be actionable in that they provide clear guidance for strategic and
managerial decisions, and in being clearly related to the success of the
business. They must be accessible in that they are comprehensible to the
people who gather and use the information. And they must be auditable in


---PAGE BREAK---

the sense that they are real and meaningful—based on clean, accurate data,
precisely defined, and reflecting the reality of the business as perceived by
users.18
In the end, the most important metric is a simple one: the number of
happy customers on every side of the network who are repeatedly and
increasingly engaged in positive, value-creating interactions. The real
question, which you should never lose sight of, is: are people happy enough
with the ecosystem to continue participating in it actively? No matter how
you end up designing the metric dashboard for your specific platform
business, it should ultimately serve to accurately measure the answer to this
key question.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER NINE
    Since the value of a platform is derived primarily from network effects, platform metrics
should ultimately seek to measure the rate of interaction success and the factors that
contribute to it. Interaction success attracts active users and thereby enhances the
development of positive network effects.
    During the startup phase, platform companies should concentrate on metrics that track the
strength of characteristics that enable core interactions on the platform, including liquidity,
matching, and trust. These characteristics can be measured in a variety of specific ways,
depending on the nature of the platform.
    During the growth phase, platform companies should focus on metrics that are likely to
impact growth and enhanced value creation, such as the relative size of various portions of
the user base, the lifetime value of producers and consumers, and the sales conversion rate.
    During the maturity phase, platform companies should focus on metrics that drive
innovation by identifying new functionalities that can create value for users, as well as
metrics that can identify strategic threats from competitors to which the platform needs to
respond.
 
*We recognize the unpleasant implications of this language. It reflects the currently prevailing
dynamic of many male–female dating interactions in U.S. society at this time, including the fact that
most online dating sites find it easier to attract male participants than females. Thus, females are “in
demand” in a way that is analogous to the demand for highly-sought-after products on an auction site
like eBay. As social norms evolve in the direction of greater gender equality, we hope and expect that
this dynamic will also evolve, with implications for the effective management of dating platforms.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

10
STRATEGY
How Platforms Change Competition
In the world of platforms, the nature of competition is being transformed.
Companies find themselves struggling to make sense of new competitive
threats posed by unexpected, often counterintuitive rivals.1 The educational
book publisher Houghton Mifflin Harcourt doesn’t fear McGraw-Hill as
much as it fears Amazon. Broadcaster NBC worries less about ABC than
about Netflix. Legal information purveyor Lexis feels less threatened by
Westlaw than by Google and by the online legal services purveyor
LegalZoom. Appliance maker Whirlpool fears GE and Siemens less than it
fears Nest, the maker of smart home monitoring and control devices that is
rapidly becoming a key element in the emerging “Internet of things.” And
the social network Facebook was less worried about a rebooted Myspace
than about Instagram and WhatsApp—which is why it bought them.
What has changed is not simply the types of competitors but the very
nature of the competitive battle. The result is a series of seismic upheavals
that 
are 
making 
one 
business 
landscape 
after 
another 
almost
unrecognizable. We’re not speaking only of the dramatic disruptions
produced by the advent of platform businesses in traditional marketplaces
(as described in chapter 4 and elsewhere in this book). We’re also referring
to the dramatic competitive battles being waged within the world of
platforms, between platform companies—with results that are often
startling, even shocking.2
It’s probably safe to say that the $25 billion initial public offering of
shares in Alibaba Group in September 2014—the largest IPO in history—
was one of the most unexpected business stories of the year. Many


---PAGE BREAK---

Westerners who had not obsessively followed the world of e-commerce had
never heard of the company. Those who had were mainly familiar with it
through its connection with the floundering Yahoo, which owned a
significant stake in Alibaba. Much U.S. coverage of the Alibaba story was
vaguely dismissive, treating the company’s amazing growth and impressive
size as fluky results of the sheer vastness and parochialism of the Chinese
market and the impact of government protectionism.
A 2010 story in the New York Times was typical. Reporter David
Barboza acknowledged Alibaba as one of several “fast-growing local firms
that are making huge profits” through online sales. But in the future,
Barboza wrote, “China’s Internet market could increasingly resemble a
lucrative, walled-off bazaar, experts say. Those homegrown successes …
could have trouble becoming global brands.” Barboza quotes one analyst as
predicting, “When the Chinese companies go outside of China, they will
find that they fail to understand their competitors as well as they did when
they were competing in China.”3
By the summer of 2014, with Alibaba’s U.S. stock debut just weeks
away, U.S. business analysts were singing a different tune. In Businessweek,
Brad Stone warned of “the Alibaba invasion” and explained how the
Chinese giant was suddenly posing the first ever significant threat to U.S.
domination of the Internet. Stone recounted how Alibaba had outcompeted
eBay in China, had become a huge source of Chinese goods for businesses
around the world, had successfully opened the Chinese consumer market
for global companies such as Nike and Apple, and was quickly building the
infrastructure to challenge Amazon and eBay in their own home market—
the U.S. Stone concluded, “China’s Web entrepreneurs are positioning
themselves to compete in—and win—the race to build the first truly global
online marketplace.”4
In most traditional industries, such a rapid emergence from relative
obscurity to global leadership would be virtually impossible. Glancing back
at business history, we see that it took American businesses in industries
like steel and heavy machinery decades to overtake once-dominant rivals in
Britain and Germany. After World War Two, Japanese upstarts required
three decades to seize leadership roles in auto making and electronics from
industry leaders in the U.S. But Alibaba today has the potential to outstrip
companies like eBay and Amazon a decade or so after entering the battle for
platform marketplace dominance.


---PAGE BREAK---

How did it happen?
As with most big business stories, there are many contributing elements
in the Alibaba saga, including the strategic insights of CEO Jack Ma, the
explosive growth of China’s middle class, and, yes, government-imposed
restrictions on foreign companies operating in China, which gave Alibaba a
bit of space to grow without being crushed by American competitors. But
the swiftness of Alibaba’s ascent is largely a function of the new realities of
platform competition.5
Explosive network effects and strong economies of scale enabled this
relatively new company to expand so rapidly on the stage of international
commerce. Alibaba.com, one of five major businesses operating under the
corporate umbrella, allows companies around the world to source goods,
products, and parts from Chinese manufacturers. One California cosmetics
maker marvels that, through Alibaba.com, “I have access to hundreds of
suppliers at my fingertips.” Conversely, Tmall, another Alibaba subsidiary,
sells foreign goods to millions of Chinese consumers, bypassing the
country’s traditional broker system, which slowed imports and added layers
of paperwork and cost. One U.S. shoe retailer says Alibaba “has
compressed the whole middle layer of retail.” The result is near-frictionless
cross-border trading that connects thousands of merchants with millions of
customers—a phenomenon scarcely imaginable before the advent of the
platform.
Furthermore, Alibaba is shrewdly leveraging another enormous
competitive strength of platforms—the ability to seamlessly incorporate the
resources and connections of outside partners into the activities and
capabilities of the platform. For example, to expand its ability to offer U.S.
goods to Chinese consumers, Alibaba has now forged a partnership with
ShopRunner, a U.S.-based logistics company in which Alibaba owns a
stake. ShopRunner already has arrangements with U.S. brands including
Neiman Marcus and Toys“R”Us that enable Alibaba to ship American
products to customers in China in two days.6
Back in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it took decades and
vast investments in retailing, warehousing, product testing, management,
printing, shipping, service, and fulfillment systems for Sears, Roebuck to
make itself into America’s merchant. Today, a platform business like
Alibaba can assemble the capabilities of dozens of preexisting entities and
swiftly become a contender for the title of merchant to the world. And, of


---PAGE BREAK---

course, Alibaba’s chief rivals for the crown are other platform companies
such as Amazon and eBay. Such is the world of competition that the rise of
platforms has brought.
But to fully understand how the rise of the platform is transforming the
nature of competition, we need to reexamine the traditional concepts of
competition that have dominated business thinking for decades—and that
many businesspeople still take for granted.
STRATEGY IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY:
A CAPSULE HISTORY
For three decades, the five forces model of competition outlined by Michael
Porter of Harvard Business School has dominated the world of strategic
thinking.7 As one measure of Porter’s influence, his writings have received
more than a quarter million citations, exceeding those of any Nobel Prize-
winning economist.
Porter’s model identifies five forces that affect the strategic position of a
particular business: the threat of new entrants to the market, the threat of
substitute products or services, the bargaining power of customers, the
bargaining power of suppliers, and the intensity of competitive rivalry in the
industry. The goal of strategy is to control these five forces in such a way as
to build a moat around the business and thereby render it unassailable.
Thus, when a firm can erect barriers to entry, it can keep competitors out,
and entrants with substitute products cannot storm the castle. When a firm
can subjugate suppliers, competition among them weakens their bargaining
power so the firm can keep its costs low. When a firm can subjugate buyers
by keeping them relatively small, disunited, and powerless, the firm can
keep its prices high.
In this model, the firm maximizes profits by avoiding ruinous
competition for itself but encouraging it for everyone else in the value
chain. Advantage is found in industry structures that create a protective
moat—one that enables the firm to segment markets, differentiate products,
control resources, avoid price wars, and defend its profit margins.
For decades, companies have studied the five forces model and used it to
guide their decisions about which markets to enter and exit, what mergers


---PAGE BREAK---

or acquisitions to consider, what sorts of product innovation to pursue, and
what supply chain strategies to employ. Approaches like horizontal
integration (in which a firm controls most or all of a specific product or
service marketplace) and vertical integration (in which a firm controls an
entire value chain, from raw materials to manufacturing to marketing) have
been analyzed and implemented based on the strategic implications of the
five forces model. Under this model, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt competes
with McGraw-Hill by striving to control the best authors and content and by
using copyright to construct a moat around its fortress of value. Whirlpool
competes with GE by engineering differentiated products, squeezing the
supply chain, and continually improving its manufacturing efficiencies,
thereby constructing a moat that makes it hard for GE to poach Whirlpool’s
customers.
Later thinkers have added nuance and fresh insights to Porter’s approach.
In 1984, MIT’s Birger Wernerfelt first described in detail what he called the
resource-based view of the firm, a variation on strategic thinking with roots
in the work of several earlier scholars.8 The resource-based view highlights
the fact that a particularly effective barrier to entry is control of an
indispensable and inimitable resource. A firm with such a resource is safe
from new entrants who lack and cannot acquire means to produce it. A
simple example is De Beers, whose control of a worldwide diamond
marketing cartel enabled it to maintain a near-monopoly over the diamond
industry for the entire twentieth century. The De Beers cartel broke down
after 2000 when some diamond producers decided to market their product
outside the De Beers-controlled system, reducing the cartel’s share of the
market from 90 percent in the 1980s to about 33 percent in 2013.9 Until
then, however, De Beers’s control of an irreplaceable resource gave it a
sustainable advantage that yielded a hundred years’ worth of profits.
In the twenty-first century, a number of strategy scholars have
challenged the resource-based view, pointing out that nimble firms are
using new technologies to ford the moats established by control of scarce
resources. In separate works, Richard D’Aveni and Rita Gunther McGrath
have argued that, in an age of “hypercompetition” (D’Aveni’s term),
sustainable advantage is illusory. Technological advances drive shorter and
shorter cycle times on everything from “microchips to corn chips, software
to soft drinks, and packaged goods to package delivery services.”10
Connecting across the Internet also allows firms to redraw industrial and


---PAGE BREAK---

geographic boundaries so that stable, slow-moving oligopolies fall to
nimbler competitors attacking with new tools and technologies.
McGrath describes how the Internet era has created radically new tools
and techniques with which to attack incumbent firms. Imagine a company
that wanted to compete with the Union Pacific Railroad in 1915—a firm
with a five-decade head start thanks to its authorization by Congress in
1862. The would-be competitor would have needed to make investments in
locomotives, rolling stock, depots, terminals, warehouses, and the legal
right-of-way required to build a nationwide rail network. The massive
investment in these and other fixed costs already spent by Union Pacific
provided a mile-wide moat that made the railroad incumbent virtually
impregnable.11
By contrast, imagine a firm that wants to compete with any of the Global
500 companies in 2015. Depending on the specific industry, such an upstart
could buy production resources from manufacturing firms around the
world, cloud and computing services from a range of suppliers, marketing
and distribution services from various intermediary companies, and
professional services from many online networks of freelancers—all at near
marginal cost. In today’s hypercompetitive environment enabled by
technology, ownership of infrastructure no longer provides a defensible
advantage. Instead, flexibility provides the crucial competitive edge,
competition is perpetual motion, and advantage is evanescent.
Other analysts have offered additional insights into the evolving nature
of competition. Author Steve Denning has highlighted the weakness of
Porter’s assumption that the purpose of strategy is to avoid competition.
Denning pointed instead to management guru Peter Drucker’s dictum that
the purpose of business is “to create a customer.” According to Denning, in
a world where sustainable advantage is an illusion, a company’s
relationships with customers are its only lasting source of value.12
It would be an exaggeration to say that events of the last decade have
demolished the five forces model—but they suggest that the nature of
competition has become more complicated and dynamic than Porter’s
model might imply.


---PAGE BREAK---

THREE-DIMENSIONAL CHESS:
THE NEW COMPLEXITIES OF COMPETITION
IN THE WORLD OF PLATFORMS
Enter platforms. Many of the insights embodied in the five forces, resource-
based, and hypercompetition models remain valid, but two new realities are
now shaking up the world of strategy.
First, firms that understand how platforms work can now intentionally
manipulate network effects to remake markets, not just respond to them.
The implicit assumption in traditional business strategy that competition is
a zero-sum game is far less applicable in the world of platforms. Rather
than re-dividing a pie of more-or-less static size, platform businesses often
grow the pie (as, for example, Amazon has done by innovating new models,
such as self-publishing and publishing on demand, within the traditional
book industry) or create an alternative pie that taps new markets and
sources of supply (as Airbnb and Uber have done alongside the traditional
hotel and taxi industries). Actively managing network effects changes the
shape of markets rather than taking them as fixed.
Second, platforms turn businesses inside out, moving managerial
influence from inside to outside the firm’s boundaries. Thus, a firm no
longer needs to seize every new opportunity on its own; instead, it can
pursue only the best opportunities while helping ecosystem partners seize
the others, with all partners sharing the value they jointly create.13
These two new realities add a dramatic layer of complexity to business
competition. Platform strategy resembles traditional strategy much the way
three-dimensional chess resembles the traditional game.14 Within the
ecosystem, the lead firm negotiates dynamic tradeoffs involving
competition at three levels: platform against platform, platform against
partner, and partner against partner.
At the first level, one platform competes with another, as in the video
game console battles among Sony (PlayStation), Microsoft (Xbox), and
Nintendo (Wii). Strategic advantage is based not on the attractiveness of
particular products or services but rather on the power of entire ecosystems.
The Sony PlayStation Portable was a stronger gaming device than the
iPhone, which lacked specialized left and right controls. When Sony
released the PSP-2000 in fall of 2007, after Apple’s summer release of the


---PAGE BREAK---

iPhone, Sony’s stock rose about 10 percent. But before long, the iPhone
ecosystem vastly outstripped that of the PSP. As we’ve already noted, Apple
has subsequently enjoyed far great financial success than Sony, thanks in
large part to the size and value of its ecosystem.
At the second level, a platform competes with its partners—for example,
when Microsoft appropriates such partner innovations as browsers,
multithreading, streaming media, and instant messaging and incorporates
them into its operating system, or when Amazon operates as a platform for
independent merchants while also selling some of the same goods on the
same platform in competition with those merchants. This is a delicate and
dangerous move. It can strengthen the platform, but at the expense of
weakening partners—a short-term gain that can lead to painful long-term
consequences.
At the third level, two unrelated platform partners compete for positions
within the platform ecosystem, as when two game app developers strive to
attract the same consumers on the same console.15
Let’s consider some of the specific impacts that these platform-driven
changes have on traditional views of strategy.
As we’ve seen, platforms expand the boundaries of the firm. The shifting
horizons of managerial influence now make competition less significant for
strategists than collaboration and co-creation—or, as scholars Barry J.
Nalebuff, Adam M. Brandenburger, and Agus Maulana call it, “co-
opetition.”16 The shift from protecting value inside the firm to creating
value outside the firm means that the crucial factor is no longer ownership
but opportunity, while the chief tool is no longer dictation but persuasion.
The five forces model depends on the distinct boundaries that
characterize traditional product markets. Each of the five forces—customer
power, supplier power, and so on—is a separate entity that must be
managed independently. By contrast, in platform markets, a winning
strategy blurs the boundaries among market participants, thereby increasing
valuable interactions on the platform. A Skillshare student today can
become a teacher tomorrow; an Etsy customer one day can begin selling her
own crafts on the site the next. Platform competition requires treating
buyers and suppliers not as separate threats to be subjugated but as value-
creating partners to be wooed, celebrated, and encouraged to play multiple
roles.


---PAGE BREAK---

The resource-based view assumes that a firm must own, or at least
control, the inimitable resource. In the world of platforms, the nature of the
inimitable resource shifts from physical assets to access to customer–
producer networks and the interactions that result. In fact, it can be better
for the firm not to own physical resources, since eschewing ownership
enables it to grow more quickly. As the examples of Airbnb and Uber
remind us, the resource pool that a platform company can access is capable
of growing much faster than the platform company itself.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (1):
PREVENTING MULTIHOMING BY LIMITING
PLATFORM ACCESS
In traditional business, Porter’s five forces and the ability to control
inimitable resources—as modified by the dynamic of technology-driven
hypercompetition—have largely shaped business strategy. In the world of
platforms, new competitive factors have moved to the fore. These new
factors help determine who participates in a platform ecosystem, the value
they help to create, who controls that value, and ultimately the size of the
market. These new factors have become the focus of a series of new
competitive strategies.
Let’s consider them one by one, beginning with the strategy of limiting
platform access so as to control and capture a greater share of the value
created on the platform.
As we’ve seen, the resource-based view of business value must be
modified when applied to platform businesses. However, the resource-based
emphasis on inimitable resources has its parallel in the world of platforms:
Platforms seek exclusive access to essential assets. They do this, in part, by
developing rules, practices, and protocols that discourage multihoming.
Multihoming occurs when users engage in similar types of interactions
on more than one platform. A freelance professional who presents his
credentials on two or more service marketing platforms, a music fan who
downloads, stores, and shares tunes on more than one music site, and a
driver who solicits rides through both Uber and Lyft all illustrate the
phenomenon of multihoming. Platform businesses seek to discourage


---PAGE BREAK---

multihoming, since it facilitates switching—when a user abandons one
platform in favor of another. Limiting multihoming is a cardinal
competitive tactic for platforms.
Here’s an example of how the effort to limit multihoming plays out in
the new world of strategy. Adobe Flash Player is a browser app that delivers
Internet content to users, including audio/video playback and real-time
game play. Flash could have been used by app developers on Apple’s
iPhone operating system—but Apple prevented this by making its iOS
incompatible with Flash and insisting that developers use similar tools
created by Apple itself.
Developers and users responded with dismay, and some observers called
the policy an anti-competitive gambit that might be subject to governmental
sanction under antitrust regulations. The furor grew so heated that, in 2010,
Apple’s Steve Jobs felt compelled to defend the policy in an open letter—a
highly unusual step for a CEO to take. In his “Thoughts on Flash,” Jobs
argued that Flash was a closed system and technically inferior to other
options, consuming excessive energy and otherwise delivering poor
performance on mobile devices. Keeping Flash off the iPhone, Jobs
claimed, would preserve the quality of the Apple user experience.17
The real reasons were much deeper and more strategic. Adobe had
designed Flash developer tools to allow content and program porting from
Apple iOS to Google Android and to web pages more generally. Apps
developed in Flash could multihome, reducing the iPhone’s distinctiveness.
Adobe also released extensions that allowed in-app purchases. By allowing
developers to take interactions off the iTunes platform, Flash would cause
Apple to lose its 30 percent cut of every interaction as well as control over
the associated usage data—information that provides valuable clues
concerning trends in the marketplace.
If Apple had supported Flash, it would have granted users access to
enormous amounts of Flash content already on the web while giving
developers more ways to monetize their investments by multihoming across
platforms.18 But it would have been a big loss for Apple. So they used
licensing rules and technology to keep interactions from going off platform.
Another example of how the strategic battle for control of access to the
customer can play out is the story of Alibaba.
Ming Zeng is chief strategy officer of Alibaba. At the MIT Platform
Strategy Summit hosted by the authors in 2014, Zeng explained how


---PAGE BREAK---

denying a powerful competitor access to Alibaba helped change the shape
of the market and enabled at least a portion of Alibaba’s remarkable
growth.19
Early in the evolution of Alibaba, the company was scrambling for ways
to attract users and generate significant network effects. The company’s
“great explosion” in network effects didn’t occur until it devised a policy
requiring every employee to find and list 20,000 items for sale by some
person or merchant. The resulting increase in product listings generated
two-sided demand. Alibaba and its companion consumer site Taobao
quickly became the fastest-growing site for online purchases, attracting any
Chinese consumer looking to purchase almost any imaginable product.
Prior to that great explosion, when Alibaba was struggling to attract
traffic, CEO Jack Ma and his team had made a counterintuitive decision:
they created technological barriers that prevented Baidu from searching
their website. Baidu is China’s biggest Internet search engine—the Google
of China. Blocking Baidu’s bots from searching Alibaba for products being
sought by Baidu users cut off a vast supply of potential customers. Doing
this at a time when Alibaba was desperate for shoppers must have seemed a
bit crazy.
But Alibaba’s leaders were playing a long-term strategic game. They had
their eye not just on the shopping interactions that would take place on their
platform but on the potential to monetize the platform by selling
advertising. They were determined to retain control of the community of
would-be shoppers that they were gradually building on Alibaba—so that
Alibaba alone would be able to sell ads aimed at those shoppers. Barring
Baidu’s bots from Alibaba’s listings was a way of preventing Baidu from
hosting the consumer-oriented ads that companies would ultimately want to
direct to the growing numbers of Chinese online shoppers—and making
sure that those ads would appear on Alibaba’s platform instead.
The strategy worked. As Alibaba’s user base expanded, it gradually
displaced Baidu as the most valuable online advertising platform in China.
It’s as if eBay or Amazon had found a way to capture the targeted
advertising revenues now enjoyed by Google. The income generated helps
to explain why Alibaba earned more profits in 2014 than Amazon has
earned in its entire history.


---PAGE BREAK---

HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (2):
FOSTERING INNOVATION,
THEN CAPTURING ITS VALUE
The open-ended nature of platforms creates enormous opportunities for
users to create new value. Platform managers can build their businesses by,
first, giving partners frictionless opportunities to innovate, then capturing
some or all of the value created by acquisition or duplication. As we saw in
chapter 8, SAP encourages innovation by partners on its business services
platform by periodically publishing a road map of the platform real estate it
plans to open to developers over the next 18–24 months. This tells
developers where they can build, giving them up to two years of lead time
before they face competition from SAP itself, and prevents developers from
wasting time and resources developing a site for SAP users only to find its
work undermined by the arrival of SAP’s own bulldozers.
Over the long haul, it is in the interest of platform managers to take
control of the major sources of value created by and for users in their
ecosystem. This leads to what we might call the platform-world variant of
the resource-based theory of value: A platform business need not own all
the inimitable resources in its ecosystem, but it should seek to own the
resources whose value is greatest. This is why Alibaba (rather than Baidu)
owns search on its platform, why Facebook (rather than Google) owns
search on its platform, and why Microsoft (rather than some outside
software developer) owns Word, PowerPoint, and Excel on its platform.
These are all crucial resources that create value for the majority of the
platforms’ users—that’s why it is critical for the platform owners to control
them. Less valuable, or more niche, resources can be ceded to ecosystem
partners without significantly weakening the competitive position of the
platform itself.
This principle explains why platform managers need to keep a careful
watch on new features or apps that appear on the platform. These will
usually make their first appearance far down the “long tail” of adoption,
with relatively few platform participants using them to co-create value.
Most will stay there, but a few will show the ability to jump rank, climbing
rapidly toward the head of the distribution curve. A few will even show
signs of attracting their own interactive communities, which means they


---PAGE BREAK---

have the potential to become platforms themselves. Recall that social
gaming company Zynga and the photo-sharing services Instagram and
Snapchat all started off as mere blips on the Facebook platform. But their
social sharing and network effects enabled them to grow fast.
Growth of this kind often launches a strategic tug-of-war. The platform
may seek to absorb the function of the innovative partner and the value it
creates by acquisition. As we’ve noted, Facebook succeeded in acquiring
Instagram, purchasing the company for $1 billion in 2012; it has (so far)
failed to acquire Snapchat, having made a $3 billion offer that company
cofounder Evan Spiegel rejected in December 2013.
The platform may also seek to weaken the startup by promoting
competitors, as Facebook has done with Zynga. As of 2011, there were
more than three thousand games on Facebook, collectively weakening
Zynga’s individual bargaining power.20 The startup’s response may be to
sell, to fight back through multihoming, or to expand into other business
arenas. Zynga, for example, now multihomes on Tencent’s QQ social
network and on the Apple and Google mobile platforms, as well as offering
its own cloud service.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (3):
LEVERAGING THE VALUE OF DATA
One of the clichés of the Internet economy is the saying “Data is the new
oil”—and like most clichés, it contains a lot of truth. Data can be a source
of enormous value to platform businesses, and well-run firms are using data
to shore up their competitive positions in a wide variety of ways.
Platform businesses can use data to improve their competitive
performance in two general ways—tactically and strategically. An example
of tactical data use is in the performance of A/B testing, to optimize
particular tools or features of the platform. If Amazon wants to determine
whether placing the buy-it-now button at the top right or the bottom left on
a web page will generate more sales, it can run an experiment by randomly
alternating the button placement and tallying the results, possibly cross-
tabulated against various customer characteristics. Tactical data analysis is
quite effective—and it’s the reason why Amazon now places the buy-it-now
button at the top right of a web page.


---PAGE BREAK---

Strategic data analysis is broader in its scope. It seeks to aid ecosystem
optimization by tracking who else is creating, controlling, and siphoning
value both on and off the platform and studying the nature of their
activities. When Facebook uses data about member activity to observe
Zynga doing something unexpected or to spot Instagram diverting traffic in
novel ways, that is strategic data analysis.
Some notable platform strategy battles have been won by companies that
took advantage of data supremacy to outcompete their rivals.
By most measures, Monster should have won the battle for supremacy
among job placement platforms. As one of the earliest entrants into the
market, it had a first mover advantage, and it quickly generated strong
network effects in the two-sided market of employers and employees
seeking one another. However, there were built-in limitations to the data
Monster gathered. Because Monster targeted only active job seekers, it
captured no information concerning users’ broader social networks. And
once a particular job search interaction was completed, both employer and
employee would leave the platform, halting the flow of data altogether.
By contrast, LinkedIn targeted the social networks of all professionals,
not just active job seekers. This led to a higher degree of ongoing
engagement and captured data from those who were happily employed but
willing to consider new job opportunities—a vastly expanded user base.
LinkedIn also captured data from interactions among professionals
interacting with one another as well as with recruiters, providing two
separate feedback loops on the same platform. Later, LinkedIn began
emphasizing content creation and sharing by its users to foster additional
reasons for them to spend time on the platform. LinkedIn’s big edge in the
scope, depth, and volume of marketplace data has given it a huge advantage
in competing against Monster.
Platform design can be optimized in various ways to generate better user
data. Guided by a two-sided network analysis, the authors developed a set
of recommendations for the design of data analysis tools to provide
improved ecosystem leverage for SAP.
We emphasized the value of search tools that help clients find solution
providers among SAP ecosystem partners. Better matches facilitated by
enhanced data make both sides happier. We also noted that solution
providers can find clients by identifying unsuccessful user searches,
reflecting the existence of potential clients in need of business solutions. In


---PAGE BREAK---

addition, we noted the need for tools that help clients benchmark their
capabilities against other, similar companies on the platform, as well as
tools to help developers benchmark their capabilities against other
developers on the platform. Such tools can help SAP users compete more
effectively with rivals who are not on the platform.
A final set recommendation that we developed with SAP is to look for
new business service capabilities that cut across industry verticals and new
features that are rapidly climbing the long tail, meaning that they are
growing in popularity among business users. These represent new sources
of value that platforms like SAP can absorb into its platform for the benefit
of ecosystem partners who have yet to discover them.
Data analytics can thus significantly augment the capabilities of both the
platform company and its ecosystem partners, making the platform more
successful and greatly increasing its ability to generate value for users.
Analytics can guide investments in product design and in customer and
partner success, reinforcing the platform’s network effects. Collectively,
these new data tools create a formidable barrier to entry—a platform
version of Porter’s competitive moat. If competitors don’t have the data,
they can’t create the value—which means they can’t create the interactions,
which further limits their access to the data.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (4):
REDEFINING MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
Classic merger and acquisition (M & A) strategy suggests that business
leaders should pursue targets that either add complementary products or
market access or subtract supply chain costs. In a world dominated by five
forces competition, the key question driving M & A evaluation is whether
or not the target company has a moat protecting a sizeable fortress of value.
Platform managers need to adjust this strategy. For them, the key
question is whether the target company creates value for a user base that
significantly overlaps with the one they are currently serving.
If the answer is yes, then a tentative conclusion that the target may be
worth acquiring can be reached. However, there are additional hurdles to be
surmounted before making the commitment to buy, such as the profitability


---PAGE BREAK---

of the target company and its ability to elicit a continuing stream of repeat
interactions from platform participants. Fortunately, a platform business is
in an unusually privileged position when it comes to measuring the value of
a potential acquisition. Unlike a traditional pipeline company, a platform
owner can delay an acquisition until it has observed how a partner transacts
on the platform.
This solves the traditional challenge of information asymmetry in M & A
evaluation. Instead of basing a buy decision on someone else’s audited
financial data, the purchaser can rely on firsthand observation of transaction
data and even run real-world experiments to test various strategic scenarios.
Managing a platform lets you take the partnership for a test drive before
signing a purchase agreement.
Furthermore, based on the fact that platform businesses don’t need to
own all the critical assets as long as they have access to them in their
ecosystems, platform companies can pursue fewer M & A deals than many
traditional firms feel compelled to do. In the process, they enjoy at least two
significant benefits.
First, claiming a portion of the value created by a platform partner is far
less risky than buying that partner. Recall that, in 2011, Farmville and
Mafia Wars were the biggest hits in gaming, driving the stock market value
of game developer Zynga through the roof. It’s easy to imagine that the
leaders of Facebook must have been tempted to buy Zynga, which would
have not only provided them with the full value of Zynga’s game portfolio
but also denied access to this key asset to rival platforms like Myspace.
But Facebook resisted the temptation—and wisely so. Game
development is notoriously unpredictable; even the most successful games
flame out after a few years, and there’s no guarantee that another hit will
follow. Rather than buying Zynga and shouldering the responsibility for
creating the next big sensation, it was far better for Facebook to let
hundreds of game companies compete to produce the next hit and then
capture a fraction of the upside.
Second, keeping a partnership at arm’s length reduces the platform’s
technological complexity. As the very term vertical integration implies, any
new business a platform purchases must be integrated with the platform,
which creates both technical and strategic challenges. A platform built from
a dozen independently developed technologies will break sooner, cost more,
and deliver a worse customer experience than one built on a lean


---PAGE BREAK---

architecture that conducts all its business activity through clean interfaces.
Recall our discussion of the benefits of modular design in chapter 3: in a
modular system, when a part or partner fails, a new one can be swapped in
relatively easily. But when a part or partner fails in an integrated system, the
whole system can grind to a halt.
For these reasons, managers of platform businesses can afford to
approach the challenge of M & A strategy in a more thoughtful, deliberate
fashion than leaders of traditional companies, who often feel compelled to
snap up the next hot startup before someone else does.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (5):
PLATFORM ENVELOPMENT
Platform managers need to continually scan the horizon, observing the
activities of other platforms—particularly platforms that serve similar or
overlapping user bases. We call these adjacent platforms. When a new
feature appears on an adjacent platform, it may represent a competitive
threat, since there’s a possibility that users of your platform may find the
new feature attractive enough to begin multihoming or even to abandon
your platform altogether.
To respond, the platform manager can choose either to provide a similar
feature directly or to offer it indirectly via an ecosystem partner. When used
most successfully, this strategy leads to the phenomenon we call platform
envelopment. This occurs when one platform effectively absorbs the
functions—and the user base—of an adjacent platform.
For example, back in the 1990s, RealNetworks invented streaming audio
in the form of its 1995 product, Real Audio. It soon owned 100 percent of
the market. But once Microsoft decided to capture this market, the
enormous scope of its existing platform gave it an almost unstoppable
advantage. Since MS Windows had a market share of over 90 percent in
operating systems, almost everyone who was interested in media streaming
already had an operating system from Microsoft. All Microsoft had to do
was develop a software product similar to Real Audio and offer it as part of
a bundle with its Windows operating system. The Windows streaming audio
platform soon enveloped the much smaller platform created by Real Audio
—despite the older software’s superior performance.


---PAGE BREAK---

The envelopment strategy is a common one that we can see in operation
in many platform arenas. Apple is now endeavoring to use its iPhone
platform to envelop the markets for mobile payment systems and wearable
technology. Similarly, China’s Haier Group is expanding its appliance
platform in an effort to envelop the market for connected home
applications.
Of course, the opportunities and threats run both ways. If Platform A is
trying to envelop adjacent Platform B by developing a feature that competes
with Platform B’s most attractive offering, Platform B may try to envelop
Platform A by mounting the same kind of attack in reverse. In this kind of
envelopment battle, the larger platform, with its more numerous initial user
base and more powerful network effects, is generally triumphant. But as the
story of Monster versus LinkedIn demonstrated, a platform that offers
superior value to users can win a competitive battle despite an initial size
disadvantage.
By comparison with traditional pipeline businesses, platform companies
are able to move very rapidly to respond to competitive moves—and to
mount competitive assaults of their own. The winners will usually be those
platforms that are able to consistently create the greatest value for users.
But in today’s business, no victory is permanent, which means that platform
companies must be at least as vigilant in guarding against complacency as
traditional firms.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (6):
ENHANCED PLATFORM DESIGN
In the world of traditional business, companies compete by attempting to
create higher-quality products and services. In an analogous fashion,
platforms compete by trying to improve the quality of the tools they provide
to pull in users, facilitate interactions, and match producers with consumers
(the basic elements of platform design we described in chapter 3).
We saw a simple example of how this works in chapter 5, when we
explained how video hosting platform Vimeo managed to coexist with
YouTube despite serving an overlapping market, differentiating itself
through better hosting services, greater bandwidth availability, more
valuable viewer feedback, no obtrusive pre-roll advertisements, and other


---PAGE BREAK---

features that attract more selective video producers despite YouTube’s much
larger viewer base. Vimeo’s competitive stance in relation to YouTube
resembles that of many traditional businesses that coexist with a market-
dominating rival by identifying a specialized niche and creating a higher-
end product designed to cater to that audience.
In some cases, superior platform design enables a platform to
dramatically outcompete a preexisting rival. Airbnb initially had far fewer
users than the much older Craigslist, which also provides listings of rooms
and apartments for short-term rent. However, Airbnb did a much better job
at the key platform functions of facilitation and matching. On Craigslist, a
person seeking a room for rent had to drill down through an unmanaged list
of options clustered by city and organized by time of posting. By contrast,
Airbnb allowed a person to search through options organized not only
according to these characteristics but also by quality, number of rooms,
price, and mapped geolocation. Furthermore, users could also strike deals
directly through Airbnb, whereas Craigslist users had to go off platform to
make a rental agreement. This made Airbnb far easier to use and enabled
the platform to rapidly outgrow the erstwhile category leader.
WHEN ADVANTAGE IS SUSTAINABLE:
WINNER-TAKE-ALL MARKETS
In business, no victory is permanent—but on occasion, a particular firm is
capable of enjoying a dominant position within its industry for a decade or
longer. When this happens, we can say that the company has maintained a
sustained advantage. This happens most often in a winner-take-all market.
This is a market in which specific forces conspire to encourage users to
gravitate toward one platform and to abandon others. The four forces that
most often characterize winner-take-all markets are supply economies of
scale, strong network effects, high multihoming or switching costs, and lack
of niche specialization.
As we explained in chapter 2, supply economies of scale are an
industrial-era source of market power driven by the massive fixed costs of
production in such industries as railroads, oil and gas exploration, mining,
pharmaceutical development, and auto and aircraft manufacture. In
industries like these, volume matters, since amortizing costs over more


---PAGE BREAK---

buyers means that margins improve with scale. It might cost Intel $1 billion
to develop a semiconductor fabrication plant, but once the plant is built, the
incremental costs of making a million chips—or a billion—are negligible.
The greater the supply economies of scale, the greater the tendency toward
market concentration. In the U.S., despite competitive markets and the
regulatory pressure created by antitrust legislation, a handful of firms
dominate industries in which supply economies of scale play a large role—
for example, the auto industry.
As we also saw in chapter 2, network effects are the Internet-era source
of market power. Thanks to positive network effects, the value created and
the profit margins enjoyed by the company both increase as more users join
the ecosystem.21 This is why firms with network effects can enjoy a 10x
multiple in value relative to other firms that have comparable revenues but
lack network effects.22 With their current product focus and business
models, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, NBC, Lexis, and Whirlpool do not
have strong network effects. Amazon, Netflix, LegalZoom, and Nest do.
Because positive network effects attract more users to whichever platform
is larger, they are a second force that is likely to strengthen a market’s
winner-take-all tendency.
A third factor driving the winner-take-all effect is high multihoming and
switching costs. As we discussed earlier in this chapter, multihoming takes
place when users participate on more than one platform. Of course,
multihoming enables users to take advantage of the benefits provided by
multiple platforms—but it always comes with a cost, monetary (such as
multiple subscription fees) or otherwise (such as the inconvenience of
having to upload data to more than one platform website).
Somewhat comparable to multihoming costs are switching costs—the
costs associated with leaving one platform and moving to another. Again,
these costs may be monetary (such as the penalty assessed when a cell
phone user switches service providers in mid-contract) or non-monetary
(such as the inconvenience of moving all your family photos from one web
hosting service to another).
Both higher multihoming costs and higher switching costs tend to push a
market toward higher concentration, dominated by fewer, larger companies.
For example, because most people cannot afford to carry both an Android
phone and an Apple phone, they tend to choose one of these two
alternatives and stay with it for at least a few years. By contrast, lower costs


---PAGE BREAK---

encourage people to participate in two or more platforms at once. Because
most credit cards carry a low annual fee or none at all, many people carry
Visa, MasterCard, and American Express cards in their wallets, perhaps
accompanied by a couple of department store cards, choosing among them
in various circumstances based on convenience and other factors.
In markets where multihoming and switching costs are low, late entrants
can gain market share more easily, leading to markets that are more open
and fluid. For example, because most social networks offer free basic
service, multihoming on two platforms is virtually costless—which is one
reason Facebook and LinkedIn were able to compete successfully with their
forerunners, Myspace and Monster. By contrast, high multihoming costs are
one reason Microsoft has had such difficulty entering the mobile market
behind Apple and Google, despite its advantage in desktop operating
systems and the market share it gained when it acquired mobile phone
maker Nokia.
The fourth and final factor affecting demand-side scale is users’ taste for
niche specialization. When a particular set of users has distinctive needs or
tastes, they can support a separate network, thereby weakening the winner-
take-all effect. In the 1990s, when Windows enjoyed strong advantages in
the world of desktop operating systems due to its strong network effects and
the high multihoming costs in the market, Apple survived thanks to niche
specialization—it was inordinately popular among graphic artists and
musicians. Similarly, LinkedIn was able to establish a foothold among
social networks against the overwhelming network effects of Facebook
because it served the distinctive needs of business professionals.
A market with little or no niche specialization is particularly susceptible
to the winner-take-all effect. And the greater the winner-take-all forces, the
more vicious the platform competition. In the market for ride-sharing
transportation services, the absence of distinct user needs and the presence
of strong network effects explains the fierce rivalry between Uber and Lyft.
Each side has ruthlessly poached the other’s drivers by offering referral
bounties and cash incentives. Some of the alleged tactics border on the
unethical. For example, Lyft has accused Uber of ordering, then cancelling,
more than 5,000 rides in order to clog the Lyft service. Uber denied the
specific charge. But there’s no doubt that both companies are convinced that
only one is likely to survive their rivalry, and that each is determined to do
whatever it takes to be the one left standing.23


---PAGE BREAK---

As we’ve seen, the nature of competition in the world of platforms is very
different from that in the world of traditional pipeline businesses. It’s a
natural next step to wonder whether and how these differences are
impacting the nature of business regulation. Do definitions of fundamental
concepts like monopoly, fair trade, price fixing, anticompetitive practices,
and restraint of trade need to be reconsidered in their application to
platform companies? Are existing rules designed to protect the interests of
consumers, workers, suppliers, competitors, and entire communities
effective and reasonable in the world of platforms? These are some of the
questions we’ll examine in the next chapter.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER TEN
    Platform competition is like 3D chess, involving competition at three levels: platform
against platform, platform against partner, and partner against partner.
    In the world of platforms, competition becomes less important that cooperation and co-
creation. Control of relationships becomes more important than control of resources.
    Among the methods that platforms use to compete with one another are preventing
multihoming by limiting platform access; fostering innovation, then capturing its value;
leveraging the value of information; nurturing partnerships rather than pursuing mergers
and acquisitions; platform envelopment; and enhanced platform design.
    Winner-take-all markets exist in certain platform markets. They are driven by four main
factors: supply economies of scale, network effects, multihoming and switching costs, and
the lack of niche specialization. In winner-take-all markets, competition is apt to be
particularly fierce.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

11
POLICY
How Platforms Should
(and Should Not) Be Regulated
In the fall of 2014, the New York City subways were suddenly filled with
ads for a business many city residents were just beginning to learn about—
Airbnb. These were not ordinary ads aimed at convincing potential
customers to try out the room rental services provided by Airbnb. They
were what advertising people call corporate image ads, designed to burnish
the reputation of the company itself. “Airbnb is great for New York City,”
read the slogan on every ad.
But not all subway riders agreed. Within days, many of the ads had been
“edited” by marker-wielding graffiti writers with their own thoughts about
Airbnb. Journalist Jessica Pressler recorded some of the choicest comments
in New York magazine. One poster had been supplemented with the
observation, “Airbnb accepts NO Liability.” Another had been marked with
the scrawl, “The dumbest person in your building is passing out a set of
keys to your front door!” And on several posters, the phrase “for New York
City” had been replaced with a different handwritten conclusion: “Airbnb is
great for Airbnb.”
The war of the posters reflected a bigger conflict already being waged in
New York City and in other cities around the world where Airbnb was
expanding its foothold. Airbnb’s corporate image advertising campaign was
part of an expensive lobbying and public relations program designed to
counter what the company viewed as an unfair assault by regulators,
business rivals, and misinformed members of the media and the general


---PAGE BREAK---

public. The issues under debate: Is Airbnb a blessing and a boon to New
York and its citizens, or a cancer that is undermining the quality of life and
the economic soundness of the city? And who should have the right and the
power to decide?
THE REGULATORY CHALLENGE: REWORKING OLD
RULES FOR A NEW WORLD
The emergence of the world of platforms is giving rise to an increasingly
important social challenge: the need to design balanced internal governance
systems and external regulatory regimes to ensure they operate fairly.1 As
platforms such as Airbnb, Uber, Upwork, RelayRides, and many more play
a growing role in the economy and in the social and political spheres, issues
about the rights of participants as well as the impact of platform businesses
on other sectors and on society as a whole are becoming increasingly
salient. Thus, the unprecedented growth of platforms is bringing regulatory
issues to the front of the popular consciousness in ways that have not been
seen since the financial meltdown of 2008–09.
As debates about these issues rage, many observers are beginning to
recognize that much of what we all “know” about regulatory policy is
wrong—at least when applied to today’s rapidly evolving platform markets.
There is significant tension between the social goals of promoting
innovation and economic development, which argue for a relatively laissez-
faire approach to regulating platforms, and the social goals of preventing
harm, encouraging fair competition, and maintaining respect for the rule of
law.
It’s time for policymakers, legal scholars, and business advocates to
reexamine old assumptions about regulation in light of the changes being
brought about by the rise of the platform. In this chapter, we’ll explore
some of the key questions that leaders must grapple with in the years to
come as platforms continue to transform the economy. Some of the issues
we will explore include possible effects on tax policy, affordable housing,
public safety, economic fairness, data privacy, labor rights, and more.


---PAGE BREAK---

THE DARK SIDE OF THE
PLATFORM REVOLUTION
We have already noted the many benefits that the explosive growth of
network platforms is providing. However, we must also acknowledge that
the spread of platforms will not usher in some kind of new-economy
nirvana. Like every business, social, or technological innovation, the rise of
platforms has the potential for harm.2
Some of the complaints about the rise of platforms reflect the disruptive
impact of platform businesses on traditional industries. It’s natural that
companies and workers whose profits and livelihood may be threatened by
new business models will fight back by any means available, including
seizing on evidence, meaningful or not, that the new models are causing
economic, environmental, social, or cultural harm. Some of the attacks on
platform businesses certainly fall into this category. It’s not hard to
understand why large publishers and bookstore chains might hate Amazon,
why record companies might hate iTunes, why taxi companies might hate
Uber, and why hotel chains might hate Airbnb. Naturally, when criticism of
platforms—including calls for strict regulation to limit their impact—comes
from interested sources like these, it should be taken with a grain of salt.
But this doesn’t mean that there are no legitimate complaints to be raised
about the impact of platform businesses. Visitors to New York who take
advantage of Airbnb to enjoy affordable accommodations are fans of the
service, as are the hosts who make extra money by renting out their spare
rooms. But some of their neighbors are unhappy. Horror stories about orgies
in Airbnb rentals, assignations with prostitutes (one of whom reportedly
ended up getting stabbed), and parties with uncontrolled groups of rowdy
young drunks have found their way into the tabloid press. One worried
Manhattan landlord, Ken Podziba, felt driven to install surveillance cameras
to prove that a tenant was renting out her place in violation of a state law
forbidding short-term sublets. He succeeded in having her evicted. “Airbnb
is making money while letting people do whatever they want,” Podziba
exclaims. “It’s crazy.”3
As we saw in chapter 8, the impacts of Airbnb on third parties
uninvolved in the rental arrangement are what economists call externalities.
A recurring economic problem is when the cost of negative externalities is


---PAGE BREAK---

borne not by the people or companies that created them but by “innocent
bystanders” who are stuck with the problem. Externality issues are a great
way for a business to antagonize its neighbors and invite intervention by
regulators—and Airbnb is currently grappling with a number of them.
Lack of consistent insurance coverage has been one of the most serious
externality questions around Airbnb. In December 2014, after years of
complaints, Airbnb announced a new policy that would provide $1 million
of liability coverage to protect its U.S. hosts from damages caused by
wayward guests. The problem: this is so-called secondary coverage, which
only kicks in after the host’s personal homeowner’s policy is used up. And
nearly all personal homeowner’s policies in the U.S. specifically exclude
coverage for “commercial activity” in the home—including rentals. Airbnb
appears to be hoping that the cost of damages will somehow get pushed
onto personal insurance policies administered by companies that aren’t
diligent about investigating claims—or that are deceived by homeowners
who lie about their role as Airbnb hosts.
Naturally, this partial insurance coverage is worrisome to many Airbnb
hosts. But as financial journalist Ron Lieber points out, it also creates an
externality that could impact thousands of otherwise uninvolved citizens.
“If Airbnb succeeds in sharing risk with personal insurance companies,” he
writes, “then everyone’s premiums have to rise to cover it.”4
Of course, as we’ve noted, some externalities are positive—economic
and other benefits that businesses provide to uninvolved third parties. Some
data suggest that hotel prices fell slightly after the entry of Airbnb, likely
increasing the tourism business and ultimately benefiting local restaurants
and other attractions.5 Other data suggest that the number of drunk driving
deaths has fallen slightly after the entry of Uber.6 But such positive
externalities are often difficult to document and quantify, while negative
externalities tend to be vivid, unmistakable, and painful. Is it fair for Airbnb
to slough off those external costs onto individuals who are not part of the
platform, or onto the society at large?
These issues are far from theoretical. Some platform businesses have
actually been shut down because of concerns about negative externalities.
Consider the MonkeyParking app. Launched in San Francisco in January
2014, this system encouraged drivers to vacate parking spaces by
auctioning off the empty places to other users of the system, splitting the
proceeds with the driver who vacated. Many observers considered it unfair


---PAGE BREAK---

that the system encouraged the privatization and monetization of a public
good—parking spaces—and thereby affected the openness and accessibility
of a public transportation system on which countless individuals and
businesses depend. It also had a negative impact on privately owned
parking lots, whose owners had invested in their businesses to serve the
same need. In response to the complaints, in June 2014, regulators stepped
in to close the platform.7
The MonkeyParking story isn’t a black-and-white judgment call. It raises
the question of whether, when, and how the social harm of privatizing a
public resource outweighs the benefit of providing planned access to a
scarce resource. A case can be made that a system like MonkeyParking
produces environmental benefits by reducing the need for drivers to roam
downtown streets in search of parking spaces, burning fossil fuels and
adding to traffic congestion in the process. But if we permit MonkeyParking
to auction off public parking spaces for private profit, are we opening up to
other questionable market activities? Should platform users be permitted to
claim choice locations in public parks or beaches on summer weekends and
auction them off to the highest bidders? What about seats in the most
desirable public schools? Or private rooms in the best-run public hospitals?
Do we want to live in a society where those with the most money can claim
an ever larger share of the most attractive public goods? These are some of
the questions about external impacts that a seemingly simple case like the
MonkeyParking story raises.
Labor platforms, bulwarks of what some call the freelance or 1099
economy, raise still other issues of social impact and equity. Platforms like
Upwork, TaskRabbit, and Washio are fine for people who value a flexible
work schedule above all, but are much more problematic for people who
find themselves with no choice except to operate as full-time employees on
a freelance basis without the benefits and worker protections normally
mandated by law. It’s understandable that businesses want to take advantage
of the agility and low overhead costs that labor platforms make possible.
But in a society like the United States, where basic services such as health
care are provided largely through employer programs, is it desirable to
create an economic advantage to companies that offload the costs of such
services onto their freelance employees—or onto government support
programs that are already financially stressed?8


---PAGE BREAK---

Platforms certainly create benefits for their users—if they didn’t, they
wouldn’t be exploding in popularity. But they also create unintended side
effects, including negative externalities, that society as a whole must
consider and address.
THE CASE AGAINST REGULATION
Despite the problems illustrated by platform business like Monkey-Parking,
there are many who would argue that the potential abuses and social
dislocations caused by platforms are a small price for the tremendous
innovation, new value, and economic growth they produce. Platform
businesses are here to stay, and they are bringing undoubted benefits to
millions of people. Why run the risk of discouraging innovation through the
heavy hand of regulation?
Opponents of regulation are quick to point out the many cases in which
it fails or backfires. Nobel Prize-winners Ronald Coase and George Stigler,
members of the famous laissez-faire-oriented Chicago School of
economics, argue that the vast majority of market failures are best
addressed 
by 
market 
mechanisms 
themselves—for 
example, 
by
encouraging the free growth of competitors who provide goods and services
that produce greater social benefits than their rivals. In their view, the
evidence of history suggests that government regulators tend to be
incompetent or corrupt, which means that regulation generally fails to solve
the problems it is intended to address. In specific instances where the free
market fails to resolve a significant problem of market fairness or consumer
protection, it can be addressed by private litigation in the courts.
One of the most common mechanisms of regulatory failure was labeled
by Stigler “regulatory capture.”9 The basic premise is that market
participants will act to influence regulation in their own interests, often
making the underlying market problems worse rather than better. In his
1971 article, Stigler illustrated the point with examples drawn from oil
import quotas, the prevention of new firms entering the airline, trucking,
and banking industries, and the control of access to labor markets through
licensing requirements for workers such as barbers, embalmers, physicians,
and pharmacists. Thanks to regulatory capture, government rules are often
used to block competition and thwart innovation rather than to protect


---PAGE BREAK---

consumers and benefit society. Stigler and his followers argue that the
economy and society as a whole will benefit when regulatory capture is
eliminated—and that this requires the elimination of most government
regulation of business. Jean-Jacques Laffont and Jean Tirole (the latter the
2014 winner of the Nobel Prize in Economics) extended Stigler’s analysis
using an agency perspective, making the point that “principals,” like voters,
have imperfect control over their “agents,” including elected and appointed
officials. Laffont and Tirole show that it would be impossible for firms to
benefit from regulatory capture if the principals involved had more
complete information about and control over the behavior of their agents.10
There’s no doubt that regulatory capture does exist. Managers of
government agencies charged with devising and enforcing business
regulations must often turn to business leaders for advice and guidance on
how to craft those regulations, which often means that the rules end up
benefiting companies—or certain highly influential companies—rather than
the public at large. In some powerful industries, such as financial services,
executives have been known to divide their careers between Washington
and the private sector, so that the same people who design regulatory
regimes later advise corporations on the best ways to evade those regimes
or manipulate them for profit (a practice that Laffont and Tirole specifically
highlighted).
Today, some of the regulatory battles about platform businesses reflect,
in part, efforts by traditional industries to use government regulation as
shields against the competitive models that platforms introduce. Thus, as
commentator Conor Friedersdorf puts it, “The car service Uber is fighting
in cities all over America to end the regulatory capture enjoyed by the
taxicab industry.”11 Airbnb is facing similar battles with regulators who are
influenced by long-standing relationships with the hospitality industry.
In the eyes of some observers, the phenomenon of regulatory capture
sharply undercuts the claims to legitimacy of most economic regulation by
government. For example, in a post on his blog Cafe Hayek, libertarian
economist Don Boudreaux summarizes the way Uber enables drivers to
transform their personal cars from private goods into part of the economy’s
capital stock, then goes on to criticize “government interventions against
Uber and other sharing-economy innovations” as both “obstacles to market
forces that improve consumers’ access to goods and services” and “assaults


---PAGE BREAK---

against market forces that increase the amount of wealth-producing capital
that ordinary people are able to own, control, and profit from.”12
You may or may not agree with Boudreaux that attempts to restrict the
spread of Uber constitute today’s “single most obnoxious example of
government intervention.” But the existence of the phenomenon of
regulatory capture is not necessarily a fatal blow to the argument in favor of
regulation—or even the argument in favor of regulating platforms in
particular. It’s possible to argue that, rather than eliminating regulation
altogether, we need to design political, social, and economic systems that
reduce the likelihood of regulatory capture—for example, through laws that
restrict the “revolving door” between business and government.
Economist Andrei Shleifer, a scholar in the areas of corporate
governance and government regulation, points out that there are strong
differences in the prevalence of regulatory capture across countries. When
governments are relatively unchecked by their citizens, strong regulation
often leads to high levels of corruption and expropriation by government
officials. And, indeed, this is widely seen in authoritarian countries.
However, in countries with more accountable governments, such as those
seen in northern Europe, higher levels of regulation appear to be relatively
free of such corruption, which reduces the level of regulatory capture. In
these circumstances, Shleifer argues, regulation can be compatible with
promotion of social welfare and economic growth.
Shleifer notes, moreover, that the reliance of the Chicago School on
litigation as an alternative to regulation assumes and depends upon the
existence of an independent and honest judiciary. This ignores the fact that
judges and lawyers are just as subject to manipulation and capture as other
government employees.13 More broadly, Shleifer’s argument is consistent
with the argument made by Laffont and Tirole in favor of regulation that is
specific to countries and technologies.14
In general, the historical record doesn’t support the arguments of people
who favor no regulation of business. In fact, it’s difficult to identify any
developed marketplace that has been completely free of intervention by
government authorities. Regulation to prevent anti-competitive practices
goes back at least as far as ancient Greece and Rome, where state
authorities took swift action to mitigate grain market price fluctuations that
occurred due to natural (weather) events as well as deliberate market
manipulation by merchants and shipping agents.15 In the same way, modern


---PAGE BREAK---

societies depend upon regulators to enforce rules of fair play in markets.
When regulation fails, we get the scandals of insider trading, the meltdown
of the mortgage securities market, or the high prices enjoyed by incumbent
monopolists.
Relatively few people want to live in a world free of all regulation, and
in a complex society like the one we live in today, regulation serves a
number of important social functions. The airline system in the developed
world is astonishingly safe, given the complexity of the technologies
involved and terrorist attempts to sabotage it.16 This record is a result both
of improved technology and training and of relentless post-crash
investigations by government agencies like the National Transportation
Safety Board, which have led to a systematic elimination of risk factors. In
similar fashion, we depend upon regulation to maintain the purity of our
drinking water, the safety of our transportation systems, and our ability to
respond to and control infectious diseases.
For all these reasons, only a relatively small fraction of the population
would endorse the extreme libertarian position of calling for a complete
elimination of business regulations—which means that the question is not
whether, but precisely how, platform businesses should be covered by
regulatory regimes.
Of course, there is a tradeoff between the benefits and costs of
regulation. A complete absence of regulation is likely to produce high social
and economic costs through the persistence of problems like business fraud,
unfair competition, monopolistic and oligopolistic practices, and market
manipulation. On the other hand, the most extreme level of government
intervention into markets, as seen in some totalitarian countries, leads to
other problems, including corruption, inefficiency, waste, and lack of
innovation. Usually the existence of such tradeoffs implies that an
intermediate solution is best, and indeed the world’s most vibrant
economies have typically employed some intermediate level of government
regulation via oversight agencies, judicial review, or some combination of
the two.
Economist Simeon Djankov and colleagues have classified the range of
possible regulatory regimes on a spectrum from private orderings (what we
call private governance), through systems that rely on court rulings
administered by independent judges or regulation by state employees, to
direct government ownership of assets (socialism).17 Their visual depiction


---PAGE BREAK---

of this spectrum (Figure 11.1) reflects the tradeoff between social losses
because of private misdeeds and social losses because of government
misbehavior.
Over the last two generations, as Andrei Shleifer has noted, most
economists and political theorists have shifted from viewing government
intervention in a positive light to preferring privatization.18 Today, there’s a
trend toward regulation that was once provided by governments now being
provided by private entities acting in their own self-interest—for example,
the gradual shift from nationally mandated accounting standards like the
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles used in the United States toward
the International Financial Reporting Standards promulgated by the
International Accounting Standards Board, a private organization based in
London. We believe this trend will continue and that governments must
rethink what they choose to regulate and what kinds of regulation private
entities can provide more efficiently. One purpose of this chapter will be to
suggest the circumstances in which regulators should consider intervention
in platform markets and those in which platforms might best govern
themselves.


---PAGE BREAK---

FIGURE 11.1. Djankov’s depiction of the curve of “social losses” produced by either the
complete absence of regulation (on the left) or total control of business by government (on the
right). Reprinted by permission.
REGULATORY ISSUES RAISED BY THE GROWTH OF
PLATFORM BUSINESSES
Let’s consider some of the most significant regulatory issues that have come
to the fore as a result of the rise of platform businesses over the last two
decades.


---PAGE BREAK---

Platform access. As platforms become increasingly important markets
for goods and services, access to platforms can be a legitimate subject for
inquiry by regulatory authorities. When certain potential participants are
excluded from a platform, it raises questions about who benefits from the
exclusion, whether that exclusion is fair, and what its long-term impact on
the overall marketplace is likely to be.
For example, the Alibaba Group handles 80 percent of e-commerce
transactions in China.19 The threat of exclusion presents a serious challenge
to any firm conducting business online. Access is also a concern of every
startup hoping to break into the top listings, among millions, when they
have no transactions history to raise their page ranks. In the computer game
console market, the platform sponsors (Sony, Microsoft, and Nintendo)
have been known to offer category exclusivity to certain firms such as
Electronic Arts in exchange for their support of the platform. Firms can
achieve the same ends when they buy producers that provide critical
components or software for their platforms. For example, Microsoft
acquired the game studio Bungie in order to ensure exclusive access to the
popular Halo video game franchise when the Xbox was launched in 2001.
Access and exclusivity also play a role in platform compatibility. In
1997, Sun Microsystems filed suit against Microsoft for intentionally
“forking” the Java programming language—that is, creating an
incompatible branch in the code base—in order to limit its appeal on
operating systems other than Microsoft Windows. Sun filed another suit in
2002 when Microsoft excluded Java from desktop distribution in favor of
.NET, a proprietary Microsoft language.20 In 2015, the mobile operating
system Android has split into open and proprietary versions. Commercial
and regulatory inducements to maintain compatibility can be necessary to
preserve the interests of consumers.
The issue of exclusion is especially significant when network effects are
strong, as business professor Carl Shapiro argues. “[S]uch exclusionary
contracts and exclusive membership rules,” Shapiro notes, “can be
especially pernicious in network industries, posing a danger that new and
improved technologies will be unable to gain the critical mass necessary to
truly threaten the current market leader.”21 He goes on to say: “Ultimately,
this is not a story about consumer harm based on monopoly pricing,
although that can be part of the problem. The graver problem is that the
pace of innovation may be slowed, denying consumers the full benefits of


---PAGE BREAK---

technological progress that a dynamically competitive market would offer.”
This phenomenon has been dubbed excess inertia, referring to the power of
network effects to slow or prevent the adoption of new, perhaps better,
technologies. When one or a few platforms can dominate a particular
market because of the power of network effects, they may choose to resist
beneficial innovations in order to protect themselves from the costs of
change and other disruptive effects.
It’s certainly arguable that regulators should consider whether
government intervention would be appropriate in cases where arbitrary
denial of access to a particular platform seems likely to lead to excess
inertia.22 However, it’s not always easy for observers to judge what the true
impact of a particular competitive move may be. In some instances, the
apparent outcome may change dramatically when viewed over time.
For example, in a 2014 article, two of the authors of this book (Geoffrey
Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne) argued that platform policies that limit
competition among developers can actually benefit consumers in the long
run by fostering higher rates of innovation.23 The process works like a short-
term micro-patent: a platform grants temporary category exclusivity to a
particular extension developer in exchange for substantial investment in
new products or services. (SAP has used this “preferred partner” strategy
with developers like ADP, and Microsoft has used it with selected game
developers.) Over time, the innovations created under this time-limited
arrangement tend to be folded into the core platform. They then become
available to all consumers for their direct consumption and also become
available to the next generation of developers to foment new innovation.
For these reasons, we’d urge regulators to move with caution when
considering intervention in cases that concern platform access.
Fair pricing. A practice that has traditionally drawn regulatory interest is
predatory pricing—the situation in which a firm prices goods or services so
low that it cannot possibly be making money. The low prices temporarily
benefit consumers, but in the long run harm them by driving competitors
out of business, which permits the remaining supplier to raise prices to
monopoly levels. This, of course, is the objective of the predatory pricer in
the first place, and it explains why government regulators have sometimes
stepped in to prohibit pricing practices they view as predatory in nature.


---PAGE BREAK---

However, two of the authors of this book (Parker and Van Alstyne) have
done research that calls into question the traditional interpretation of lower-
than-cost prices and therefore the regulator’s definition of predatory pricing.
Our analysis shows that in fact firms with strong two-sided network
externalities can maximize profit even when they distribute services to one
side of the market at a price of zero. They achieve this result by earning
attractive profits through sales of the goods or services they provide to the
other side of the market.24
Along with other authors, including Jean Tirole, this line of research in
two-sided networks has overturned the conventional wisdom and required
regulators to retool their predation tests to incorporate network effects.25 In
particular, regulators have viewed the practice of selling goods or services
at or below cost as evidence of intent to drive competitors out of business
with the intent of then raising prices once those competitors are gone.
However, as discussed above, when firms take cross-market externalities
into account, they can rationally price their goods or services at zero when
selling to certain groups of customers, even in the absence of competition.
Despite these changes in competition analysis, there are still open issues
of platform law to be decided. The case brought against Google’s search
service by the European Union in 2015, which accuses Google of favoring
its own comparison shopping service over that of rivals, illustrates this
point.26 Interestingly, a similar complaint to the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) in the U.S. was dropped in 2013.27 Another platform giant, Amazon,
is facing scrutiny over its role in the book market. The concern is that
Amazon is lowering prices in order to gain market share and that, once
competitors exit, prices will rise.28 We are skeptical about the specific
charge against Amazon—namely, that book prices will rise significantly
once the company’s dominance is complete—but we are somewhat more
sympathetic to the idea that Amazon might act as too powerful a gatekeeper
for an important cultural industry, perhaps establishing its own proprietary
format for digital content, as it has tried to do with Amazon Word (AZW),
the format used on the Kindle reader. Free pricing of book chapters given
away in the AZW format, for example, could be used as a Trojan horse,
attracting readers as part of a long-term strategy leading to increased
platform control and a shift from an open to a closed proprietary standard.


---PAGE BREAK---

Data privacy and security. Citizens have long had reason to wonder
about what firms might be doing with the personal data they collect about
their customers. The ability of businesses to gather finely detailed data
about individual households expanded dramatically with the introduction of
the consumer credit card. This financial innovation helped increase
consumer spending by making it much easier to access credit. But this, of
course, meant banks had a significant incentive to use data to measure the
creditworthiness of customers. To provide this analysis, three major
consumer credit information agencies arose: Equinox, Experian, and
Transunion. In exchange for interaction-level detail from the banks, the
agencies computed credit scores for consumers that banks could use to
decide whether to extend credit and if so, at what rates. If you’ve ever taken
out a car loan or a mortgage, you’re familiar with the importance and
impact of your credit score.
Early data security regulation focused on the need to provide
transparency around the criteria used to compute credit scores. Stories of
racial and geographic discrimination abounded.29
In 1974, Congress passed the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which
prohibited credit discrimination on the basis of sex and marital status. It was
amended in 1976 to include race, color, religion, national origin, source of
income, and age. In 1977, the FTC began to devote a significant fraction of
its resources toward enforcing the act and addressing the discriminatory
practices that had led to its passage.30
Today, however, issues regarding the use of consumer data have grown
in scale and complexity. The credit agencies have been plagued by
problems such as stolen and mistaken identities that can take years for
consumers to resolve, causing untold harm.31 The use and abuse of
consumer information by the credit agencies and the lenders who rely upon
them are also the subject of fierce debate. Practices like predatory lending
—the deliberate targeting of consumers who can’t afford credit by lenders
eager to profit from exorbitant interest rates and fees for missed payments
—have been blamed for contributing to economic inequality and even
market instability.
It’s against this backdrop that the FTC came to be the leading U.S.
player in regulating the practices of data service providers.
Most consumers appear to be willing to trade access to detailed data
about their spending behavior for easy access to credit. But many may not


---PAGE BREAK---

fully appreciate the fact that the same dynamics that power the credit
agencies underlie the services provided by “free” information service
businesses—the data aggregators we described in chapter 7. If you’ve gone
online to search for or simply research information about a camera, a book,
or any other consumer product, you probably noticed that advertisements
for the same product subsequently popped up on every website you visited.
This is data-driven marketing in action, and the sale of the underlying
personal information about consumers is a significant source of income for
many platform businesses.
You may find those customized ads on the Internet a bit unsettling. Even
more unsettling are some of the less obvious ways in which personal data
are used. Many firms—both platform businesses and others—track
consumers’ web usage, financial interactions, magazine subscriptions,
political and charitable contributions, and much more to create highly
detailed individual profiles. In the aggregate, such data can be used for
cross-marketing to people who share profiles, as when a recommendation
engine on a shopping site tells you, “People like you who bought product A
often enjoy product B, too!” The anonymity of this process renders it
unobjectionable to most people. But the same underlying data can be, and
is, sold to prospective employers, government agencies, health care
providers, and marketers of all kinds. Individually identifiable data about
sensitive topics such as sexual orientation, prescription drug use,
alcoholism, and personal travel (tracked through cell phone location data)
can be purchased through data broker firms such as Acxiom.32
Consumer concern over the practices of the data broker industry has led
to a number of investigations, including a major FTC inquiry that resulted
in a report titled “Data Brokers: A Call for Transparency and
Accountability.”33 But very little has actually changed to prevent practices
that many find objectionable.34
Skeptics say that, in reality, citizen concerns about data privacy are
superficial. They point out that consumers routinely share intimate personal
information about themselves on social media platforms such as LinkedIn
and Facebook, and that they are increasingly “instrumenting themselves”
using fitness, health, and diet tools like Fitbit, Jawbone, and MyFitnessPal.
Although these platforms have privacy policies that are available to
consumers, they are written in dense legalese that very few users bother to
read. The readiness with which consumers publicly expose information


---PAGE BREAK---

about themselves through platforms suggests that few citizens care
passionately about the issue of data privacy—which makes it unlikely that
either regulators or platform managers will rein in the use of personal data
any time soon.
One final point with respect to privacy is the issue of data ownership.
Data aggregators and other firms with access to information are, in effect,
asserting an ownership interest in data that might otherwise be viewed as
belonging to individuals. In a provocative act designed to shed light on the
issue, a young woman named Jennifer Lyn Morone has incorporated herself
in order to assert an ownership interest in the data stream that she
generates.35 Companies that profit from the use and sale of personal data, of
course, are unlikely to find Morone’s gesture either amusing or persuasive.
But the issue is not going to disappear. J. P. Rangaswami, chief data officer
for Deutsche Bank, predicts:
As we learn more about the value of personal and collective information, our approach to such
information will mirror our natural motivations. We will learn to develop and extend these rights.
The most important change will be to do with collective (sometimes, but not always, public)
information. We will learn to value it more; we will appreciate the trade-offs between personal
and collective information; we will allow those learnings to inform us when it comes to mores,
conventions, and legislation.36
In a world where data is widely described as “the new oil,” it’s clear that
the issue of data ownership will need to be resolved through some
combination of regulatory action, court rulings, and industry self-
regulation.37 Each new scandal involving the release of sensitive
information, such as the 2014 disclosure that Sony Pictures had leaked
access to the viewing history of millions of users, is likely to increase the
push to establish ownership rights over user data.38 Such ownership rights
would give victims a legal course of action after data breaches occur; the
theory is that, given high enough liability, firms will take data security more
seriously and act to prevent future leaks.39 In some niche markets,
agreements over data ownership are already being developed. For example,
in November 2014, a collection of major agricultural companies and
organizations, including Dow, DuPont, Monsanto, and the National Corn
Growers Association, agreed on a set of principles defining the rights of
farmers to own and control data about their crops.40 Consider the
implications: sensor data used to improve crop yield could just as easily be
used to predict soybean futures. These secondary uses have the potential to


---PAGE BREAK---

create vast wealth in which the sources of that data would have a legitimate
interest.
National control of information assets. The global reach of the Internet
has added significant complication to business regulation. Developing
sensible rules concerning the role of national borders in business
transactions, and then finding ways to enforce those rules consistently and
fairly, is far more difficult in a world that is electronically interconnected.
One example of this difficulty is the application to platform businesses of
rules regarding national control of data access.
When multinational firms expand into less developed countries, they are
usually required to follow so-called local content regulations, which are
designed to stimulate the local economy and to ensure that a portion of the
economic growth created by the new venture remains in the host country
rather than being transferred to the headquarters of the multinational. For
example, when corporations like Siemens and GE expand into sub-Saharan
Africa, they are often required to set up local operations, in activities such
as training and service. This is why Siemens operates a Siemens Power
Academy in Lagos, Nigeria, to train technicians for the electrical power
industry.
Some industry observers believe it is possible that the local content
requirement might extend to data services—requiring, for example, that
business data be stored and processed locally rather than internationally. If
this principle becomes widely established, the value of the data involved
may be significantly diminished. For example, if GE or Siemens power
turbines around the globe were connected into a single network for data
collection and study, the resulting data flow could become the basis of
comparative analysis that would yield a unique “usage signature” for each
machine. This would enable data analysts to make more accurate
predictions of turbine performance and create customized maintenance
schedules that could save money for both the corporation and its customers.
However, realizing this positive outcome requires access to tremendous
amounts of information for real-time processing—access that local data
content laws might thwart. It’s a good example of the kind of regulatory
restriction that governments should reconsider in the light of the new
capabilities offered by platform ecosystems.41


---PAGE BREAK---

Privacy laws in Europe represent another form of what might be called
data nationalism. Rules concerning the flow of data have been established
for the ostensible purpose of protecting citizens’ privacy. The result is a
hodgepodge of local data processing centers and a fragmentation of data
that, if aggregated, could be used for commercial purposes. The number of
billion-dollar startups in the U.S. is forty-two, but only thirteen in the EU.42
An inability to scale network effects could be one reason. Recent evidence
suggests that this EU data privacy regime is already having a notable
economic impact. For example, ad placement firms, which rely on insights
from big data to optimize their decisions, are significantly less effective in
their European operations than in comparably wealthy regions such as the
United States that lack restrictive data management rules.43
Tax policy. One of the hottest regulatory issues facing platforms is tax
policy. As quickly growing platforms that do business around the country
and even around the world reorganize the economy and put countless local
“mom and pop” companies out of business, who benefits from the sales tax
dollars generated? Should they be paid at the location of a central producer,
or should they be collected at the point of consumption? The economic and
political impact of questions like these can be substantial.
As the world’s second biggest online retailer (based on revenues),
Amazon has been the poster child for this issue. In most countries where
Amazon operates, a national sales or value-added tax is levied, which
Amazon must collect from all customers. However, the crazy quilt of state
and local sales taxes in the U.S. creates opportunities for Amazon to
minimize its tax collection obligations and thereby keep the perceived price
of its goods as low as possible. The company has battled with numerous
state regulators and legislatures over sales tax rules, often refusing to collect
taxes until specifically compelled to do so by the passage of new laws. In
some states, Amazon claims not to maintain a “legal presence” sufficient to
require payment of sales tax, despite operating large warehouses and
shipping centers in those states. And in some cases, Amazon has played one
state off against another—for example, apparently rewarding Indiana for
passing a law that exempted the company from collecting sales tax by
locating no fewer than five of its regional warehouses in the state. Today,
Amazon collects sales taxes in twenty-three U.S. states, including several of


---PAGE BREAK---

the largest, while holding out against tax collection requirements
elsewhere.44
The same issue exists in regard to other online platforms, such as labor
platform Upwork, which reduces local tax collections by putting local
staffing agencies out of business. It would seem that the international reach
of online platforms renders traditional local and state sales tax regimes
obsolete, and that a national sales tax law would be a natural and logical
solution. However, as of the mid-2010s, it seems highly unlikely that the
U.S. Congress, with its strong anti-tax bias, will pass such a law.
A next-best solution would be a bill making it easier for states to impose
sales tax on goods purchased online from out-of-state sources, and such a
bill has in fact been introduced in Congress several times since 2010. An
early version, called the Main Street Fairness Act, failed to advance beyond
the committee stage, thanks in part to heavy lobbying against the bill by
representatives of Amazon.
A newer version called the Marketplace Fairness Act was passed in the
Senate in May 2013, though it has not yet been brought to a vote in the
House. In a fascinating twist, the Marketplace Fairness Act has been
publicly supported by Amazon (as well as by retail giant Walmart). The
likely reason for the reversal: since Amazon now collects sales tax on most
of the goods it sells, the company stands to gain from a simplified sales tax
system that will apply equally to all Internet merchants—including the
many smaller rivals of Amazon who currently skate by collecting little or
no tax on most of their sales. It’s a classic illustration of how regulatory
debates that evoke majestic concepts such as equity, freedom, and the
sanctity of the marketplace often turn, in the end, on nitty-gritty issues of
dollars and cents and the political clout that various players bring to the
legislative table.
Labor regulation. Those who operate labor platforms usually choose to
describe their systems as intermediaries that serve solely to match labor
with demand for services. In this view, the people who sign up for work
through firms such as Uber, TaskRabbit, and Mechanical Turk are truly
independent contractors, and the platform bears little legal (or moral)
responsibility to the parties on either side of the interaction once the match
has been made.


---PAGE BREAK---

However, from the perspective of regulators who are charged with
safeguarding the welfare of working men and women, this position is
dubious. In the traditional world of offline business, a number of firms that
classify full-time, permanent employees as contract labor for legal and
regulatory purposes have been drawing unfavorable attention for the
practice. For example, in August 2014, FedEx lost a federal court case
involving 2,300 full-time workers in California who were classified as
contractors rather than employees. The practice, which the court ruled was
illegal, reduced FedEx’s responsibility for benefits, overtime payments,
Social Security and Medicare contributions, and even reimbursement for
work expenses such as uniforms. (FedEx has said it plans to appeal the
ruling.)45
Labor platforms will need to monitor the evolution of regulation in this
area very carefully. While government agencies and judges vary in their
attitudes and in their readiness to challenge widespread business practices,
many look askance at employment models that seem to be designed solely
to shield companies from responsibility for the well-being of their workers.
Perhaps equally significant, the reputation of online labor platforms has
already taken a serious hit in the unofficial “court of public opinion”—as
reflected, for example, in more than a million Google results, many from
respectable mainstream media outlets, in response to the query “Internet
sweatshop.”46 In the long run, public disapproval of business behavior can
have a meaningful impact on the value of a company’s brand—which
means that the court of public opinion operates, at times, as an unofficial
regulatory body that business leaders are wise to heed.
Similarly, there are limits to the extent to which labor platforms will be
able to evade responsibility for their practices in hiring, screening, training,
and supervising workers—even when those workers are technically
classified as independent contractors. Uber, for example, has experienced
significant criticism for alleged sexual assaults committed by its drivers on
passengers.47 At a time when Uber is engaged in a fierce battle over
regulation with the traditional taxi industry, it can ill afford the suspicion
that its labor practices are shoddy.
On a very different front, the emergence of online labor platforms is
creating new challenges for regulators tasked with monitoring and
measuring the national and local labor markets. Because of multihoming,
freelancers can switch between multiple platforms over the course of a day


---PAGE BREAK---

—for example, drivers can accept jobs for both Uber and Lyft. This makes
it all the more complex for government agencies to accurately capture labor
and unemployment data, which in turn play an important role in economic
and political policy debates. If employment platforms continue to grow, this
will be an increasingly important issue.
Potential manipulation of consumers and markets. When platforms
grow big enough, they have the potential to cease being mere participants in
markets—serving to efficiently match existing supply with existing demand
—and actually begin manipulating individual users and even entire markets
through their great size and reach.
There are disturbing indications that this is already beginning to happen.
Retail platform Amazon controls such a large share of the online book
market that even giant publishers feel pressured to accept business terms
they’d otherwise consider unacceptable. During a seven-month dispute with
Amazon over price-setting policy, the French-based Hachette Book Group
—one of the world’s largest publishers—found online sales of its products
being delayed and preorder buttons for some of its titles being removed.
Since preorders play an important role in determining whether or not a book
achieves bestseller status, these steps by Amazon impacted the long-term
success of a number of Hachette publications. The two sides finally came to
terms in November 2014, having apparently reached some kind of
compromise and with neither side claiming outright victory.48
Facebook users and privacy experts were distressed in June 2014, when
it was revealed that, two years previously, the newsfeeds of almost 700,000
members had been deliberately manipulated as part of a psychological
experiment. The researchers, including Cornell professor Jeffrey Hancock
as well as some Facebook employees, altered the news flows to include an
abnormally low or an abnormally high number of either positive or negative
posts. According to the study results, the status messages posted by the
Facebook members in response showed that “emotional states can be
transferred to others via emotional contagion, leading people to experience
the same emotions without their awareness.”49
The stakes get higher as influence moves to politics. In one study of 61
million Facebook users, news feeds with positive social pressure caused
roughly 2 percent more people to vote or at least declare that they had voted
relative to people who did not receive such messages. In fact, Facebook


---PAGE BREAK---

social messaging increased turnout directly by about 60,000 people and
indirectly by about 280,000 more people via social contagion.50 While there
is no evidence that election outcomes changed, one can imagine close races
where a 2 percent margin affects who wins.
It’s an interesting finding—one that Facebook advertisers and others
seeking to influence the attitudes and behaviors of large numbers of people
might find valuable. But these studies were conducted without the
knowledge or consent of their subjects. And not all the studies received
prior approval by any institutional review board, which is normally required
before experimentation on human subjects is conducted. Outside experts
responded by challenging the ethics and possibly even the legality of
Facebook’s actions. Amidst the ensuing furor, Mike Schroepfer, Facebook’s
chief technology officer, announced that the company would henceforth
conduct an “enhanced review process” before performing research dealing
with sensitive emotional issues.51
In a third case, Uber was embroiled in controversy in July 2015, when a
team funded by FUSE Labs, a research organization sponsored by
Microsoft, reported on the existence of so-called “phantom cabs” on the
Uber passenger app—cars that appear to be close to a passenger pickup
location but which in fact do not exist. An Uber spokesperson explained the
phantoms as a mere “visual effect” that riders should ignore, but some
drivers and passengers suspect they may be a deliberate ploy to trick riders
into thinking Uber cabs are closer than they really are. Other reported visual
anomalies on the Uber app create misleading or confusing impressions of
high-demand areas that forecast higher “surge” pricing.
The FUSE researchers say that both drivers and passengers are learning
to game the system, trying to avoid being misled by Uber’s inaccurate
visual data. They conclude: “Uber’s access to real-time information about
where passengers and drivers are has helped make it one of the most
efficient and useful apps produced by Silicon Valley in recent years. But if
you open the app assuming you’ll get the same insight, think again: drivers
and passengers are only getting part of the picture.”52
Cases like these illustrate the wide variety of ways that highly popular
platforms can use their market power and their access to vast amounts of
data to mislead people and manipulate their behavior without their
knowledge or consent. The temptation for platform managers to engage in
such practices for potential economic gain is likely to be huge. But defining


---PAGE BREAK---

this kind of ethically questionable behavior, developing clear and
reasonable rules to discourage it, and then enforcing those rules without
excessive intrusiveness and bureaucracy will be a huge challenge for
regulators.
TIME FOR REGULATION 2.0?
Some observers say that the advent of the information age, in which vast
amounts of previously inaccessible data are now available for evaluation,
analysis, and use in smart decision-making, should drive a wholesale
rethinking of traditional approaches to regulation. Nick Grossman, an
entrepreneur, investor, and former MIT Media Lab Scholar, calls for a
transition from today’s Regulation 1.0, which emphasizes prescriptive rules,
certification processes, and gatekeeping, to a new system he calls
Regulation 2.0, based on open innovation tempered by data-driven
transparency and accountability.53 Both kinds of regulatory regime share the
goal of creating trust and fostering fairness, security, and safety, but the
means employed are very different.
In Grossman’s view, regulation based on restricted access makes sense in
a world of scarce information. Traditionally, it was difficult or impossible
for a consumer to gather accurate information about the quality or safety of
a particular taxi driver or hotel. That’s why most governments have taken
steps to screen and certify taxi drivers, require insurance coverage for
drivers, and monitor the safety and cleanliness of hotel accommodations.
But in a world of abundant information, regulation based on data-driven
accountability makes more sense. Firms like Uber and Airbnb can be
granted freedom to operate in exchange for access to their data. Because it
is possible to know exactly who did what to whom and when, consumers
and regulators can hold people and platforms accountable for their
behaviors after the fact. Uber customers can use driver ratings to decide
whether or not to accept a particular ride; Airbnb customers can use host
ratings to pick a safe and comfortable place for a night’s stay; and both
organizations can be sanctioned or even shut down by regulators if their
activities violate public expectations of safety and fair dealing.
Under Grossman’s Regulation 2.0 scheme, government regulatory
agencies would operate quite differently from the way they do today. Rather


---PAGE BREAK---

than establishing rules of market access, their primary job would be to
establish and enforce requirements for after-the-fact transparency.
Grossman imagines a city government responding to the arrival of Uber by
passing an ordinance that states: “Anyone offering for-hire vehicle services
may opt out of existing regulations as long as they implement mobile
dispatch, e-hailing, and e-payments, 360-degree peer-review of drivers and
passengers, and provide an open data API for public auditing of system
performance with regards to equity, access, performance, and safety.”54
It certainly makes sense for policy-makers to seek ways to take
advantage of the vast new flows of data created by online business—and in
particular by the rise of platforms—in developing new systems for
monitoring and regulating economic activity. And in some arenas, enhanced
transparency, perhaps under government mandate, can powerfully
supplement or even replace traditional forms of regulation, reducing the
costs and inertia associated with government intervention and encouraging
innovation.55 For example, mandated disclosures of food nutrition data, auto
safety ratings, and the energy efficiency of appliances have helped millions
of consumers to make wiser choices and encouraged companies to improve
the quality of their products.56
Grossman’s emphasis on the power of transparency to enforce high
community standards of behavior is particularly relevant in an age driven
by information. An interesting analogy can be drawn with the ideas
promulgated by Richard Stallman, the programmer–activist who is a leader
of the “free software” movement. Stallman points out that one of the key
virtues of free (or open source) software is that anyone can inspect the code
and see what it does. Of course, only experts are likely to do this. But those
who take the opportunity will be in a position to offer an informed
judgment about the virtues and vices of the program, and, when necessary,
to alert the general public to the problems they detect. If software code
allows a company to spy on customers, defraud them, or misappropriate
their data, then making the code freely accessible to all will quickly expose
the problem and likely force its correction.57
In this sense, free software resembles the free speech guaranteed to
Americans by the Bill of Rights—in the hands of engaged citizens, both can
serve as crucial weapons in the battle against private or public malfeasance.
And the same can be said about the platform data that Grossman’s new
regulatory system would rely upon. As Supreme Court Justice Louis


---PAGE BREAK---

Brandeis famously said, “Sunshine is said to be the best disinfectant;
electric light the most efficient policeman.”
Of course, it’s unlikely, especially in the short term, that a wholesale
replacement of traditional regulation with a new, information-based system
would produce results that most citizens would find acceptable. Would most
families be satisfied to have government inspections of food processing
plants eliminated, so long as statistics about deaths from salmonella and
trichinosis associated with particular companies were widely available? In
matters of life and death, traditional systems of standard-setting and
certification make it easier for people to consume goods and services
without anxiety, and it’s hard to imagine that most consumers would want
to completely eliminate those systems.
Furthermore, an effective Regulation 2.0 regime would require
significant talent upgrades on the part of government agencies as well as
complex revisions to existing statutory codes. As suggested by the cases of
apparent customer and market manipulation we described earlier in this
chapter, platform businesses can’t necessarily be trusted to behave with
consistent transparency and integrity unless independent outsiders are
monitoring their actions. These outsiders could be teams of tech-savvy
experts employed by government agencies; they could be employees of
rival businesses who take advantage of open data access to study the
behavior of their competitors and publicize instances of wrongdoing. In
either case, Regulation 2.0 could still end up being fairly intrusive and
costly.
Grossman cites the work of economist Carlota Perez, who has described
how “great surges” in technology have led to “profound changes in people,
organizations and skills in a sort of habit-breaking hurricane.” Perez goes
on to say that these surges also demand changes in regulatory regimes—and
Grossman’s contention is that the advent of the information age represents
the latest such surge.58
There’s much truth in the notion that the information age—including the
rise of the platform—is a paradigm-altering shift that will profoundly
impact every corner of society, including government regulation of
business. But, as Grossman notes, Perez describes the great surges as cycles
of change that take around fifty years to play out. That’s about right—and
this suggests that it will take time to determine in exactly what ways the
traditional regulatory system can safely be discarded in favor of a system


---PAGE BREAK---

like Regulation 2.0. In many cases, we may conclude that maintaining at
least a portion of the current permission-based regulatory apparatus while
augmenting its effectiveness using systems of permissionless, data-driven
accountability will yield the best results.
OUR ADVICE FOR REGULATORS
We began this chapter by describing the basic economic tradeoff between
private governance and government regulation. Corporate governance acts
to mitigate negative externalities that affect the private interests of the firm.
Platforms are adept at regulating market failures on-platform but less able
to regulate them off-platform. Experience suggests that firms are usually
quick to react to changing technology and market conditions, but they
generally do not act to maximize social welfare unless forced to do so by
the power of public opinion or by regulatory constraints.
Government regulation, on the other hand, is supposed to be focused on
safeguarding the interests of the general public and those of private
industry. It can wield tools of enforcement such as search warrants, the
power of civil forfeiture, and the authority of law. Unfortunately, regulators
are subject to capture, especially in countries with weak democracy and
government oversight. Thus, neither private governance nor government
regulation can be counted on to serve as a foolproof guardian of the public
interest.
For policymakers who are taking on the challenging task of adapting
traditional regulatory systems to the new conditions of the age of platforms,
we recommend two sets of frameworks. The first, provided by economists
Heli Koski and Tobias Kretschmer, suggests that industries with strong
network effects can generate market inefficiencies and that the goal of
public policy should be to minimize those. The market inefficiencies of
particular concern are abuse of dominant position and the failure to ensure
that new and better technologies are adopted as soon as they become
available.59
The second framework, developed by David S. Evans, proposes a three-
step process to test for the desirability of government regulatory action. The
first step is to examine whether the platform has a functioning internal
governance system in place. The second step is to see whether the


---PAGE BREAK---

governance system is mostly being used to reduce negative externalities
that would harm the platform (such as criminal behavior by users) or to
reduce competition or take advantage of a dominant market position. If, on
balance, the firm is using its governance system to deter negative
externalities, then no further action is necessary. However, if the
governance system appears to encourage anticompetitive practices, then a
third and final step is required. This step involves asking whether the
anticompetitive behavior outweighs the positive benefits of the governance
system. If so, then a violation has occurred, and a regulatory response is
required. If not, then no further action is needed.60
Proponents of low regulation are likely to urge restraint in applying
government pressure to platform businesses, especially during the startup
phase. After all, they might reason, the harm done to the marketplace or to
the general public by a startup company is likely to be relatively small,
especially when compared with the potential positive effects to be derived
from innovation, new business model development, and economic growth.
The time to apply the rules more stringently will come later, once the start
up has grown to the point where the costs and benefits of regulation are
both reasonable.
Early in its history, YouTube had an informal though unacknowledged
policy of allowing copyrighted material to be posted on its site. As YouTube
grew, concern over this lax enforcement of intellectual property rights
increased, putting pressure on the company to establish a stricter
compliance standard. Over time, mechanisms have been worked out to
compensate rights holders, and today there are many instances of musicians
earning significant revenues from their YouTube channels.
However, this approach does not satisfy everyone. Harvard professor
Benjamin Edelman observes:
If we let tech companies launch first and ask questions later, we invite misbehavior … Perhaps
some sectors suffer unnecessary or outdated regulation; if so, let’s remove the regulations through
proper democratic processes. If we let a few firms ignore the rules, we effectively penalize those
that comply with the law, while granting windfalls to free-wheeling competitors. That’s surely not
a business model consumers are looking for.61
We close with some general principles of regulatory guidance:
Where possible, we would hope that regulators will move to make
adjustments to law to more quickly adapt to technological change. Old


---PAGE BREAK---

regulatory practices, such as the predatory pricing tests developed for non-
network industries, simply do not work for new technologies and business
models. Regulation must incorporate the recent advances in economic
theory that show that firms can still be maximizing their profits even when
they choose to distribute certain products and services at zero price.
Regulators should also act to reduce the opportunities for arbitrage.
Given that the number of New York City taxi medallions has not changed
since 1937, it should surprise no one that an alternate market would develop
to leap the regulatory hurdle. In this sense, Uber is a response to regulatory-
driven market failure, much like the gypsy cabs that have long operated
under the regulatory radar.
Another area where regulators can add value to new technologies is
where consumers depend upon accurate information in order for markets to
function. Gas stations have long had their pump accuracy checked,
restaurants have had health inspectors, and buildings have had safety
inspections. Such audits have provided the consumer confidence for those
markets to function. Comparable systems for auditing ratings and service
quality might help the new platform-based markets develop and thrive.
Access to platform data represents a real opportunity to limit market
failures both on and off platform.
Finally, we would encourage regulators to have a light touch in order to
encourage innovation. Change often provokes anxiety, and there’s an
understandable impulse to slow the pace of technological and economic
innovation in order to fend off unforeseeable consequences that may be
harmful. But history suggests that, in most cases, allowing change to
flourish leads mainly to positive results in the long run.
One of the most notable regulatory battles related to technological
change took place in the early 1980s, when the major movie studios fought
to prevent ordinary citizens from using the then-new video recording
technology to create copies of movies and TV shows for their personal use.
In the landmark 1984 case Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios,
Inc., the Supreme Court ruled that such copying constituted fair use and
therefore did not violate copyright law. From an economic standpoint, the
Sony decision proved to be highly beneficial. To the surprise of the movie
moguls, the studios that once opposed video recorders made more money
after the new technology was allowed to emerge, through the creation of an
entirely new secondary market for movie rentals that did not previously


---PAGE BREAK---

exist. In a similar fashion, new platform markets are likely to create
unexpected new opportunities for growth and profit, even for many
incumbent businesses that may be fearful of change. For this reason,
regulator-induced industry sclerosis must be strenuously avoided, despite
the pressures government officials may feel from anxious business leaders
eager to protect their familiar turf.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER ELEVEN
    Opponents of regulation point to phenomena like regulatory capture to argue that
government intervention in business is usually ineffectual. But history suggests that some
level of societal regulation of business is healthy and beneficial both to the economy and to
society as a whole.
    There are a number of regulatory issues that are unique to platform businesses or that
require fresh thinking in the light of the economic changes that platforms are causing.
These include access to platforms, compatibility, fair pricing, data privacy and security,
national control of information assets, tax policy, and labor regulation.
    The flood of new data made available by today’s information age technologies suggests the
possibility of new regulatory approaches based on after-the-fact transparency and
accountability rather than restrictions on market access. But such new approaches will need
to be designed thoughtfully and carefully to fully protect the public.
    Economic frameworks for industries with network effects suggest that dominance alone is
not necessarily cause for government intervention. Rather, failure to manage externalities,
abuse of dominance, manipulating populations, and delaying innovation can indicate when
intervention in platform markets is necessary and appropriate.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

12
TOMORROW
The Future of the Platform Revolution
As you’ve seen in the previous chapters of this book, platforms have been
transforming entire sectors of the economy, marginalizing incumbents and
enabling small startups to rise rapidly to global dominance. It’s rare to see a
single new business model sweep the field in so many industries so quickly.
Still, you might be feeling that we’ve been overstating the impact of the
platform, at least a bit. After all, hasn’t the platform revolution so far been
restricted to a relative handful of sectors? Many of the most important
aspects of our economy, our society, and our lives—education and
government, health care and finance, energy and manufacturing—appear
largely unaffected by the rise of the platform.
That’s true—so far. But these and other arenas are already seeing the
encroachment of platform business models. In the years to come, we
believe it’s likely that platform businesses, while not claiming control of
every aspect of these economic sectors, will stake out significant areas of
influence in all of them. In this final chapter, we want to sketch some of the
future trends that are already taking shape and that you will want to be
aware of as you make plans for your own future.
WHAT MAKES AN INDUSTRY READY FOR
THE PLATFORM REVOLUTION?


---PAGE BREAK---

In our research into the disruption of industries by platforms, we’ve noted
characteristics that make a particular industry especially susceptible. Here
are some of the types of businesses that are most likely to join the platform
revolution in the years to come:
•        Information-intensive industries. In most industries today, information is an important
source of value—but the more crucial information is as a value source, the closer the industry
is to being transformed by platforms. This explains why media and telecom are two of the
industries that have already been disrupted so thoroughly by platforms. New entrants have
created ecosystems that can create and disrupt content and software more quickly and easily
than large firms with thousands of employees once did. 
•    Industries with non-scalable gatekeepers. Retailing and publishing are two examples of
industries that traditionally have employed expensive, non-scalable human gatekeepers—
buyers and inventory managers in the case of retail, editors in the case of publishing. Both are
already undergoing disruption thanks to the rise of digital platforms, with millions of
producers (artisans, craftspeople, writers) creating and marketing their own goods through
platforms like Etsy, eBay, and Amazon. 
•    Highly fragmented industries. Market aggregation through a platform increases efficiencies
and reduces search costs for businesses and individuals looking for goods and services created
by far-flung local producers. Platforms ranging from Yelp and OpenTable to Etsy, Uber, and
Airbnb have made it easy for customers to visit a single source to gain access to thousands of
small suppliers. 
•    Industries characterized by extreme information asymmetries. Economic theory suggests
that fair, efficient markets require that all participants have equal access to information about
goods, services, prices, and other crucial variables. But in many traditional markets, one set of
participants has far better access than others. Used car dealers, for example, knew much more
about the condition and history of the cars they sold, as well as about supply and demand
variables, than their customers—hence the distrust in which they were held. Data aggregating
and sharing platforms such as Carfax are now leveling the field, making detailed information
about used car values available to anyone willing to pay a small fee. Other markets where
information asymmetries have made fair dealing difficult, from health insurance to home
mortgages, are ripe for similar changes.
Based on the factors above, one may question why banking, health care,
and education continue to be so resistant to transformation. All three
industries are information-intensive. (Health care may seem like a service-
intensive industry, but all of its efficiencies are powered by information.)
However, industries that might seem to be susceptible to platform
approaches, yet are likely to be resistant to such disruption, have certain
other characteristics. These include the following:
•    Industries with high regulatory control. Banking, health care, and education are all highly
regulated. Regulations favor incumbents and work against the interests of startups trying to
unlock new sources of value. Emerging platforms are starting to attack this problem in an
effort to create new sources of value, but regulatory control is holding them back.


---PAGE BREAK---

•    Industries with high failure costs. The costs of a defaulted loan or matching a patient with
the wrong doctor are much higher than the cost of showing inappropriate content on a media
platform. Consumers are reluctant to participate on platforms when the perceived costs of
failure are high.
•        Resource-intensive industries. Resource-intensive industries have typically not been
dramatically affected by the Internet. Winning participants in these markets still depend on
their access to resources and their ability to manage efficient, large-scale processes such as
mining, oil and gas exploration, and agriculture, in which information has a limited role to
play.
The impact of these factors will change over time. As more and more
processes and tools get connected to the Internet, every industry has the
potential to become an information-intensive industry. For example,
resource-intensive industries like mining and energy will increasingly need
to leverage the power of platforms, creating efficiency gains and faster
learning by connecting their resources—material, labor, and machines—
over a central network to coordinate workflows. Over the next few years,
we will see the start of transformation in large resource-intensive companies
as they leverage platforms toward greater efficiency gains.
Even as we consider the relative likelihood that various industries will be
susceptible to platform transformation in the near future, let’s bear in mind
that industry boundaries are becoming increasingly porous due to the
impact of platforms. Think about the advertising industry, for example. In a
world of pipelines, businesses’ access to consumers was limited to media
and retail channels: television networks, newspapers and magazines,
department stores. Very few businesses could afford to own their own
direct-to-consumer channels for promoting their goods and services. By
contrast, in today’s world of Internet-powered platforms, any business can
engage with consumers directly, capturing data about their preferences,
connecting them with external producers, and offering personalized services
that provide individual customers with unique value.
In effect, every company can now be an advertising company. Uber, for
example, has the potential to be the world’s largest hyperlocal advertising
business. Through its rider data, Uber can gain unique insight into where
users live, where they work, when and how often they commute, and many
other such aspects of behavior. The company could use such data to connect
users with local merchants. Many other kinds of companies with vibrant
platforms, from banks to retailers, could employ a similar strategy.


---PAGE BREAK---

The power of the platform is modifying—even erasing—many other,
similar barriers that once separated industries from one another. Thus, one
of the most dramatic effects of the rise of the platform has been the
emergence of unexpected new competitors from seemingly unrelated
industry sectors. Bear this in mind as you consider the possible future
impact of the platform model on your own industry, whatever it may be.
With these insights in mind, let’s consider some of the most plausible
and intriguing future scenarios for the expansion and evolution of platforms
in specific sectors of the economy.
EDUCATION:
THE PLATFORM AS GLOBAL CLASSROOM
Education is perhaps the prime example of a major industry that is ripe for
platform disruption. Information-intensive? Check. In fact, the fundamental
product being sold by schools, colleges, and universities is information of
various kinds. Non-scalable gatekeepers? Check. Ask any parent whose
child has recently had to navigate the slow, complex, inherently arbitrary
process by which a lucky handful of students are admitted to the most
prestigious and selective colleges, and you’ll hear plenty about the
shortcomings of some of the world’s most powerful gatekeepers. Highly
fragmented? Check. Within the United States, there are over 13,000 public
school districts, as well as thousands of private school systems, colleges,
universities, and proprietary schools, each fiercely independent and proud
of its unique programs and standards. Information asymmetry? Check. Only
a small percentage of parents feel competent to judge the qualifications and
reputations of schools and colleges—hence the proliferating, competing,
and confusing array of rating systems and the ever-increasing pressure on
students to earn entry to the handful of institutions that are universally
admired—the Harvards and Yales of the world.
With millions of families forced to negotiate this non-system system
every year, it’s no wonder that most emerge frustrated and uncertain as to
whether or not they’ve found the right school for their child. Then factor in
the unsustainable cost inflation that education has experienced in the U.S.:
having grown by twenty-five times over the past fifty years, higher
education spending has skyrocketed even faster than health care spending.


---PAGE BREAK---

The overall picture is of an industry under tremendous pressure to change
so as to deliver better value for the dollars being invested.
The drive to build education platforms is well under way, as businesses
like Skillshare, Udemy, Coursera, edX, Khan Academy, and others suggest.
Eager to avoid being rendered irrelevant or obsolete by upstart platform
companies, a number of the world’s greatest universities are moving to
position themselves as leaders in this educational revolution. Institutions
including Harvard, Princeton, Stanford, the University of Pennsylvania, and
many others are offering online versions of some of their most popular
classes in the form of “massive open online courses” (MOOCs)—many in
partnership with companies like Coursera.
In the years to come, the spread and increasing popularity of teaching
and learning ecosystems will have an enormous impact on public school
systems, private schools, and traditional universities. Barriers to entry that
have long made a first-class education an exclusive, expensive, and highly
prestigious luxury good are already beginning to fall. Platform technologies
are making it possible for hundreds of thousands of students to
simultaneously attend lectures by the world’s most skilled instructors, at
minimal cost, and available anywhere in the world that the Internet is
accessible. It seems to be only a matter of time before the equivalent of a
degree from MIT in chemical engineering will be available at minimal cost
in a village in sub-Saharan Africa.
The migration of teaching to the world of platforms is likely to change
education in ways that go beyond expanded access—important and
powerful as that is. One change that is already beginning to happen is the
separation of various goods and services formerly sold as a unit by colleges
and universities. Millions of potential students have no interest in or need
for the traditional college campus complete with an impressive library, a
gleaming science lab, raucous fraternity houses, and a football stadium.
The traditional university makes education available to a select few:
professors with specific, laboriously obtained academic credentials and
highly qualified students with the time and money to invest in campus life.
For this relative handful of people, the old model of education may work
well. But education platforms like Skillshare make high-level teaching and
learning available to thousands who can’t or won’t fit the traditional mold.
Suddenly, brilliant instructors and eager learners can find one another


---PAGE BREAK---

anywhere, anytime. It’s a priceless opportunity that the online platform
makes available at a tiny fraction of the traditional cost.
Education platforms are also beginning to unbundle the process of
learning from the paper credentials traditionally associated with it. As of
2014, statistics show that only about 5 percent of students who enroll in
MOOCs receive certificates of completion—a data point that has led many
to conclude that online teaching is ineffective. But a study of more than 1.8
million MOOC enrollees at the University of Pennsylvania found that 60
percent of students become actively engaged with the course content,
watching class videos, connecting with their peers, and completing one or
more assignments. The researchers concluded that “students treat MOOCs
like a buffet, sampling the material according to their interests and goals.”1
As students gravitate to MOOCs—especially those that teach specific work
skills, like the many online courses in fields such as software engineering,
design, marketing, and film editing—they appear to be more interested in
the real-world abilities they are honing than in such traditional symbols of
achievement as a class transcript or a diploma. A high ranking on TopCoder,
a platform that hosts programming contests, will earn a developer a job at
Facebook or Google just as fast as a computer science degree from
Carnegie Mellon, Caltech, or MIT. Platform-based students for whom a
conventional credential is important can often make special arrangements to
receive one—for example, at Coursera, college credit is a “premium
service” you pay extra for.
The platform-based unbundling of educational activities is separating the
teaching of specific skills from reliance on vast, multipurpose institutions
like traditional universities. Duolingo uses a crowdsourcing platform to
teach foreign languages. Its founder, Luis von Ahn, is a computer scientist
who never studied language instruction. After reading the most respected
books on the topic, he performed comparative tests of the leading theories
using the crowds that visited his website and an evolving set of testing tools
to measure the results. Today, more people are using Duolingo to learn a
language than all the students in high school in the U.S. combined.2
Duolingo separates language teaching from traditional educational
institutions. The same thing is happening with the teaching of programming
on TopCoder, marketing on Salesforce, or guitar on Microsoft Xbox.
Learning platforms are facilitating many other experiments with the
form, structure, and substance of traditional education. For example, the


---PAGE BREAK---

Minerva Project, launched in September 2014, with an initial class of thirty-
three students, aims to replace the traditional liberal arts college with an
online platform that allows students to attend interactive seminars with
professors located anywhere in the world. The students themselves will live
for a year at a time in dorms in various cities—San Francisco, Berlin,
Buenos Aires—where local cultural, professional, and recreation facilities
will be incorporated into the curriculum. Minerva hopes to grow to admit
some 2,500 students per year, each paying a total fee of around $28,000
(including room and board)—about half the cost of attending a selective
college or university.
“The Minerva boast,” journalist Graeme Wood observes, “is that it will
strip the university experience down to the aspects that are shown to
contribute directly to student learning.”3 Will Minerva succeed? Only time
will tell. But whether it does or not, many other educational experiments are
sure to follow. The flexibility and power of the platform to facilitate
connections between teachers and students makes this virtually inevitable.
The long-term implications of the coming explosion in educational
experimentation are difficult to predict with certainty. But it wouldn’t be
surprising if many of the 3,000 colleges and universities that currently
dominate the U.S. higher education market were to fail, their economic
rationale fatally undercut by the vastly better economics of platforms.
HEALTH CARE: CONNECTING
THE PARTS OF AN UNWIELDY SYSTEM
Like education, health care is an information-intensive industry that
features non-scalable gatekeepers (in the form of insurance company
networks and much-in-demand physicians whose referrals are needed
before any consultation can occur), a high degree of fragmentation (among
hospitals, clinics, labs, pharmacies, and millions of individual practitioners),
and enormous information asymmetries (thanks in part to professionals who
sometimes encourage an attitude of “doctor knows best” among patients
who are often overwhelmed by the complexities of modern medicine). And
like education, health care is an industry widely felt to be in crisis,
particularly in the United States. The fragmented U.S. health care delivery


---PAGE BREAK---

system imposes huge costs in missed diagnoses, garbled data, wasted time,
and squandered resources.
In its simplest form, the platform model can make accessing health care
faster and more convenient by providing an Uber-like interface that permits
people to summon medical help wherever they are. Such a system has
already been launched in several cities, including Miami, Los Angeles, and
San Diego, by a company called Medicast. Click the Medicast app, describe
your symptoms, and a physician is guaranteed to arrive within two hours.
The service is popular among doctors who want to earn a few extra dollars
during their off-hours.4
But the potential impact of the platform model on medicine goes far
deeper than such basic one-off interactions. In fact, the platform revolution
offers huge opportunities to remedy many of the problems that plague
American health care. Connecting all suppliers—as well as health care
consumers themselves—in a hyperefficient platform has the potential to
revolutionize the system.
One of the early harbingers of the kind of change we can expect in the
decades to come is the enormous popularity of mobile health care apps and
wearable fitness devices linked to networks that provide analysis and
information based on the personal data generated. Millions of Americans
are already demonstrating that they are comfortable having electronic tools
measuring their pulse, blood pressure, activity levels, sleeping patterns, and
other health indicators, as well as sharing this information with a software
package that can offer diagnostic readings and customized advice.
Expanding and enhancing this approach can help shift the emphasis of the
health care system from curing or managing illnesses—often diagnosed late
and treated at very high cost—to preventing them.
It’s also easy to envision a platform that could help individuals manage
such chronic—and costly—health care problems as diabetes, hypertension,
heart disease, asthma, allergies, and obesity. For example, a wearable
device could track a diabetic’s nutrition intake, exercise regimen, and blood
glucose levels; use the data to describe and explain recommended
treatments based on past medical experience and history; and alert a
clinician when warning signs of an impending medical crisis arise. One
analyst estimates that such a platform could reduce the national investment
in diabetes management by at least $100 billion per year.5 Extend the same
logic to the other chronic illnesses that affect tens of millions of Americans


---PAGE BREAK---

—and which our current pay-for-service health care system manages poorly
—and the potential cost savings could skyrocket … to say nothing of the
thousands of lives that would be extended and improved.
Even greater benefits will be realized when one or more platforms
emerge that are capable of integrating a wide range of health care data from
multiple sources—not just wearable sensors but also patient input and
electronic health records generated and maintained by service providers.
Developing a platform that is accessible both to patients and to an array of
professionals—physicians, nurses, technicians, therapists, pharmacists,
insurance carriers, and others—while still protecting patient confidentiality
will represent a crucial challenge. As health care consultant Vince Kuraitis
notes:
Many healthcare value propositions will be dependent on broad networks and platforms. If you
had high blood pressure and needed to manage your own care with support from your physician,
what good would it be if your lab values were on one platform and your medications were listed
on another, non-interoperable platform? If you were traveling and went to a hospital emergency
room, what good would it do you if your health data was stored on a network not accessible by
the hospital?6
Many of today’s leading technology companies are already beginning to
position themselves for the coming battle to dominate the health care
platform business. Microsoft, Amazon, Sony, Intel, Facebook, Google, and
Samsung have all launched platforms designed to stake out at least one
corner of the rapidly growing fitness–health care space.
One intriguing entrant is Apple’s HealthKit app, announced in mid-2014,
which allows a range of health and fitness apps—including those from
outside providers like Nike—to share data with one another. Apple
announced plans to work with the famous Mayo Clinic and other health
care companies to develop systems that would allow data from HealthKit to
be shared with physicians and other caregivers (with appropriate privacy
safeguards). And in early 2015, Apple unveiled its new Apple Watch, which
boasts an array of health and fitness tracking, measurement, and
communication tools.
Under the circumstances, it’s not surprising that, according to consultant
Kuraitis, Apple has been hiring a large number of professionals to staff up
its health platform business—including many with MD and PhD degrees. It
seems clear that, within the next decade or two, at least one giant platform


---PAGE BREAK---

business will become a major player in the U.S. health industry. Apple is
one of the companies with its eyes fixed on that goal.
The transition from today’s fragmented health care system to an efficient
platform-based system will not be easy. The barriers to health care platform
development include economic and managerial forces that discourage the
sharing of patient data and services. These forces help to explain, for
example, why the implementation of electronic medical records mandated
by the Affordable Care Act (2010) has been poorly managed, with record
systems so customized by institution that two hospitals in the same
community are often unable to share data regarding the same patient. The
problem is exacerbated by the financial incentives for health care
organizations to keep each patient within a single medical “home.” Many
patients are mandated by their insurance carriers to seek services within one
health care system, usually defined by geography—an approach that is
untenable for patients who are highly mobile or transient, like many young
adults.
Furthermore, there is huge variability in how clinicians interact with the
health care system. Some are employed by hospitals or other large
institutions, which means they usually enjoy relatively easy access to
platform data. Others are employed by the government, which means that
the platform data they generate are accessible to the government but not to
others. Still others are privately employed, which means that the platform
data they produce are extremely fragmented.
Until financial incentives are aligned to encourage universal sharing of
patient services and data, the growth of platforms within health care may be
slow. Helping to bring about this alignment should be a key focus of
regulators and industry leaders.
ENERGY: FROM SMART GRID TO
MULTIDIRECTIONAL PLATFORM
In a world driven by vast amounts of energy—and in which the supply and
usage of energy are intimately linked to such crucial factors as global
climate change and international geopolitical conflict—we can’t afford to
squander the energy supplies we have or use them in ways that harm the
natural environment. That’s where platform technologies can make a big


---PAGE BREAK---

difference. The electrical energy grid, fueled by sources that include coal,
gas, oil, water, wind, solar, and nuclear power, has long been a giant
interconnected network of complex technologies. However, it’s a network
plagued by numerous costly inefficiencies, such as the mismatch between
supply and demand caused by variability of energy use over the course of a
day and across seasons of the year. The more fully we can convert this
network into an intelligent, interactive ecosystem of participants who can
produce, share, conserve, store, and manage energy wisely together, the
greater the value we can extract from our energy resources—and the
healthier the world we’ll pass on to future generations.
Today, energy companies and government authorities around the world
are working with scientists and engineers to implement “smart grid”
technologies that are improving the use and control of energy through
digital systems for measuring, communicating, analyzing, and responding
to vast amounts of data. Enhanced electrical metering tools are making it
easier to implement variable pricing systems that improve the
responsiveness of the system to variations in demand, encourage
conservation, and smooth out fluctuations in energy availability and use.
Decentralization is reducing the grid’s reliance on a few vast production
facilities, increasing reliability, decreasing vulnerability to sabotage or
disaster, and making it easier to distribute energy produced by consumers
using wind turbines, photovoltaic panels, and other small-scale systems.
These changes prefigure the interactive network that is likely to shape
tomorrow’s global energy marketplace. In effect, we’re migrating from the
one-way pipeline model of energy production and distribution to a platform
model, in which millions of individuals and organizations are
interconnected and able to play varying roles as circumstances change—
consuming energy one moment, producing and selling it the next.
Centralized production and control of energy by a few massive utilities will
in time give way to millions of small producer–consumers, many as modest
as a single solar panel on a family’s rooftop.
Continued technological breakthroughs will drive this transformation.
Battery technology, for example, will play a crucial role. The leading
sources of renewable energy, wind and solar, are both intermittent, which
leads to mismatches between supply and demand. More efficient
rechargeable electrical storage batteries could provide an answer. Tesla,
most famous for its electric vehicles, is currently building a so-called


---PAGE BREAK---

gigafactory in Nevada that is expected to manufacture a new generation of
powerful batteries that are capable of supplying energy to a home for up to
two days. Sister company SolarCity—run by a cousin of Tesla chairman
Elon Musk—which already controls 39 percent of the residential solar
market, has announced that, within a decade, all of its power units will
come complete with battery storage.
The disruptive potential of this technology for the traditional utility
industry is enormous; in fact, a 2013 report by the Edison Electric Institute
warned, “One can imagine a day when battery storage technology or micro
turbines could allow customers to be electric grid independent.” Energy
analyst Ravi Manghani foresees a day when today’s energy utilities become
“something closer to service providers and minders of an increasingly
distributed grid rather than the centralized power producers they are
today.”7
It’s a pattern we’ve seen being played out in every corner of the world of
platforms: power, which once flowed in a single direction from a central
source, is increasingly shared and controlled by millions of market
participants. The shift applies to the literal power that flows through
electrical lines as well as to the metaphorical kinds of power traditionally
wielded by corporate chieftains.
The missing link in the transformation of the energy industry has been a
platform that permits large-scale energy transactions. That is beginning to
change. The state of California now allows bundlers of distributed energy
resources to offer those resources on the wholesale market, and, as we
discussed in chapter 4, the state of New York is considering the
development of a platform dedicated to the management of distributed
energy resources. By mobilizing existing distributed resources, systems like
these should facilitate the integration of clean renewable power to
accommodate the inherent variability in energy demand.
What is unclear is whether current stakeholders in the energy industry
will embrace the emergence of energy platforms or engage in drawn-out
regulatory battles in an effort to preserve their current advantages. The
challenge for regulators will be to design a system that benefits as many
stakeholders as possible—including the future generations that are counting
on us to leave them with both adequate supplies of energy and a clean,
healthy environment.


---PAGE BREAK---

FINANCE: MONEY GOES DIGITAL
In a sense, the earliest forms of money—historically documented at least as
far back as the Babylonian Code of Hammurabi in the second millennium
BCE—represented the first platform businesses. Money is a form of value
accepted by all the participants in a particular economic system, who
thereby constitute an interactive network able to engage in transactions with
one another for mutual benefit. So the world of finance—payment,
currency, credit, investment, and the myriad transactions these generate—
has always involved platform-like behavior.
Today, online financial platforms like PayPal and Square have created
new ways of conducting payment transactions (online in the case of PayPal,
mobile and app-based in the case of Square), which in turn open doors to
the creation of new categories of merchants. Just as the invention of money
some four thousand years ago facilitated astonishing new flexibility and
economic growth, the new digital platforms for financial transactions are
encouraging thousands of participants to become producers and sellers as
well as consumers.
Financial platform companies are also working on unlocking new forms
of value hidden within transaction data itself—something that only the new
digital tools for gathering and analyzing that data make possible. Knowing
who has transacted with whom can help companies discover consumer
tastes and spending habits, information they can leverage to generate still
more economic activity. For example, MasterCard is a venerable platform
business that today operates a financial ecosystem linking two billion
cardholders to 25,000 banks and more than 40 million merchants around the
world. Now its technology R & D division, known as MasterCard Labs, is
experimenting with payment mechanisms that are focused on creating new
opportunities to expand the platform’s usefulness. Leveraging contextual
data captured on the platform, these new tools encourage users to transact
by determining the next possible payment opportunity, prompting the user
toward it, and facilitating the interaction. ShopThis!, for instance, is a
MasterCard Labs innovation that lets magazine readers click on an
embedded app to instantly purchase an item they’ve read about from an
affiliated retailer, such as Saks Fifth Avenue.8
Other familiar financial platforms—many of them traditionally quite
conservative in their business culture as well as significantly constrained by


---PAGE BREAK---

regulation—will be pushed to develop innovations based on the latest
platform technologies. Commercial bankers, for instance, have been closely
monitoring the rise of online peer-to-peer lending communities like Zopa
and Lending Club, which are facilitating billions of dollars’ worth of
financial transactions and providing credit while bypassing traditional
gatekeepers. Peer-to-peer lending platforms have the potential to be
particularly disruptive because of their ability to identify patterns in lending
and borrowing from the troves of digital data they collect. Using these
patterns, these platforms may be able to do a better job of identifying
behaviors that predict defaults and fraud than traditional banks that rely on
a static set of data markers. Partly for this reason, Lending Club is able to
offer most borrowers a lower interest rate on their loans than that available
from a traditional bank—while lenders earn a higher return than they would
get from most conventional investments.9 Over time, commercial banks will
be driven to adapt the same big-data tools that peer-to-peer lending
platforms are using to measure and control risk.
Alternative sources of funding for businesses are also creating new
competition for banks. Platforms such as AngelList allow investors to join
syndicates that offer funding to early-stage startups in exchange for equity
participation. While these applications are themselves still at an early stage
of development, they suggest the kinds of new investment models that
platforms are making possible.
Platform-based data analysis tools can also be used to enhance the
marketing of financial products. Personal finance platforms such as Mint
have begun gathering and analyzing data about users’ financial status,
challenges, and goals that can enable financial institutions to target them
with products designed to cater to their specific needs. Well-designed
financial platforms can do a better job of consummating mutually beneficial
matches between financial services and the consumers who need them than
traditional sales and marketing channels have done. 
Even more important, traditional financial institutions are beginning to
use platform models to expand the reach of their services to segments of the
economy that they formerly could not touch. For example, banks are
leveraging platforms to tap the cash economy, which they see as a huge
future source of growth, particularly in Asia. To gain a foothold in this
arena, banks are building invoicing and payment platforms that enable
small businesses in the cash economy to better conduct business with one


---PAGE BREAK---

another while capturing data about their interactions in the process. The
analytics derived from this data will help banks target small businesses with
financial products for the first time in a highly relevant manner. Likewise,
some banks are offering digital services to assist consumers with real estate
searches in the hope of gathering data that could indicate lending
opportunities.
Insurance is another space that is set to be rapidly transformed in the age
of data platforms. Connected cars are now gathering real-time data about
driving behavior, and insurance companies are leveraging such data to offer
customized premium pricing based on user-specific driving habits. The
growing popularity of wearable devices for tracking health and wellness
indicators will create opportunities for health insurance companies to offer
similarly customized insurance packages.
Still another potential source of future growth is the hundreds of millions
of “unbanked” people, both in the developing world and in less affluent
neighborhoods in the U.S. and other developed countries, who currently
have no access to tools that can help them pay their bills, borrow money,
save, and make investments. Because they live in areas without bank
branches and lack the capital needed to qualify for a traditional bank
account or line of credit, the unbanked are forced to rely on costly,
inconvenient, and sometimes fraudulent alternatives like check-cashing
services, money order businesses, payday loan companies, and illegal loan
sharks. These substandard financial operators represent another barrier to
self-sufficiency that makes it harder for the poor to escape poverty.
Now that millions of these less affluent consumers have access to mobile
technology in the form of cell phones, the possibility of creating affordable
online financial platforms customized to their needs has become a reality.
Naturally, each of these poor or near-poor customers will generate less
value for a bank or financial platform operator than a wealthy customer
might—but their numbers are so vast that this market represents a huge
business opportunity. In sub-Saharan Africa and other developing regions,
telecom and technology companies such as Vodafone (through its
Safaricom subsidiary) are sparring with traditional financial institutions
such as Kenya’s Equity Bank to determine who will control the leading
financial platform and its hundreds of millions of potential customers.10
In this area, as in many others, the bankers have heard the message that
is spreading through one industry after another—disrupt or be disrupted.


---PAGE BREAK---

Increasingly, they are looking to the platform model as the chief disruptive
mechanism.
LOGISTICS AND TRANSPORTATION
Logistics and transportation—the business functions by which people and
things are moved efficiently from place to place—are resource-intensive
industries that were once largely unaffected by the emergence of digital
business models. Logistics companies such as FedEx have enjoyed
significant competitive advantages because of the huge fixed costs of
owning a fleet of cars, trucks, and planes, which create enormous barriers to
entry for competitors. But a platform approach doesn’t require fleet
ownership. Platforms that can aggregate real-time market information on
the movement of physical goods and carriers can orchestrate an ecosystem
of third-party delivery agents to manage an efficient logistics and delivery
system while requiring minimal capital investment.
Specific industries that rely on complex logistical processing are already
being transformed by the superior ability of platforms to coordinate the
movement of vehicles and resources using highly efficient algorithms to
match demand and supply. For example, San Francisco-based Munchery is
one of several rapidly growing new food delivery platforms. By aggregating
citywide demand according to specific time slots, Munchery’s algorithms
determine the best truck routes to maximize density of delivery points,
thereby minimizing the marginal costs of delivery. In Indonesia, a platform
business named Go-Jek allows motorbike drivers to offer rides in a manner
similar to Uber. Go-Jek also offers free food delivery throughout the
Indonesian capital of Jakarta by leveraging the connected motorbikes and
using cleverly designed algorithms to determine the most efficient delivery
routes.
LABOR AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: PLATFORMS
REDEFINE THE NATURE OF WORK
As we’ve discussed, some of the most dramatic examples of platform
advances have involved labor markets. Every indication is that the


---PAGE BREAK---

transformation of work by the world of platforms is likely to continue in the
decades to come, with some implications that are easy to foresee—and
others that may take the world by surprise.
One assumption that is already being shattered is the idea that only
routine, semi-skilled jobs like taxi driving, food delivery, or household
chores are susceptible. Even traditional professions like medicine and law
are proving to be susceptible to platform models. We’ve already mentioned
Medicast, which applies an Uber-like model to finding a doctor. Several
platform companies are providing online venues where legal services are
available with comparable ease, speed, and convenience. Axiom Law has
built a $200 million platform business by using a combination of data-
mining software and freelance law talent to provide legal guidance and
services to business clients; InCloudCounsel claims it can process basic
legal documents such as licensing forms and nondisclosure agreements at a
savings of up to 80 percent compared with a traditional law firm.11
In the decades to come, it seems likely that the platform model will be
applied—or at least tested—in virtually every market for labor and
professional services. How will this trend impact the service industries—
not to mention the working lives of hundreds of millions of people?
One likely result will be an even greater stratification of wealth, power,
and prestige among service providers. Routine and standardized tasks will
move to online platforms, where an army of relatively low-paid, self-
employed professionals will be available to handle them. Meanwhile, the
world’s great law firms, medical centers, consulting partnerships, and
accounting practices will not vanish, but their relative size and importance
will shrink as much of the work they used to do migrates to platforms that
can provide comparable services at a fraction of the cost and with far
greater convenience. A surviving handful of world-class experts will
increasingly focus on a tiny subset of the most highly specialized and
challenging assignments, which they can tackle from anywhere in the world
using online tools. Thus, at the very highest level of professional expertise,
winner-take-all markets are likely to emerge, with (say) two dozen
internationally renowned attorneys competing for the splashiest and most
lucrative cases anywhere on the globe.
The platform transformation of labor will further accelerate trends that
have already made huge inroads into the organization of work. The division
of labor into smaller and smaller units of work, which Adam Smith


---PAGE BREAK---

recognized as a key to the productive capability of organizations almost
three centuries ago, is likely to continue, powered by increasingly smart
algorithms that are capable of breaking down a complex job into tiny,
simple tasks to be handled by hundreds of workers, then reassembling the
results into a unified whole. Amazon’s Mechanical Turk already applies this
logic to many assignments.
The trend toward freelance work, self-employment, contract labor, and
nontraditional career paths will also continue to accelerate. The Freelancers
Union estimates that one in three American workers already does some
freelance work; that percentage is likely to increase in the years to come. Of
course, this will be a mixed blessing. Many people who want flexibility and
freedom to set their own working hours and conditions—artists, students,
travelers, working moms, the semi-retired—will thrive in this new
environment. Those who prefer stability and predictability in their work—
or who are accustomed to relying on an employer for vital benefits such as
health insurance and a retirement plan—will find the transition challenging,
even painful. Traditional labor unions, which organized and defended the
rights of the vast armies of workers that big corporations once employed,
will continue to decline, leaving individuals to scramble for security on
their own.
As we noted when discussing the regulation of platforms in chapter 11,
the growing dominance of the world of platforms will create genuine
challenges for society. Traditional corporate employment once provided a
safety net for millions of workers and their families. As the platform
revolution shreds the final vestiges of that safety net, it seems clear that
government—or some other new social institution, as yet unenvisioned—
will have to find a way to fill the gap.
GOVERNMENT AS PLATFORM
Government, of course, is not an industry in the conventional sense. But it’s
a major sector of the economy with a huge impact on the life of every
citizen. And it certainly has the characteristics of being information-
intensive, surrounded by gatekeepers (as anyone who has struggled with an
unresponsive government bureaucracy will attest), fragmented (into dozens
or hundreds of agencies with overlapping, often mutually contradictory


---PAGE BREAK---

mandates), and marked by information asymmetries (exacerbated by the
legal mumbo-jumbo in which laws and regulations are usually written).
So it’s understandable that ordinary citizens, along with well-intentioned
legislators, elected officials, and civil servants, might be eager to apply the
platform model to governments at all levels. Making government processes
as transparent, responsive, flexible, user-friendly, and innovative as a well-
designed and well-managed platform would be an enormous blessing to the
country and could go a long way toward alleviating the cynicism and
negativity with which many citizens currently view government.
Of course, transforming government is easier said than done.
Constitutional and legal restrictions, conflicting pressures from interest
groups and lobbyists, partisan hostilities, budgetary constraints, the
complex challenges inherent in developing services suitable for all citizens
rather than just a self-selected subset, and the sheer inertia built into any
organization that has grown through accretion over more than two centuries
—all of these factors pose huge challenges to leaders who want to apply
principles from the for-profit sector to streamlining government along
platform lines.
Yet despite these difficulties, local, regional, and national governments
around the world are beginning to incorporate some of the benefits of the
platform model into their daily operations. Perhaps not surprisingly, one of
the leading examples is the city of San Francisco, perched at the northern
end of Silicon Valley. The city’s Open Data policy, originally launched in
2009 for implementation through the Mayor’s Office of Civic Innovation, is
designed to promote the sharing of city data through an open-access portal,
the creation of public–private partnerships to facilitate the development of
value-creating tools that citizens and companies can use, and the promotion
of data-based initiatives intended to improve the quality of life for everyone
living in and around the San Francisco Bay area.
The city’s data platform, dubbed DataSF, contains a vast array of
information about the city, gleaned from both public and private sources, as
well as an application programming interface and tips for outside
developers who want to use the data to create apps. To encourage creative
use of the platform, the city government has sponsored a series of Data
Jams, Hackathons, and app competitions centered on specific civic
challenges, from transportation to sustainable development. For example, in
June 2013, San Francisco’s City Hall was the site of a Housing Data Jam in


---PAGE BREAK---

which fifty local entrepreneurs took a deep dive into issues related to local
housing—homelessness, affordable home finance, building safety, energy
efficiency, and more. By October, ten privately created apps had been
launched using information from DataSF to create tools for improving
housing conditions in the city. They included Neighborhood Score, a mobile
app that provides a block-by-block health and sustainability score for every
area of the city; Buildingeye, a map-based app that makes building and
planning information easily accessible; Project Homeless Connect, which
uses mobile technology to help people without shelter find the resources
they need to get off the streets and into decent housing; and House Fax, a
“Carfax for houses,” that allows homeowners and residents to access the
maintenance history of a particular building.12
Ongoing efforts to apply platform thinking to San Francisco city
government include a number of other initiatives, including the creation of
a single central portal where local businesses can manage all the licensing,
regulation, and reporting requirements associated with operating in the city;
the Universal City Services Card, which provides a one-stop location for
accessing San Francisco services ranging from marriage licenses to golf
course discounts; and a partnership with Yelp, the restaurant-rating
platform, that will incorporate city health department scores for local
eateries into their online Yelp profiles.
While San Francisco has advanced the concept of “government as
platform” further than most jurisdictions, similar efforts are underway in
cities, states, and regions around the U.S. and the world. The federal
government is beginning to travel the same path. Data.gov, launched in
2009, has gradually been expanded, updated, simplified, and enhanced to
make large amounts of once inaccessible government data easy to reach for
every citizen, as well as providing tools to enable the building of apps using
the data.
The burgeoning government platforms that are springing up around the
world will only be as open, democratic, and empowering as the sponsoring
agencies and our political leaders will allow them to be. (It’s not surprising
that the National Security Agency and other intelligence organizations are
not among the federal offices participating in Data.gov.) Will the
platforming of government usher in a new age of universal responsiveness,
efficiency, and freedom … or will it further advantage the prosperous and
the well connected at the expense of the poor and the powerless?


---PAGE BREAK---

THE INTERNET OF THINGS:
A WORLDWIDE PLATFORM OF PLATFORMS
At its core, the platform revolution is about using technology to connect
people and provide them with tools they can use to create value together. As
digital technology continues to advance—in particular, as chips, sensors,
and communication devices continue to grow smaller and more efficient—
the number and ubiquity of these connections continue to grow. Many are
now being located not in computing devices such as laptops and cell phones
but in ordinary machines and appliances—including everything from home
thermostats and garage door openers to industrial security systems. With
designers and engineers finding more and more ways to usefully link the
machines, gadgets, and other devices people interact with daily, a vast new
layer of data infrastructure is emerging that has been dubbed the Internet of
things. This new universe of networks will have a profound impact on the
power of tomorrow’s platforms.
A wide range of companies is deeply engaged in the effort to build the
Internet of things—and, if possible, to control both the new infrastructure
and the ultra-valuable data it will provide. As we’ve mentioned, industrial
firms like GE, Siemens, and Westinghouse are moving to create information
links among the turbines, engines, motors, heating and cooling systems, and
manufacturing plants they build and operate, hoping to enable tremendous
new efficiencies and cost savings. Digital technology firms like IBM, Intel,
and Cisco are racing to design the tools and connections that will make the
vast new networks possible. And Internet-centered companies like Google
and Apple are designing interfaces and operating systems that will enable
both technology experts and ordinary people to have easy access to the
Internet of things and use it in countless ways we’re only beginning to
imagine and explore.
What’s more, the potential power of the Internet of things will only
continue to grow as the varieties of devices available to us and their
capabilities continue to expand. To mention just a few examples, consider
the transformative power of such just-around-the-corner technologies as
driverless cars, cheap and powerful electrical storage batteries for the home,
and easy-to-use 3D printers for quickly replicating useful objects. As these
and other new tools become widely available, they’ll also quickly be linked


---PAGE BREAK---

to the Internet of things, making even more powerful value-creating
platforms possible.
Applied to the Internet of things, platform economics will dramatically
alter the business models associated with countless familiar goods and
services. Take, for example, the familiar lightbulb. Originally patented by
Thomas Edison in 1878, the basic engineering of the incandescent bulb has
scarcely changed since then, which is why the typical bulb retails for just 40
cents and provides its maker with virtually no profit margin. It’s also highly
inefficient, wasting more than 95 percent of the energy it uses in the form of
heat.
Improved products such as the compact fluorescent bulb and the light
emitting diode (LED) have made lighting technology much more efficient
as well as more profitable. But when home lighting systems are connected
to the Internet of things, the very purpose of the lightbulb is transformed.
Lights can be programmed for intruder alerts; they can flash to warn parents
when a toddler is wandering near the stairs or the stove; they can blink to
remind grandma to take her medication. Lights with wireless connectivity
can track the energy consumption of other appliances, enabling lightbulb
vendors to offer energy management services to homeowners and utility
companies. Suddenly, the lightbulb maker can afford to give away a $40
LED in exchange for a share of the ongoing revenues provided by
networked services.
Platform-based connections among household and personal devices have
attracted much of the publicity surrounding the Internet of things. But the
potential for transformation in the B2B world is, if anything, even greater.
David Mount, a partner at the high-tech investment firm of Kleiner Perkins
Caufield and Byers, refers to the coming wave of innovation as the
Industrial Awakening. He lists eight markets with the potential to generate
new multi-billion-dollar industries based on smart connections among
industrial devices:
•    Security: using platform-based networks to protect industrial assets from attacks
•    Network: designing, building, and servicing the networks that will link and control industrial
tools
•    Connected services: developing software and systems to manage the new networks
•    Product as a service: transitioning industrial companies from selling machines and tools to
selling services facilitated by platform connections
•    Payments: implementing new ways to create and capture value from industrial equipment


---PAGE BREAK---

•    Retrofits: equipping the $6.8 trillion worth of existing industrial machinery in the U.S. to
participate in the new industrial Internet
•        Translation: teaching a wide array of devices and software systems to share data and
communicate with one another
•    Vertical applications: finding ways to connect industrial tools at various places in the value
chain to solve specific problems
In total, Mount concludes (drawing on data from a World Economic
Forum report) that the Industrial Awakening will generate $14.2 trillion of
global output by 2030.13
Economist Jeremy Rifkin has deftly summarized this development, as
well as some of its broader implications:
There are now 11 billion sensors connecting devices to the internet of things. By 2030, 100 trillion
sensors will be [in place] … continually sending big data to the communications, energy and
logistics internets. Anyone will be able to access the internet of things and use big data and
analytics to develop predictive algorithms that can speed efficiency, dramatically increase
productivity and lower the marginal cost of producing and distributing physical things, including
energy, products and services, to near zero, just as we now do with information goods.14
We may not be on the verge of seeing the majority of physical goods
priced at or even near to zero—not yet. But it seems safe to say that we’ve
barely begun to imagine the transformative potential of the platform model.
A CHALLENGING FUTURE
Having read this far, you’ve undoubtedly recognized that the authors of this
book are, in many ways, enthusiastic about the economic and social
changes being wrought by the rise of the platform. The remarkable
efficiency improvements, innovative capabilities, and enhanced consumer
options that platforms make possible have already begun to create amazing
new forms of value for millions of people in many walks of life.
But every revolutionary change has its dangers, and every major social
and economic disruption creates both winners and losers. The platform
revolution is no exception. We’ve already seen the problems some long-
established industries are suffering as their familiar business models are
upended by the advent of platforms. From newspaper publishers to record
producers, taxi companies to hotel chains, travel agents to department
stores, numerous businesses have seen their market shares, revenues, and


---PAGE BREAK---

profitability plummet in the face of platform competition. The fallout
inevitably includes uncertainty, loss, and suffering on the part of countless
individuals and even some entire communities.
It’s easy for pundits and consultants to call for business leaders to “adapt
and adjust” to a transformed business environment. But the process of
adaptation is often lengthy, confusing, and painful, and some companies
and workers will never find their way in the emerging platform-dominated
world. It’s an unfortunate reality that society must recognize and deal with.
Society must also respond to the structural changes that the platform
revolution is creating. We examined some of these in chapter 11, including
the unprecedented access to personal and business information enjoyed by
the largest platform businesses; the massive shift from traditional forms of
employment to more flexible yet uncertain modes of contingent, freelance
work; the unpredictable external impacts, positive and negative, that
platforms have on the communities in which they operate; and the potential
for manipulation of individuals and entire markets by powerful platforms.
Traditional forms of government regulation developed for pipeline
businesses are inadequate to addressing the social challenges these
platform-based upheavals will bring. But it will take time for policy-makers
to fully understand the nature of the changes and to develop regulatory
responses that protect citizens from the most serious dangers posed by the
platform revolution without unduly stifling beneficial innovations. It will
take even longer for ordinary people and the civil society organizations they
support and rely upon to absorb the nature of the platform revolution and
create appropriate institutional responses.
History shows that it took generations for Western societies to develop
effective responses to the dislocations and abuses associated with the
Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries—responses
that included the union movement, the building of a modern skills-based
educational system to prepare workers for new forms of employment, and
the funding of a social safety net to care for those who fell through the
cracks. In the same way, it will take time for contemporary societies to
figure out what they need to do to respond appropriately to the shifts in
economic, social, and political power being generated by the platform
revolution—which is why we need to begin thinking about these issues
now, as the contours of the revolution are beginning to emerge.


---PAGE BREAK---

One inevitable by-product of dramatic technological change seems to be
hyperbole. From the popularizing of the term automation in the 1930s
(when predictions about the obsolescence of work were common) to the
dot-com and Internet booms of the 1990s and 2000s, there’s been no
shortage of enthusiasts and hucksters breathlessly describing the latest
innovations and declaring, “This changes everything!”
We hope that, in this book, we’ve provided abundant evidence to
document our belief that the platform revolution is indeed transforming our
world in a host of significant and exciting ways. But there’s one thing the
platform revolution will not change—namely, the ultimate goal that
technology, business, and the entire economic system need to serve. The
purpose of all these human constructs should be the unlocking of individual
potential and the building of a society in which everyone has the
opportunity to live a rich, fulfilling, creative, and abundant life. It’s up to all
of us—business leaders, professionals, working people, policy-makers,
educators, and ordinary citizens—to play our part in making sure that the
platform revolution brings us closer to that objective.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER TWELVE
    Industries that are most prone to platform transformation in the near future include those
that are information-intensive, those with unscalable gatekeepers, those that are highly
fragmented, and those characterized by extreme information asymmetries.
    Industries that are less likely to be transformed by platforms in the short run include those
with high regulatory control and high failure costs as well as those that are resource-
intensive.
    It’s possible to foresee some of the specific changes that are likely to impact selected
industries in the decades ahead, including education, health care, energy, and finance.
    The platform model will continue to shape transformations in the markets for labor and
professional services as well as the operations of government.
    The burgeoning Internet of things will add a new layer of connectivity and power to the
platforms of the future, linking people and devices to one another in new value-creating
ways.
    The platform revolution will ultimately transform our world in unpredictable ways, calling
for society as a whole to develop creative, humane responses to the challenges this change
will produce.


---PAGE BREAK---

OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The creation of a book is a team effort to which many people contribute. A few members of our
publishing team have been particularly important to all three coauthors of Platform Revolution.
We want to thank our editorial advisor, Karl Weber, for his tremendous skill in unifying the voices
of three authors. Karl, your patience, wisdom, and experience have been essential.
We want to thank our agent, Carol Franco, for her wise counsel at every stage of this project. And
we are grateful to our editor at W. W. Norton, Brendan Curry, and to the rest of the Norton team for
their enthusiasm and belief in this book.
We would like to thank the many companies and organizations that have provided research
funding and have made their employees available to us in support of our effort to better understand
network business models. Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alystne are grateful to organizations that
include Accenture, AT&T, British Telecom, the California ISO, Cellular South, Cisco,
Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Dun & Bradstreet, France Telecom, GE, Goldman Sachs, Haier
Group, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, IBM, Intel, the International Post Corporation, Law &
Economics Consulting Group, Mass Mutual, Microsoft, Mindtree, Mitsubishi Bank, NetApp, PIM
Interconnection, the State of New York, Pearson, Pfizer, SAP, Telecom Italia, Thomson Reuters, the
U.S. Postal Service, and the U.S. Office of the Inspector General. This book is richer for the
generosity of their support.
Sangeet Choudary would like to thank the various companies he has worked with in advisory
positions and on commissioned research, including the Centre for Global Enterprise, the INSEAD
Business School, Intuit, Yahoo, Schibsted Media, Spotify, Commonwealth Bank of Australia,
500Startups, JFDI Asia, Autodesk, Adobe, Accenture, Dun & Bradstreet, Webb Brazil, BHP Billiton,
Philips, Shutterstock, SWIFT, the iSpirit foundation, and Telkom Indonesia. All these experiences
have proven extremely valuable in building up Sangeet’s body of work on platforms.
In addition, each of the authors has a personal list of friends, colleagues, advisors, and supporters
they wish to acknowledge.
GEOFFREY G. PARKER
I thank my wife, Debra, my father, Don, and my children, Benjamin and Elizabeth, for their
wonderful support and feedback during the process of writing this book.
I thank my advisors and mentors at MIT—Arnold Barnett, Steve Connors, Richard DeNeufville,
Charles Fine, Gordon Hamilton, Richard Lester, Richard Tabors, and Daniel Whitney—for their
support, guidance, and enthusiasm. They truly opened up a new world to me.
At MIT, I was fortunate to meet a group of lifelong collaborators: Edward Anderson, Nitin
Joglekar, and Marshall Van Alstyne. I could not ask for a finer set of colleagues and friends.


---PAGE BREAK---

In the process of teaching and learning about platforms, I came to meet Tom Eisenmann, who has
been a great friend and collaborator. His ideas have contributed significantly to this work.
I was also fortunate to meet our coauthor Sangeet Choudary, who has worked at and consulted
with numerous platform firms. His experience has been wonderfully complementary to my own.
I thank Erik Brynjolfsson, Andy McAfee, Dave Verrill, and the great team at the MIT Initiative on
the Digital Economy (IDE). The IDE has been instrumental in hosting the MIT Platform Summit and
providing Marshall and me with the opportunity to work with multiple companies as part of our
effort to bridge practice and academia.
Peter Evans has inspired me with his insatiable curiosity and drive to measure the growing
platform economy. I have also been fortunate to be part of a large community of like-minded scholars
who are interested in the economics of information systems, and I am grateful for the regular
interaction.
I am grateful to my colleagues at Tulane University, who have provided a sounding board for me
to test and strengthen the ideas presented in this book. I have also been fortunate to teach wonderful
students at Tulane, who have eagerly helped to refine earlier versions of this material.
I wish to acknowledge the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy, and the
Louisiana Board of Regents for their generous support of my research agenda.
Finally, I again thank Marshall, who has joined me on a nearly twenty-year odyssey to try to
understand the rules of the world we are living in and how to navigate its ever-changing waters. I
look forward to many more years of entertainment and fascination as we continue the journey.
MARSHALL W. VAN ALSTYNE
Thank you, Erik and Alexander, for your love, support, and patience while Dad worked on this book.
Thank you, Joyce, for carrying through on a project that’s finally over. Family will always matter
most.
I thank my advisors at MIT: Erik Brynjolfsson, Chris Kemerer, Stuart Madnick, Thomas Malone,
Wanda Orlikowski, and Lones Smith.  The standards you set were remarkable. I also thank the MIT
community for letting me be a part of it, for its openness, and for its joy in experimentation. There is
a reason that Open CourseWare, edX, PET scans, RSA encryption, spreadsheets, and condensed soup
sprang from people in this environment. It is one of the most grueling and at the same time one of the
best intentioned and most rewarding places anywhere.
I join Geoff in thanking the members of the great team at the MIT Initiative on the Digital
Economy, including Dave Verrill, Erik Brynjolfsson, Andy McAfee, Glenn Urban, Tommy Buzzell,
and Justin Lockenwitz. Thank you Michael Schrage for good wine and deep thoughts. You all are
where great ideas gain great influence.
Our work on platforms draws heavily on that of Tom Eisenmann and Andrei Hagiu at Harvard
Business School, whose teaching materials are excellent. Tom in particular taught me how much
theory really does need application, and his contributions as a collaborator have led to many
successful papers.
When it comes to understanding startups and social aspects of platforms, few could be better than
our coauthor Sangeet Choudary, who has worked at and consulted with numerous platform firms. His
experience is wonderful, and he could not be a better addition to our team.
Recently, Peter Evans has inspired us with his ability to build a community of platform
scholarship and deliver new data analytic insights into the behaviors of the network economy.
At Boston University, I thank the research rebels—Erol Pekoz, Stine Grodal, and Chris Dellarocas
—who meet regularly over lunch to discuss research, swap stories, and poke fun at each other’s
ideas. As head of the digital learning initiative, Chris practices what we discuss here. Paul Carlile, the


---PAGE BREAK---

whole school and I owe you thanks for helping to create such a supportive and collaborative
academic culture. Maria Anderson and Brett Marks, thank you for making everything work.
In teaching, I owe much to my many students, especially those in IS710, IS827, and IS912, who
helped me fully cook my half-baked ideas. It’s wonderful to see so many of you start companies and
take leadership roles—please keep in touch with me as your careers blossom. Sinan Aral, a
remarkable MIT student turned faculty member, helped sharpen some of my key ideas on networks.
Students like Tushar Shanker, now at Airbnb, are the best reason to teach.
The National Science Foundation deserves special credit for helping to launch my academic career
with a CAREER Award, as well as providing numerous grants along the way via the IOC, SGER,
iCORPS, and SBIR programs.
Geoff Parker, it’s hard to imagine any of this without you. You’ve been a friend, collaborator,
drinking buddy, and sparring partner—contributing to my growth in all the ways that mattered. It’s
been almost two decades of output, but we’re just getting started. My best work has been possible
because of you. Thank you.
SANGEET PAUL CHOUDARY
First and foremost, I thank my wife, Devika, and my parents, Varu and Effie, for supporting every
decision I’ve ever taken, including the decision to quit a traditional career and devote my life’s work
to understanding how connected systems transform the world. Out of this curiosity emerged the focus
on researching platforms. 
I also thank my parents-in-law, Payal and Arun Sikka, for their enthusiasm and support at every
step of this journey. I thank my friends Yow Kin Cheong, David Dayalan, L. T. Jeyachandran, and
many others who have enthusiastically partnered on this journey with me. 
I want to especially thank my coauthors, Geoffrey Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, for being the
best allies and partners I could ever have asked for on this journey to understanding the impact of
technology and connectivity on today’s economy. It’s been a privilege to have partnered with them in
further building the body of work that explains this field.
Finally, I am grateful to everyone who has followed my work on platforms on the Internet and
across different research and media channels, embracing the principle of connected business models
and my work on this topic as they work to transform their businesses. It is that large-scale proof of
concept—multiple businesses globally applying this work and achieving important results—that
drives me daily to build our understanding of this field further.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

GLOSSARY
Adjacent platforms. Platforms that serve similar or overlapping user bases.
Application programming interface (API). A standardized set of routines, protocols, and tools for
building software applications that makes it easy for an outside programmer to write code that will
connect seamlessly with the platform infrastructure.
Brand effects. The power of a highly positive brand image to attract consumers and lead to rapid
growth of a business. Not to be confused with network effects.
Convex growth. See Metcalfe’s law.
Core developers. Programmers and designers who create the core platform functions that provide
value to platform participants. These developers are generally employed by the platform managers
—the brand names that are familiar to users, such as Apple, Samsung, Airbnb, Uber, and many
others. Their main job is to get the platform into user hands and to deliver value through tools and
rules that make the core interaction easy and mutually satisfying.
Core interaction. The single most important form of activity that takes place on a platform—the
exchange of value that attracts most users to the platform in the first place. Therefore, platform
design generally starts with the design of the core interaction. The core interaction involves three
key components: the participants, the value unit, and the filter. All three must be clearly identified
and carefully designed to make the core interaction as easy, attractive, and valuable to users as
possible.
Cross-side effects. In a two-sided market, network effects created by the impact of user from one
side of the market on users from the other side of the market—for example, the effects that
consumers have on producers and the effects that producers have on consumers. Cross-side effects
can be positive or negative, depending on the design of the system and the rules put in place.
Curation. The process by which a platform filters, controls, and limits the access of users to the
platform, the activities they participate in, and the connections they form with other users. When
the quality of a platform is effectively curated, users find it easy to make matches that produce
significant value for them; when curation is nonexistent or poorly handled, users find it difficult to
identify potentially valuable matches amid a flood of worthless matches.
Curation of participants. See Trust.
Data aggregators. Outside developers that enhance the matching function of the platform by adding
data from multiple sources. Under license from the platform management, they “vacuum up” data
about platform users and the interactions they engage in, which they generally resell to other
companies for purposes such as advertising placement. The platform that is the source of the data
shares a portion of the profits generated.
Enhanced access. The provision of tools that enable a producer to stand out above the crowd and be
noticed on a two-sided platform, despite an abundance of rival producers and the resulting intense
competition to attract consumer attention. Platforms that charge producers fees for better-targeted


---PAGE BREAK---

messages, more attractive presentations, or interactions with particularly valuable users are using
enhanced access as a monetization technique.
Envelopment. The process by which one platform effectively absorbs the functions—and often the
user base—of an adjacent platform.
Excess inertia. The power of network effects to slow or prevent the adoption of new, perhaps better,
technologies. When one or a few platforms are able to dominate a particular market because of the
power of network effects, they may choose to resist beneficial innovations in order to protect
themselves from the costs of change and other disruptive effects.
Feedback loop. In platforms, any pattern of interactions that serves to create a constant stream of
self-reinforcing activity. In the typical feedback loop, a flow of value units is delivered to the
participant which generates a response from him or her. If the units are relevant and interesting,
the user will be drawn to the platform repeatedly, generating a further flow of value units and
prompting more interactions. Effective feedback loops help to swell the network, increase value
creation, and enhance network effects.
Filter. An algorithmic, software-based tool used by the platform to enable the exchange of
appropriate units of information between users. A well-designed filter ensures that platform users
receive only units of information that are relevant and valuable to them; a poorly-designed filter
(or no filter at all) means users may be flooded with units of information they find irrelevant and
valueless, driving them to abandon the platform.
Frictionless entry. The ability of users to quickly and easily join a platform and begin participating
in the value creation that the platform facilitates. Frictionless entry is a key factor in enabling a
platform to grow rapidly.
Linear value chain. See Pipeline.
Liquidity. A state in which there are a minimum number of producers and consumers in a platform
marketplace and a high level of interactions taking place. When liquidity is achieved, interaction
failure is minimized, and the intent of users to interact is consistently satisfied within a reasonable
period of time. Achieving liquidity is the first and most important milestone in the life cycle of a
platform.
Market aggregation. The process whereby platforms provide centralized markets to serve widely
dispersed individuals and organizations. Market aggregation provides information and power to
platform users who formerly engaged in interactions in a haphazard fashion, often without access
to reliable or up-to-date market data.
Matching quality. The accuracy of the search algorithm and the intuitiveness of the navigation tools
offered to users as they seek other users with whom they can engage in value-creating
interactions. Matching quality is critical to delivering value and stimulating the long-term growth
and success of a platform. It is achieved through excellence in product or service curation.
Metcalfe’s law. A principle formulated by Robert Metcalfe which states that the value of a network
grows nonlinearly as the number of users of the network increases, making more connections
among users possible (a type of growth also known as convex growth). Specifically, Metcalfe’s
law posits that the value of a network with n connected users is proportional to the square of the
number of users (n2).
Multihoming. The phenomenon of users engaging in similar types of interaction on more than one
platform. A freelance professional who presents his credentials on two or more service marketing
platforms, a music fan who downloads, stores, and shares tunes on more than one music site, and
a driver who solicits rides through both Uber and Lyft all illustrate the phenomenon of
multihoming. Platform businesses seek to discourage multihoming, since it facilitates switching—
the abandonment by users of one platform in favor of another.
Network effects. The impact that the number of users of a platform has on the value created for each
user. “Positive network effects” refers to the ability of a large, well-managed platform community


---PAGE BREAK---

to produce significant value for each user of the platform. “Negative network effects” refers to the
possibility that the growth in numbers of a poorly managed platform community can reduce the
value produced for each user.
Pipeline. The structure of a traditional (non-platform) business, in which a firm first designs a
product or service, then manufactures the product and offers it for sale or puts in place a system to
deliver the service. Finally, a customer shows up and purchases the product or service. This step-
by-step arrangement for creating and transferring value can be viewed as a kind of pipeline, with
producers at one end and consumers at the other. Also known as a linear value chain.
Platform. A business based on enabling value-creating interactions between external producers and
consumers. The platform provides an open, participative infrastructure for these interactions and
sets governance conditions for them. The platform’s overarching purpose: to consummate matches
among users and facilitate the exchange of goods, services, or social currency, thereby enabling
value creation for all participants.
Platform envelopment. The process whereby one platform effectively absorbs the functions—and
the user base—of an adjacent platform.
Price effects. The power of extremely low prices for goods or services to (temporarily) attract
consumers and lead to rapid growth of a business. Not to be confused with network effects.
Product or service curation. See Matching quality.
Re-intermediation. The process whereby platforms introduce new kinds of middlemen into markets.
Typically, re-intermediation involves replacing non-scalable and inefficient agent intermediaries
with online, often automated tools and systems that offer valuable new goods and services to
participants on both sides of the platform.
Same-side effects. In a two-sided market, network effects created by the impact of users from one
side of the market on other users from the same side of the market—for example, the effects that
consumers have on other consumers and the effects that producers have on other producers. Same-
side effects can be positive or negative, depending on the design of the system and the rules put in
place.
Sharing economy. The growing sector of the economy in which products, services, and resources are
shared among people and organizations rather than having their availability limited to one
proprietor. Often facilitated by platform businesses, sharing economy systems have the potential
to unlock hidden or untapped sources of value and to reduce waste.
Side switching. The phenomenon of platform users from one side of the platform joining the
opposite side—for example, when those who consume goods or services produced on the platform
begin to produce goods and services for others to consume. On some platforms, users engage in
side switching easily and repeatedly.
Spreadable value unit. See Value unit.
Supply economies of scale. Economic advantages driven by production efficiencies, which reduce
the unit cost of creating a product or service as the quantities produced increase. These supply
economies of scale can give the largest company in an industrial economy a cost advantage that is
extremely difficult for competitors to overcome.
Switching. The abandonment by users of one platform in favor of another.
Switching costs. The costs incurred by users when they abandon one platform in favor of another.
These may be financial costs (for example, cancellation fees) or costs in terms of time, effort, and
inconvenience (for example, the need to move information files from one platform to another).
Trust. The degree to which users of a platform feel comfortable with the level of risk associated with
engaging in interactions on the platform. Trust is achieved through excellent curation of
participants in the platform.
Value unit. The most basic item of value that may be exchanged by users on a platform—for
example, a photo on Instagram, a video on YouTube, a craft product on Etsy, or a freelance project


---PAGE BREAK---

on Upwork. When a value unit is spreadable, it can be easily distributed by users both on and off
the platform, thereby helping to fuel viral growth.
Viral growth. A pull-based process that encourages users to spread the word about the platform to
other potential users. When users themselves encourage others to join the network, the network
becomes the driver of its own growth.
Virality. The tendency of an idea or brand to be circulated rapidly and widely from one Internet user
to another. Virality can attract people to a network, but network effects keep them there. Virality is
about stimulating growth among people off-platform, while network effects are about increasing
value among people on-platform.
Winner-take-all market. A market in which specific forces conspire to encourage users to gravitate
toward one platform and to abandon others. The four forces that most often characterize winner-
take-all markets are supply economies of scale, strong network effects, high multihoming or
switching costs, and lack of niche specialization.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

NOTES
CHAPTER 1: TODAY
1.    Bill Gurley, “A Rake Too Far: Optimal Platform Pricing Strategy,” Above the Crowd, April 18,
2013, http://abovethecrowd.com/2013/04/18/a-rake-too-far-optimal-platformpricing-strategy/.
2.    Thomas Steenburgh, Jill Avery, and Naseem Dahod, “HubSpot: Inbound Marketing and Web
2.0,” Harvard Business School Case 509-049, 2009.
3.        Tom Goodwin, “The Battle Is for the Customer Interface,” TechCrunch, March 3, 2015,
http://techcrunch.com/2015/03/03/in-the-age-of-disintermediation-the-battle-is-all-for-the-
customer-interface/.
CHAPTER 2: NETWORK EFFECTS
1.    Aswath Damodaran, “Uber Isn’t Worth $17 Billion,” FiveThirty-
EightEconomics, June 18, 2014, http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/uber-isnt-worth-17-billion/.
2.    Bill Gurley, “How to Miss By a Mile: An Alternative Look at Uber’s Potential Market Size,”
Above the Crowd, July 11, 2014, http://abovethecrowd.com/2014/07/11/how-to-miss-by-a-
mile-an-alternative-look-at-ubers-potential-market-size/.
3.    W. Brian Arthur, “Increasing Returns and the Two Worlds of Business,” Harvard Business
Review 74, no. 4 (1996): 100–9; Michael L. Katz and Carl Shapiro, “Network Externalities,
Competition, and Compatibility,” American Economic Review 75, no. 3 (1985): 424–40.
4.        Carl Shapiro and Hal R. Varian, Information Rules (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business
School Press, 1999).
5.    Thomas Eisenmann, Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Strategies for Two-Sided
Markets,” Harvard Business Review 84, no. 10 (2006): 92–101.
6.    Sarah Needleman and Angus Loten, “When Freemium Fails,” Wall Street Journal, August 22,
2012.
7.    Saul Hansell, “No More Giveaway Computers. Free-PC To Be Bought by eMachines,” New
York Times, November 30, 1999, http://www.nytimes.com/1999/11/30/business/no-more-
giveaway-computers-free-pc-to-be-bought-by-emachines.html.
8.        Dashiell Bennett, “8 Dot-Coms That Spent Millions on Super Bowl Ads and No Longer
Exist,” Business Insider, February 2, 2011, http://www.businessinsider.com/8-dot-com-super-
bowl-advertisers-that-no-longer-exist-2011-2.
9.    “The Greatest Defunct Web Sites and Dotcom Disasters,” Crave, cnet
.co.uk, 
June 
5, 
2008,
http://web.archive.org/web/20080607211840/http://crave.cnet.co.uk/0,39029477,49296926-
6,00.htm.


---PAGE BREAK---

10.    Geoffrey Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Information Complements, Substitutes and
Strategic Product Design,” Proceedings of the Twenty-First International Conference on
Information Systems (Association for Information Systems, 2000), 13–15; Geoffrey Parker and
Marshall Van Alstyne, “Internetwork Externalities and Free Information Goods,” Proceedings
of the Second ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (Association for Computing
Machinery, 2000), 107–16; Geoffrey Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Two-Sided Network
Effects: A Theory of Information Product Design,” Management Science 51, no. 10 (2005):
1494–1504.
11.  M. Rysman, “The Economics of Two-Sided Markets,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23,
no. 3 (2009): 125–43.
12.  Paul David, “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY,” American Economic Review 75 (1985):
332–7.
13.  UN Data: https://data.un.org/Host.aspx?Content=Tools.
14.  Christian Rudder, “Your Looks and Your Inbox,” OkCupid, http://blog
.okcupid.com/index.php/your-looks-and-online-dating/.
15.    Jiang Yang, Lada A. Adamic, and Mark S. Ackerman, “Crowdsourcing and Knowledge
Sharing: Strategic User Behavior on taskcn,” Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Conference on
Electronic Commerce (Association for Computing Machinery, 2008), 246–55; Kevin Kyung
Nam, Mark S. Ackerman, and Lada A. Adamic, “Questions In, Knowledge In?: A Study of
Naver’s Question Answering Community,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Special Interest Group on Computer–Human Interaction,
2009), 779–88. 
16.  Barry Libert, Yoram (Jerry) Wind, and Megan Beck Fenley, “What Airbnb, Uber, and Alibaba
Have 
in 
Common,” 
Harvard 
Business 
Review, 
November 
20, 
2014,
https://hbr.org/2014/11/what-airbnb-uber-and-alibaba-have-in-common.
17.  Andrei Hagiu and Julian Wright, “Marketplace or Reseller?” Management Science 61, no. 1
(January 2015): 184–203.
18.  Clay Shirky, Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations (New
York: Penguin, 2008).
19.  Henry Chesbrough, Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from
Technology (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2003).
CHAPTER 3: ARCHITECTURE
1.    Charles B. Stabell and Øystein D. Fjeldstad, “Configuring Value for Competitive Advantage:
On Chains, Shops, and Networks,” Strategic Management Journal 19, no. 5 (1998): 413–37.
2.    Rajiv Banker, Sabyasachi Mitra, and Vallabh Sambamurthy, “The Effects of Digital Trading
Platforms on Commodity Prices in Agricultural Supply Chains,” MIS Quarterly 35, no. 3
(2011): 599–611.
3.    “Hop In and Shove Over,” Businessweek, February 2, 2015.
4.        Mark Scott and Mike Isaac, “Uber Joins the Bidding for Here, Nokia’s Digital Mapping
Service,” New York Times, May 7, 2015.
5.    Adam Lashinsky, “Uber Banks on World Domination,” Fortune, October 6, 2014.
6.    J. H. Saltzer, D. P. Reed, and D. D. Clark, “End-to-End Arguments in System Design,” ACM
Transactions on Computer Systems 2, no. 4 (1984): 277–88.
7.        Steve Lohr, “First the Wait for Microsoft Vista; Now the Marketing Barrage,” New York
Times, January 30, 2007.


---PAGE BREAK---

8.        Denise Dubie, “Microsoft Struggling to Convince about Vista,” Computerworld UK,
November 19, 2007, http://www.computerworlduk.com/news/it-vendors/microsoft-struggling-
to-convince-about-vista-6258/.
9.    Robin Bloor, “10 Reasons Why Vista is a Disaster,” Inside Analysis, December 18, 2007,
http://insideanalysis.com/2007/12/10-reasons-why-vista-is-a-disaster/2/.
10. 
 
See 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Vista 
and
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_XP.
11.  Steve Lohr and John Markoff, “Windows Is So Slow, but Why?” New York Times, March 27,
2006, http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/27/technology/27soft.html?_r=1.
12.  Carliss Young Baldwin and Kim B. Clark, Design Rules: The Power of Modularity, vol. 1
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).
13.    Robert S. Huckman, Gary P. Pisano, and Liz Kind, “Amazon Web Services,” Harvard
Business School Case 609-048, 2008.
14.  Carliss Young Baldwin and Kim B. Clark, “Managing in an Age of Modularity,” Harvard
Business Review 75, no. 5 (1996): 84–93.
15.    Carliss Young Baldwin and C. Jason Woodard, “The Architecture of Platforms: A Unified
View,” 
Harvard 
Business 
School 
Working 
Paper 
09-034,
http://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Publication%20Files/09-034_149607b7-2b95-4316-b4b6-
1df66dd34e83.pdf.
16.    Daniel Jacobson, Greg Brail, and Dan Woods, APIs: A Strategy Guide (Cambridge, MA:
O’Reilly, 2012).
17.  Peter C. Evans and Rahul C. Basole, “Decoding the API Economy with Visual Analytics,”
Center for Global Enterprise, September 2, 2015, http://thecge.net/decoding-the-api-economy-
with-visual-analytics/.
18.  Michael G. Jacobides and John Paul MacDuffie, “How to Drive Value Your Way,” Harvard
Business Review 91, no. 7/8 (2013): 92–100.
19.    Amrit Tiwana, Platform Ecosystems: Aligning Architecture, Governance, and Strategy
(Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2013), ch. 5.
20.  Steven Eppinger and Tyson Browning, Design Structure Matrix Methods and Applications
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012).
21.    Alan MacCormack and Carliss Young Baldwin, “Exploring the Structure of Complex
Software Designs: An Empirical Study of Open Source and Proprietary Code,” Management
Science 52, no. 7 (2006): 1015–30.
22.  Andy Grove, Only the Paranoid Survive (New York: Doubleday, 1996).
23.  Michael A. Cusumano and Annabelle Gawer, “The Elements of Platform Leadership,” MIT
Sloan Management Review 43, no. 3 (2002): 51.
24.  Edward G. Anderson, Geoffrey G. Parker, and Burcu Tan, “Platform Performance Investment
in the Presence of Network Externalities,” Information Systems Research 25, no. 1 (2014):
152–72.
25.  Interested readers who wish to learn more might begin with the following managerial works:
Charles H. Fine, Clockspeed: Winning Industry Control in the Age of Temporary Advantage
(New York: Basic Books, 1998); N. Venkatraman and John C. Henderson, “Real Strategies for
Virtual Organizing,” MIT Sloan Management Review 40, no. 1 (1998): 33; and Daniel E.
Whitney, “Manufacturing by Design,” Harvard Business Review 66, no. 4 (1988): 83–91.
There is also a tremendous volume of academic work on modularity. Readers who wish to
explore the subject might start with the following academic works: Baldwin and Clark, Design
Rules; Timothy F. Bresnahan and Shane Greenstein, “Technological Competition and the
Structure of the Computer Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics 47, no. 1 (1999): 1–40;
Viswanathan Krishnan and Karl T. Ulrich, “Product Development Decisions: A Review of the


---PAGE BREAK---

Literature,” Management Science 47, no. 1 (2001): 1–21; Ron Sanchez and Joseph T.
Mahoney, “Modularity, Flexibility, and Knowledge Management in Product and Organization
Design,” Strategic Management Journal 17, no. S2 (1996): 63–76; Melissa A. Schilling,
“Toward a General Modular Systems Theory and Its Application to Interfirm Product
Modularity,” Academy of Management Review 25, no. 2 (2000): 312–34; Herbert A. Simon,
The Sciences of the Artificial (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969); and Karl Ulrich,
Fundamentals of Product Modularity (Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Netherlands, 1994).
CHAPTER 4: DISRUPTION
1.    Chris Gayomali, “The Two Startups that Joined the $40 Billion Club in 2014,” Fast Company,
December 30, 2014, http://www.fastcompany.com/3040367/the-two-startups-that-joined-the-
40-billion-club-in-2014.
2.    Kara Swisher, “Man and Uber Man,” Vanity Fair, December 2014; Jessica Kwong, “Head of
SF Taxis to Retire,” San Francisco Examiner, May 30, 2014; Alison Griswold, “The Million-
Dollar New York City Taxi Medallion May Be a Thing of the Past,” Slate, December 1, 2014,
http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/12/01/new_york_taxi_medallions_did_tlc_transa
ction_data_inflate_the_price_of_driving.html.
3.    Swisher, “Man and Uber Man.”
4.    Zack Kanter, “How Uber’s Autonomous Cars Will Destroy 10 Million Jobs and Reshape the
Economy by 2025,” CBS SF Bay Area, sanfrancisco.cbslocal.com/2015/01/27/how-ubers-
autonomous-cars-will-destroy-10-million-jobs-and-reshape-the-economy-by-2025-lyft-google-
zack-kanter/.
5.    Swisher, “Man and Uber Man.”
6.    Marc Andreessen, “Why Software Is Eating the World,” Wall Street Journal, August 20, 2011,
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424053111903480904576512250915629460.
7.        Phil Simon,  The Age of the Platform: How Amazon, Apple, Facebook, and Google Have
Redefined Business (Henderson, NV: Motion Publishing, 2011).
8.    Feng Zhu and Marco Iansiti, “Entry into Platform-Based Markets,” Strategic Management
Journal 33, no. 1 (2012): 88–106.
9.    Jason Tanz, “How Airbnb and Lyft Finally Got Americans to Trust Each Other,” Wired, April
23, 2014, http://www.wired.com/2014/04/trust-in-the-share-economy/.
10.    Arun Sundararajan, “From Zipcar to the Sharing Economy,” Harvard Business Review,
January 3, 2013, https://hbr.org/2013/01/from-zipcar-to-the-sharing-eco/.
11.  Dan Charles, “In Search of a Drought Strategy, California Looks Down Under,” The Salt,
NPR, August 19, 2015, http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2015/08/19/432885101/in-search-
of-salvation-from-drought-california-looks-down-under.
12.  Simon, The Age of the Platform.
13.  Hemant K. Bhargava and Vidyanand Choudhary, “Economics of an Information Intermediary
with Aggregation Benefits,” Information Systems Research 15, no. 1 (2004): 22–36.
14.    Marco Ceccagnoli, Chris Forman, Peng Huang, and D. J. Wu, “Cocreation of Value in a
Platform Ecosystem: The Case of Enterprise Software,” MIS Quarterly 36, no. 1 (2012): 263–
90.
15.  DC Rainmaker blog, “Under Armour (owner of MapMyFitness) buys both MyFitnessPal and
Endomondo,” February 4, 2015, http://www
.dcrainmaker.com/2015/02/mapmyfitness-myfitnesspal-endomondo
.html.


---PAGE BREAK---

16.  Peter C. Evans and Marco Annunziata, “Industrial Internet: Pushing the Boundaries of Minds
and 
Machines,” 
General 
Electric, 
November 
26, 
2012,
http://www.ge.com/docs/chapters/Industrial_Internet.pdf.
17. 
 
Accenture 
Technology, 
“Vision 
2015 
– 
Trend 
3: 
Platform 
(R)evolution,”
http://techtrends.accenture.com/us-
en/downloads/Accenture_Technology_Vision%202015_Platform_Revolution.pdf. 
Accessed
October 13, 2015.
18.  Barry Wacksman and Chris Stutzman, Connected by Design: Seven Principles for Business
Transformation Through Functional Integration (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2014).
CHAPTER 5: LAUNCH
1.        Eric M. Jackson, “How eBay’s purchase of PayPal changed Silicon Valley,” VentureBeat,
October 27, 2012, http://venturebeat.com/2012/10/27/how-ebays-purchase-of-paypal-changed-
silicon-valley/.
2.    Blake Masters, “Peter Thiel’s CS183: Startup—Class 2 Notes Essay,” Blake Masters blog,
April 6, 2012, http://blakemasters.com/post/20582845717/peter-thiels-cs183-startup-class-2-
notes-essay. Copyright 2014 by David O. Sacks. Reprinted by permission.
3.    Eric M. Jackson, The PayPal Wars: Battles with eBay, the Media, the Mafia, and the Rest of
Planet Earth (Los Angeles: WND Books, 2012).
4.        Andrei Hagiu and Thomas Eisenmann, “A Staged Solution to the Catch-22,” Harvard
Business Review 85, no. 11 (2007): 25–26.
5.        Annabelle Gawer and Rebecca Henderson, “Platform Owner Entry and Innovation in
Complementary Markets: Evidence from Intel,” Journal of Economics and Management
Strategy 16, no. 1 (2007): 1–34.
6.    Joel West and Michael Mace, “Browsing as the Killer App: Explaining the Rapid Success of
Apple’s iPhone,” Telecommunications Policy 34, no. 5 (2010): 270–86.
7.        K. J. Boudreau, “Let a Thousand Flowers Bloom? An Early Look at Large Numbers of
Software App Developers and Patterns of Innovation,” Organization Science 23, no. 5 (2012):
1409–27.
8.    Ciara O’Rourke, “Swiss Postal Service Is Moving Some Mail Online,” New York Times, July
13, 2009.
9.    Ellen Wallace, “Swiss Post Set to Become Country’s Largest Apple Seller,” Genevalunch,
June 28, 2012, http://genevalunch.com/2012/06/28/swiss-post-set-to-become-countrys-largest-
apple-seller/.
10.  Mark Suster, “Why Launching Your Startup at SXSW Is a Bad Idea,” Fast Company, February
13, 2013.
11.  “Instagram Tips: Using Hashtags,” Instagram blog, http://blog
.instagram.com/post/17674993957/instagram-tips-using-hashtags.
CHAPTER 6: MONETIZATION
1.        Research Network, September 12, 2012, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=1676444.
2.    Parker and Van Alstyne, “Internetwork Externalities and Free Information Goods”; Geoffrey
G. Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Two-Sided Network Effects: A Theory of Information
Product Design,” Management Science 51, no. 10 (2005); Eisenmann, Parker, and Van
Alstyne, “Strategies for Two-Sided Markets.”


---PAGE BREAK---

3.    Jean-Charles Rochet and Jean Tirole, “Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets,” Journal
of the European Economic Association 1, no. 4 (2003): 990–1029.
4. 
 
 
 
Rob 
Hof, 
“Meetup’s 
Challenge,” 
Businessweek, 
April 
14, 
2005,
http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2005-04-13/meetups-challenge.
5.        Matt Linderman, “Scott Heiferman Looks Back at Meetup’s Bet-the-Company Moment,”
Signal v. Noise, January 25, 2011, https://signalvnoise.com/posts/2751-scott-heiferman-looks-
back-at-meetups-bet-the-company-moment-.
6.    Stuart Dredge, “MySpace—What Went Wrong,” Guardian, March 6, 2015.
CHAPTER 7: OPENNESS
1.        Nigel Scott, “Wikipedia: Where Truth Dies Online,” Spiked, April 29, 2014,
http://www.spiked-online.com/newsite/article/wikipedia-where-truth-dies-
online/14963#.U7RzHxbuSQ2.
2.    Thomas R. Eisenmann, Geoffrey G. Parker, and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Opening Platforms:
How, When and Why?” chapter 6 in Platforms, Markets and Innovation, edited by Annabelle
Gawer (Cheltenham, UK, and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2009).
3.        Kevin Boudreau, “Open Platform Strategies and Innovation: Granting Access Versus
Devolving Control,” Management Science 56, no. 10 (2010): 1849–72.
4.        Andrei Hagiu and Robin S. Lee, “Exclusivity and Control,” Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy 20, no. 3 (Fall 2011): 679–708.
5.    Joel West, “How Open Is Open Enough? Melding Proprietary and Open Source Platform
Strategies,” Research Policy 32, no. 7 (2003): 1259–85; Henry William Chesbrough, Open
Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2006).
6.    Felix Gillette, “The Rise and Inglorious Fall of Myspace,” Businessweek, June 22, 2011.
7.    Simon, The Age of the Platform.
8.        Catherine Rampell, “Widgets Become Coins of the Social Realm,” Washington Post,
November 3, 2011, D01.
9.    Peng Huang, Marco Ceccagnoli, Chris Forman, and D. J. Wu, “Appropriability Mechanisms
and the Platform Partnership Decision: Evidence from Enterprise Software,” Management
Science 59, no. 1 (2013): 102–21.
10.    Thomas R. Eisenmann, “Managing Proprietary and Shared Platforms,” California
Management Review 50, no. 4 (2008): 31–53.
11.  Eisenmann, Parker, and Van Alstyne, “Opening Platforms.”
12.  “Android and iOS Squeeze the Competition, Swelling to 96.3% of the Smartphone Operating
System Market for Both 4Q14 and CY14, According to IDC,” press release, International Data
Corporation, February 24, 2015, http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25450615.
13.  Matt Rosoff, “Should Google Ditch Android Open Source?” Business Insider, April 10, 2015,
http://www.businessinsider.com/google-should-ditch-android-open-source-2015-4; 
Ron
Amadeo, “Google’s Iron Grip on Android—Controlling Open Source By Any Means
Necessary,” Arstechnica, October 20, 2013, http://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2013/10/googles-
iron-grip-on-android-controlling-open-source-by-any-means-necessary/.
14.    Rahul Basole and Peter Evans, “Decoding the API Economy with Visual Analytics Using
Programmable 
Web 
Data,” 
Center 
for 
Global 
Enterprise, 
September 
2015,
http://thecge.net/decoding-the-api-economy-with-visual-analytics/.
15.    Shannon Pettypiece, “Amazon Passes Wal-Mart as Biggest Retailer by Market Cap,”
BloombergBusiness, 
July 
23, 
2015, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-07-


---PAGE BREAK---

23/amazon-surpasses-wal-mart-as-biggest-retailer-by-market-value.
16.  Bala Iyer and Mohan Subramaniam, “The Strategic Value of APIs,” Harvard Business Review,
January 7, 2015, https://hbr.org/2015/01/the-strategic-value-of-apis.
17.  Charles Duhigg, “How Companies Learn Your Secrets,” New York Times, February 16, 2012,
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/19/magazine/shopping-habits.html?pagewanted=all.
18.  Wade Roush, “The Story of Siri, from Birth at SRI to Acquisition by Apple—Virtual Personal
Assistants 
Go 
Mobile,” 
xconomy, 
June 
14, 
2010, 
http://www.xconomy.com/san-
francisco/2010/06/14/the-story-of-siri-from-birth-at-sri-to-acquisition-by-apple-virtual-
personal-assistants-go-mobile/?single_page=true.
19.  “A letter from Tim Cook on Maps,” Apple, http://www.apple.com/letter-from-tim-cook-on-
maps/.
20.  Amadeo, “Google’s Iron Grip on Android.”
CHAPTER 8: GOVERNANCE
1.        Josh Dzieza, “Keurig’s Attempt to DRM Its Coffee Cups Totally Backfired,” The Verge,
February 5, 2015, http://www.theverge
.com/2015/2/5/7986327/keurigs-attempt-to-drm-its-coffee-cups-totally-backfired.
2.    Geoffrey G. Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Innovation, Openness and Platform Control,”
October 3, 2014, available at SSRN at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1079712.
3.       Tiwana, Platform Ecosystems; Youngin Yoo, Richard J. Boland, Kalle Lyytinen, and Ann
Majchrzak, “Organizing for Innovation in the Digitized World,” Organization Science 23, no.
15 (2012): 1398–1408.
4.        J. R. Raphael, “Facebook Privacy: Secrets Unveiled,” PCWorld, May 16, 2010,
http://www.pcworld.com/article/196410/Facebook_Privacy_Secrets_Unveiled.html.
5.    Brad McCarty, “LinkedIn Lockout and the State of CRM,” Full Contact, March 28, 2014,
https://www.fullcontact.com/blog/linkedin-state-of-crm-2014/.
6.        Nitasha Tiku and Casey Newton, “Twitter CEO: ‘We Suck at Dealing with Abuse,’” The
Verge, February 4, 2015, http://www
.theverge.com/2015/2/4/7982099/twitter-ceo-sent-memo-taking-personal-responsibility-for-
the.
7.    Juro Osawa, “How to Understand Alibaba’s Business Model,” MarketWatch, March 15, 2014,
http://www.marketwatch.com/story/how-to-understand-alibabas-business-model-2014-03-15-
94855847.
8.        Brad Burnham, “Web Services as Governments,” Union Square Ventures, June 10, 2010,
https://www.usv.com/blog/web-services-as-governments.
9.        Wolfram Knowledgebase, https://www.wolfram.com/knowledgebase/. Accessed May 30,
2015.
10.  “Politicians,” Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau, https://www.cpib
.gov.sg/cases-interest/cases-involving-public-sector-officers/politicians. Accessed October 13,
2015.
11. 
 
“Corrupt 
Perceptions 
Index,” 
Wikipedia,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corruption_Perceptions_Index, accessed October 13, 2015; B.
Podobnik, J. Shao, D. Njavro, P. C. Ivanov, and H. E. Stanley, “Influence of Corruption on
Economic Growth Rate and Foreign Investment,” European Physical Journal B-Condensed
Matter and Complex Systems 63, no. 4:547–50.
12.  Estimate based on data from Wolfram Knowledgebase. Accessed October 13, 2015.


---PAGE BREAK---

13.    Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review 91, no.
5 (2001): 1369–1401; D. Acemoglu, S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson, “Reversal of Fortune:
Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, no. 4 (2002): 1231–94; Gavin Clarkson and Marshall
Van Alstyne, “The Social Efficiency of Fairness,” Gruter Institute Squaw Valley Conference:
Innovation and Economic Growth, October 2010.
14.    Roger Protz, “Arctic Ale, 1845,” Beer Pages, March 23, 2011, http://www.beer-
pages.com/stories/arctic-ale.htm; Jeremy Singer-Vine, “How Long Can You Survive on Beer
Alone?” 
Slate, 
April 
28, 
2011,
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/explainer/2011/04/how_long_can_you_survi
ve_on_beer_alone.html.
15. 
 
“Allsopp’s 
Arctic 
Ale, 
The 
$500,000 
eBay 
Typo,” 
New 
Life 
Auctions,
http://www.newlifeauctions.com/allsopp.html, accessed October 13, 2015. In fact, the winning
bid was $503,300, but it is unclear whether anyone actually paid this amount.
16.  Hillel Aron, “How eBay, Amazon and Alibaba Fuel the World’s Top Illegal Industry—The
Counterfeit 
Products 
Market,” 
LA 
Weekly, 
December 
3, 
2014,
http://www.laweekly.com/news/how-ebay-amazon-and-alibaba-fuel-the-worlds-top-illegal-
industry-the-counterfeit-products-market-5261019.
17.   Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, “A Survey of Corporate Governance,”  Journal of
Finance 52, no. 2 (1997): 737–83, esp. 737.
18.  Steve Denning, “The Dumbest Idea in the World: Maximizing Shareholder Value,” Forbes,
November 28, 2011, http://www
.forbes.com/sites/stevedenning/2011/11/28/maximizing-shareholder-value-the-dumbest-idea-
in-the-world/.
19.  Alvin E. Roth, “The Art of Designing Markets,” Harvard Business Review 85, no. 10 (2007):
118.
20.  Lawrence Lessig, Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace (New York: Basic Books, 1999).
21.  Dana Sauchelli and Bruce Golding, “Hookers Turning Airbnb Apartments into Brothels,” New
York Post, April 14, 2014, http://nypost.com/2014/04/14/hookers-using-airbnb-to-use-
apartments-for-sex-sessions/; Amber Stegall, “Craigslist Killers: 86 Murders Linked to
Popular Classifieds Website,” WAFB 9 News, Baton Rouge, LA, April 9, 2015,
http://www.wafb.com/story/28761189/craigslist-killers-86-murders-linked-to-popular-
classifieds-website.
22.    Apple, “iTunes Store—Terms and Conditions,” http://www.apple.com/legal/internet-
services/itunes/us/terms.html. Accessed May 20, 2015.
23.  Apple, “iOS Developer Program License Agreement,” https://developer
.apple.com/programs/terms/ios/standard/ios_program_standard_agreement_20140909.pdf.
Accessed May 20, 2015.
24. 
 
Stack 
Overflow, 
“Privileges,” 
Stack 
Overflow 
help 
page,
http://stackoverflow.com/help/privileges. Accessed May 20, 2015.
25.    Rebecca Grant and Meghan Stothers, “iStockphoto.Com: Turning Community Into
Commerce,” Richard Ivey School of Business Case 907E13, 2011.
26.    Michael Dunlop, “Interview With Bruce Livingstone—Founder and CEO of iStockphoto,”
Retire at 21, http://www.retireat21.com/interview/interview-with-bruce-livingstone-founder-
of-istockphoto.
27.  Grant and Stothers, “iStockphoto.Com,” 3.
28.  Nir Eyal, Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products (Toronto: Penguin Canada, 2014).


---PAGE BREAK---

29.    Nir Eyal, “Hooks: An Intro on How to Manufacture Desire,” Nir & Far,
http://www.nirandfar.com/2012/03/how-to-manufacture-desire
.html. Accessed October 13, 2015.
30.  Elinor Ostrom, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
31.  Jeff Jordan, “Managing Tensions In Online Marketplaces,” TechCrunch, February 23, 2015,
http://techcrunch.com/2015/02/23/managing-tensions-in-online-marketplaces/.
32.  Ibid.
33.    Charles Moldow, “A Trillion Dollar Market, By the People, For the People,” Foundation
Capital,
https://foundationcapital.com/downloads/FoundationCap_MarketplaceLendingWhitepaper.pdf
.
34.    Sangeet Choudhary, “Will Peer Lending Platforms Disrupt Banking?” Platform Thinking,
http://platformed.info/peer-lending-platforms-disrupt-banking/.
35.    Michael Lewis,  Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt (New York: Norton, 2014); P. Martens,
“Goldman Sachs Drops a Bombshell on Wall Street,” Wall Street on Parade, April 9, 2014,
http://wallstreetonparade
.com/2014/04/goldman-sachs-drops-a-bombshell-on-wall-street/.
36.  Michael Lewis, “Michael Lewis Reflects on his Book Flash Boys, a Year after It Shook Wall
Street to its Core,” Vanity Fair, April 2015, http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2015/03/michael-
lewis-flash-boys-one-year-later.
37.    William Mougayar, “Understanding the Blockchain,” Radar, January 16, 2015,
http://radar.oreilly.com/2015/01/understanding-the-blockchain.html.
38.  Ibid.
39.    Tamara McCleary, “Got Influence? What’s Social Currency Got To Do With It?” Tamara
McCleary blog, December 1, 2014, http://tamaramccleary.com/got-influence-social-currency/.
40.  Grant and Stothers, “iStockphoto.Com,” 3.
41.  Hind Benbya and Marshall Van Alstyne, “How to Find Answers within Your Company,” MIT
Sloan Management Review 52, no. 2 (2011): 65–75.
42.  Peng Huang, Marco Ceccagnoli, Chris Forman, and D. J. Wu, “IT Knowledge Spillovers and
Productivity: Evidence from Enterprise Software,” Working Paper, University of Maryland
and Georgia Institute of Technology, April 2, 2013, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2243886.
43.  Benbya and Van Alstyne, “How to Find Answers within Your Company.”
44.  Geoffrey G. Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Innovation, Openness, and Platform Control.”
45.  Arvind Malhotra and Marshall Van Alstyne, “The Dark Side of the Sharing Economy … and
How to Lighten It,” Communications of the ACM 57, no. 11 (2014): 24–27.
46.  Julie Bort, “An Airbnb Guest Held a Huge Party in This New York Penthouse and Trashed It,”
Business Insider, March 19, 2014, http://www.businessinsider.com/how-an-airbnb-guest-
trashed-a-penthouse-2014-3?op=1#ixzz3dA5DDMZz; M. Matthews, “Uber Passenger Says
Driver Struck Him with Hammer After He Told Him He Was Going the Wrong Way,” NBC
Bay Area, October 8, 2014, http://www.nbcbayarea.com/news/local/Passenger-Hit-with-
Hammer-by-Uber-Driver-278596821.html.
47.    Airbnb, “Host Protection Insurance,” https://www.airbnb.com/host-protection-insurance,
accessed June 15, 2015; A. Cecil, “Uber, Lyft, and Other Rideshare Drivers Now Have
Insurance Options,” Policy Genius, https://www.policygenius.com/blog/uber-lyft-and-other-
rideshare-drivers-now-have-insurance-options/, accessed June 14, 2015.
48.  Huckman, Pisano, and Kind, “Amazon Web Services.”
49.  Jillian D’Onfro, “Here’s a Reminder Just How Massive Amazon’s Web Services Business Is,”
Business Insider, June 16, 2014, http://www


---PAGE BREAK---

.businessinsider.com/amazon-web-services-market-share-2014-6.
50.  Annabelle Gawer and Michael A. Cusumano, Platform Leadership: How Intel, Microsoft, and
Cisco Drive Industry Innovation (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002).
51.  Adapted from Gawer and Cusumano, Platform Leadership.
52.  Clarkson and Van Alstyne, “The Social Efficiency of Fairness.”
53.  Ibid.
54.  Benbya and Van Alstyne, “How to Find Answers within Your Company.”
CHAPTER 9: METRICS
1.        Jonathan P. Roth, The Logistics of the Roman Army at War: 264 BC–AD 235 (Leiden,
Netherlands: Brill, 1999), 3.
2.    Josh Costine, “BranchOut Launches Talk.co to Expand from Networking into a WhatsApp for
the Workplace,” TechCrunch, October 7, 2013, http://techcrunch.com/2013/10/07/talk-co/.
3.    Teresa Torres, “Why the BranchOut Decline Isn’t Surprising,” Product Talk, June 7, 2012,
http://www.producttalk.org/2012/06/why-the-branchout-decline-isnt-surpising/.
4.        John Egan, “Anatomy of a Failed Growth Hack,” John Egan blog, December 6, 2012,
http://jwegan.com/growth-hacking/autopsy-of-a-failed-growth-hack/.
5.        Derek Sivers, “The Lean Startup—by Eric Ries,” Derek Sivers blog, October 23, 2011,
https://sivers.org/book/LeanStartup.
6.    Alistair Croll and Benjamin Yoskovitz, Lean Analytics: Use Data to Build a Better Startup
Faster (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2013).
7.    Christian Rudder, “The Mathematics of Beauty,” OkTrends: Dating Research from OkCupid,
January 10, 2011, http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-mathematics-of-beauty/.
8.        Bianca Bosker, “OkCupid Hides Good-Looking People from Less Attractive Users,”
Huffington Post, June 16, 2010, http://www.huffingtonpost
.com/2010/06/16/okcupid-hiding-hotties-fr_n_614149.html.
9.        Eisenmann, Parker, and Van Alstyne, “Strategies for Two-Sided Markets”; Croll and
Yoskovitz, Lean Analytics.
10.    Francis J. Mulhern, “Customer Profitability Analysis: Measurement, Concentration, and
Research Directions,” Journal of Interactive Marketing 13, no. 1 (1999): 25–40; Nicolas
Glady, Bart Baesens, and Christophe Croux, “Modeling Churn Using Customer Lifetime
Value,” European Journal of Operational Research 197, no. 1 (2009): 402–11.
11.    Minter Dial, “Best of the Web or Death by Aggregation? Why Don’t Brands Curate the
News?” Myndset, December 16, 2014, http://themyndset.com/2014/12/aggregation-curation/.
12.    Nidhi Subbaraman, “Airbnb’s Small Army of Photographers Are Making You (and Them)
Look 
Good,” 
Fast 
Company, 
October 
17, 
2011,
http://www.fastcompany.com/1786980/airbnbs-small-army-photographers-are-making-you-
and-them-look-good.
13.  Ruimin Zhang interview by Geoffrey Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, December 12, 2014.
14.  Tiwana, Platform Ecosystems.
15.  Parker and Van Alstyne. “Innovation, Openness, and Platform Control.”
16.  Guido Jouret interview by Geoffrey Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, September 8, 2006.
17.    Gary Swart, “7 Things I Learned from Startup Failure,” In, September 23, 2013,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/20130923123247-758147-7-things-i-learned-from-startup-
failure.
18.    Eric Ries, The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to
Create Radically Successful Businesses (New York: Random House, 2011).


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 10: STRATEGY
1.        David J. Teece, “Next Generation Competition: New Concepts for Understanding How
Innovation Shapes Competition and Policy in the Digital Economy,” Journal of Law
Economics and Policy 9, no. 1 (2012): 97–118.
2.    David B. Yoffie and Michael A. Cusumano, Strategy Rules: Five Timeless Lessons from Bill
Gates, Andy Grove, and Steve Jobs (New York: HarperCollins, 2015); F. F. Suarez and J.
Kirtley, “Innovation Strategy—Dethroning an Established Platform,” MIT Sloan Management
Review 53, no. 4 (2012): 35.
3.    David Barboza, “China’s Internet Giants May Be Stuck There,” New York Times, March 23,
2010, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/24/business/global/24internet.html.
4.        Brad Stone, “Alibaba’s IPO May Herald the End of U.S. E-Commerce Dominance,”
Businessweek, August 7, 2014, http://www.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2014-08-07/alibabas-
ipo-may-herald-the-end-of-u-dot-s-dot-e-commerce-dominance.
5.    Sarit Markovich and Johannes Moenius, “Winning While Losing: Competition Dynamics in
the Presence of Indirect Network Effects,” International Journal of Industrial Organization
27, no. 3 (2009): 346–57.
6.    Stone, “Alibaba’s IPO.”
7.    Michael E. Porter, “How Competitive Forces Shape Strategy,” Harvard Business Review 57,
no. 2 (1979): 137–45; Michael E. Porter, Competitive Strategy (New York: Free Press, 1980).
8.    Birger Wernerfelt, “A Resource-Based View of the Firm,” Strategic Management Journal 5
(1984): 171–80.
9.    Paul Zimnisky, “A Diamond Market No Longer Controlled By De Beers,” Kitco Commentary,
June 
6, 
2013, 
http://www.kitco.com/ind/Zimnisky/2013-06-06-A-Diamond-Market-No-
Longer-Controlled-By-De-Beers.html.
10.  Richard D’Aveni, Hypercompetition (New York: Free Press, 1994), 4.
11.  Rita Gunther McGrath, The End of Competition: How to Keep Your Strategy Moving as Fast
as Your Business (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2013).
12.  Steve Denning, “What Killed Michael Porter’s Monitor Group? The One Force That Really
Matters,” 
Forbes, 
November 
20, 
2012,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/stevedenning/2012/11/20/what-killed-michael-porters-monitor-
group-the-one-force-that-really-matters/.
13.  Ming Zeng, “Three Paradoxes of Building Platforms,” Communications of the ACM 58, no. 2
(2015): 
27–9, 
cacm.acm.org/magazines/2015/2/182646-three-paradoxes-of-building-
platforms/abstract.
14.  Thomas Eisenmann, Geoffrey G. Parker, and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Platform Envelopment,”
Strategic Management Journal 32, no. 12 (2011): 1270–85.
15.    Geoffrey G. Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Platform Strategy,” New Palgrave
Encyclopedia of Business Strategy (New York: Macmillan, 2014).
16.    Angel Salazar, “Platform Competition: A Research Framework and Synthesis of Game-
Theoretic 
Studies,” 
Social 
Science 
Research 
Network, 
February 
15, 
2015,
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2565337. Mimeo: Manchester Metropolitan
University, 2015; Barry J. Nalebuff and Adam M. Brandenburger, Co-opetition (London:
HarperCollins Business, 1996).
17.    Steve Jobs, “Thoughts on Flash,” April 2010, http://www.apple.com/hotnews/thoughts-on-
flash/.
18.  Vardit Landsman and Stefan Stremersch, “Multihoming in Two-Sided Markets: An Empirical
Inquiry in the Video Game Console Industry,” Journal of Marketing 75, no. 6 (2011): 39–54.


---PAGE BREAK---

19.  Ming Zeng, “How Will Big Data and Cloud Computing Change Platform Thinking?”, keynote
address, MIT Platform Strategy Summit, July 25, 2014, http://platforms.mit.edu/2014.
20.    “Top 20 Apps with MAU Over 10 Million,” Facebook Apps Leaderboard, AppData,
appdata.com/leaderboard/apps?show_na=1. Accessed October 14, 2015.
21.  Carl Shapiro and Hal R. Varian, “The Art of Standards Wars,” California Management Review
41, no. 2 (1999): 8–32.
22.  Bill Gurley, “All Revenue Is Not Created Equal: Keys to the 10X Revenue Club,” Above the
Crowd, May 24, 2011, http://abovethecrowd.com/2011/05/24/all-revenue-is-not-created-equal-
the-keys-to-the-10x-revenue-club/.
23.    Douglas MacMillan, “The Fiercest Rivalry in Tech: Uber vs. Lyft,” Wall Street Journal,
August 11, 2014; C. Newton, “This is Uber’s Playbook for Sabotaging Lyft,” The Verge,
August 26, 2014, http://www.theverge
.com/2014/8/26/6067663/this-is-ubers-playbook-for-sabotaging-lyft.
CHAPTER 11: POLICY
1.        Kevin Boudreau and Andrei Hagiu, Platform Rules: Multi-Sided Platforms as Regulators
(Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2009), 163–89.
2.    Malhotra and Van Alstyne, “The Dark Side of the Sharing Economy.”
3.    Felix Gillette and Sheelah Kolhatkar, “Airbnb’s Battle for New York,” Businessweek, June 19,
2014, http://www.bloomberg
.com/bw/articles/2014-06-19/airbnb-in-new-york-sharing-startup-fights-for-largest-market.
4.    Ron Lieber, “A Liability Risk for Airbnb Hosts,” New York Times, December 6, 2014.
5.    Georgios Zervas, Davide Proserpio, and John W. Byers, “The Rise of the Sharing Economy:
Estimating the Impact of Airbnb on the Hotel Industry,” Boston University School of
Management Research Paper 2013-16, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2366898.
6.        Brad N. Greenwood and Sunil Wattal, “Show Me the Way to Go Home: An Empirical
Investigation of Ride Sharing and Motor Vehicle Homicide,” Platform Strategy Research
Symposium, Boston, MA, July 9, 2015, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2557612.
7.    John Coté, “SF Cracks Down on ‘MonkeyParking’ Mobile App,” SF Gate, June 23, 2014,
http://blog.sfgate.com/cityinsider/2014/06/23/sf-cracks-down-on-street-parking-cash-apps/.
8.    Kevin Roose, “Does Silicon Valley Have a Contract-Worker Problem?” New York, September
18, 
2014, 
http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2014/09/silicon-valleys-contract-worker-
problem.html.
9.    George J. Stigler, “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science 2, no. 1 (Spring 1971): 3–21.
10.    Jean-Jacques Laffont and Jean Tirole, “The Politics of Government Decision-Making: A
Theory of Regulatory Capture,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, no. 4 (1991): 1089–
1127.
11.  Conor Friedersdorf, “Mayors of Atlanta and New Orleans: Uber Will Beat the Taxi Industry,”
Atlantic, June 29, 2014, http://www.theatlantic
.com/business/archive/2014/06/mayors-of-atlanta-and-new-orleans-uber-will-beat-the-taxi-
cab-industry/373660/.
12. 
 
Don 
Boudreaux, 
“Uber 
vs. 
Piketty,” 
Cafe 
Hayek, 
August 
1, 
2015,
http://cafehayek.com/2015/08/uber-vs-piketty.html.
13.   Andrei Shleifer, “Understanding Regulation,” European Financial Management 11, no. 4
(2005): 439–51.


---PAGE BREAK---

14.  Jean-Jacques Laffont and Jean Tirole, Competition in Telecommunications (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2000).
15.  Ben-Zion Rosenfeld and Joseph Menirav, “Methods of Pricing and Price Regulation in Roman
Palestine in the Third and Fourth Centuries,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 121,
no. 3 (2001): 351–69; Geoffrey E. Rickman, “The Grain Trade under the Roman Empire,”
Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome 36 (1980): 261–75.
16.  Jad Mouawad and Christopher Drew, “Airline Industry Is at Its Safest Since the Dawn of the
Jet 
Age,” 
New 
York 
Times, 
February 
11, 
2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/12/business/2012-was-the-safest-year-for-airlines-globally-
since-1945.html.
17.  Simeon Djankov, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
Shleifer, “The New Comparative Economics,” Journal of Comparative Economics 31, no. 4
(2003): 595–619.
18.  Shleifer, “Understanding Regulation.”
19.    KPMG, “China 360: E-Commerce in China, Driving a New Consumer Culture,”
https://www.kpmg.com/CN/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Newsletters/China-
360/Documents/China-360-Issue15-201401-E-commerce-in-China.pdf.
20.  S. Shankland, “Sun Brings Antitrust Suit Against Microsoft,” CNET News, July 20, 2002,
http://www.cnet.com/news/sun-brings-antitrust-suit-against-microsoft-1/.
21.  Carl Shapiro, “Exclusivity in Network Industries,” George Mason Law Review 7 (1998): 673.
22.    Neil Gandal, “Compatibility, Standardization, and Network Effects: Some Policy
Implications,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 18, no. 1 (2002): 80–91.
23.  Parker and Van Alstyne, “Innovation, Openness, and Platform Control.”
24.  Parker and Van Alstyne, “Internetwork Externalities and Free Information Goods”; Parker and
Van Alstyne, “Two-Sided Network Effects.”
25.  David S. Evans and Richard Schmalensee, “The Antitrust Analysis of Multi-Sided Platform
Businesses,” in The Oxford Handbook of International Antitrust Economics, vol. 1, edited by
Roger D. Blair and D. Daniel Sokol (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015).
26.  Tom Fairless, Rolfe Winkler, and Alistair Barr, “EU Files Formal Antitrust Charges Against
Google,” Wall Street Journal, April 15, 2015.
27.  “Statement of the Federal Trade Commission Regarding Google’s Search Practices: In the
Matter 
of 
Google, 
Inc.,” 
FTC 
File 
Number 
111-0163, 
January 
3, 
2013,
https://www.ftc.gov/public-statements/2013/01/statement-federal-trade-commission-regarding-
googles-search-practices.
28.    Jeremy Greenfield, “How the Amazon–Hachette Fight Could Shape the Future of Ideas,”
Atlantic Monthly, May 28, 2014.
29.    Helen F. Ladd, “Evidence on Discrimination in Mortgage Lending,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 12, no. 2 (1998): 41–62.
30.  Noel Capon, “Credit Scoring Systems: A Critical Analysis,” Journal of Marketing 46, no. 2
(1982): 82–91.
31.  Jim Puzzangher, “Obama to Push Cybersecurity, Identity Theft and Online Access Plans,” Los
Angeles Times, January 10, 2015, http://www
.latimes.com/nation/politics/politicsnow/la-pn-obama-cybersecurity-20150110-story.html.
32.  Steve Kroft, “The Data Brokers: Selling Your Personal Information,” CBS News, March 9,
2014, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/the-data-brokers-selling-your-personal-information/.
33.  Federal Trade Commission, “Data Brokers: A Call for Transparency and Accountability,” May
2014, 
http://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/data-brokers-call-transparency-
accountability-report-federal-trade-commission-may-2014/140527databrokerreport.pdf.


---PAGE BREAK---

34.  Lee Rainie and Janna Anderson, “The Future of Privacy,” Pew Research Center, December 18,
2014, http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/12/18/future-of-privacy/.
35.    “Who Owns Your Personal Data? The Incorporated Woman,” Economist, June 27, 2014,
http://www.economist.com/blogs/schumpeter/2014/06/who-owns-your-personal-data.
36.  Lee Rainie and Janna Anderson, “The Future of Privacy: Other Resounding Themes,” Pew
Research 
Center, 
December 
18, 
2014, 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/12/18/other-
resounding-themes/.
37.    Charles Arthur, “Tech Giants May Be Huge, But Nothing Matches Big Data,” Guardian,
August 23, 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/aug/23/tech-giants-data.
38.  James Cook, “Sony Hackers Have Over 100 Terabytes Of Documents. Only Released 200
Gigabytes So Far,” Business Insider, December 16, 2014, http://www.businessinsider.com/the-
sony-hackers-still-have-a-massive-amount-of-data-that-hasnt-been-leaked-yet-2014-12.
39.  Lisa Beilfuss, “Target Reaches $19 Million Settlement with MasterCard Over Data Breach,”
Wall Street Journal, April 15, 2015.
40.  Andrew Nusca, “Who Should Own Farm Data?” Fortune, December 22, 2014.
41.  We thank Peter Evans, former head of analytics for GE, for his counsel on this topic.
42.  Email to Marshall Van Alstyne from Peter Evans, Center for Global Enterprise, using 2015
Crunchbase data.
43.    Avi Goldfarb and Catherine E. Tucker, “Privacy Regulation and Online Advertising,”
Management Science 57, no. 1 (2011): 57–71.
44.    Robert W. Wood, “Amazon No Longer Tax-Free: 10 Surprising Facts As Giant Loses
Ground,” 
Forbes, 
August 
22, 
2013,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/robertwood/2013/08/22/amazon-no-longer-tax-free-10-surprising-
facts-as-giant-loses-ground.
45.  Bob Egelko, “Court Rules FedEx Drivers in State Are Employees, Not Contractors,” SF Gate,
August 28, 2014, http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Court-to-FedEx-Your-drivers-are-full-
time-5717048.php.
46.  Google search results, “Internet sweatshop,” accessed January 28, 2015.
47.  Krishnadev Calamur, “Uber’s Troubles Mount Even As Its Value Grows,” The Two-Way, NPR,
December 10, 2014, http://www
.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2014/12/10/369922099/ubers-troubles-mount-even-as-its-value-
grows.
48.  Jeffrey A. Trachtenberg and Greg Bensinger, “Amazon, Hachette
End 
Publishing 
Dispute,” 
Wall 
Street 
Journal, 
November 
13, 
2014,
http://www.wsj.com/articles/amazon-hachette-end-publishing
-dispute-1415898013.
49.    Robinson Meyer, “Everything We Know About Facebook’s Secret Mood Manipulation
Experiment,” Atlantic, June 28, 2014, http://www
.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/06/everything-we
-know-about-facebooks-secret-mood-manipulation-experiment/
373648/.
50.  Robert M. Bond, Christopher J. Fariss, Jason J. Jones, Adam D. I. Kramer, Cameron Marlow,
Jaime E. Settle, and James H. Fowler, “A 61-Million-Person Experiment in Social Influence
and Political Mobilization,” Nature 489, no. 7415 (2012): 295–8.
51.  Dominic Rushe, “Facebook Sorry—Almost—For Secret Psychological Experiment on User,”
Guardian, October 2, 2012, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/02/facebook-
sorry-secret-psychological-experiment-users.
52. 
 
Alex 
Rosenblat, 
“Uber’s 
Phantom 
Cars,” 
Motherboard, 
July 
27, 
2015,
http://motherboard.vice.com/read/ubers-phantom-cabs.


---PAGE BREAK---

53.  Nick Grossman, “Regulation, the Internet Way: A Data-First Model for Establishing Trust,
Safety, and Security—Regulatory Reform for the 21st Century City,” Harvard Kennedy
School, ASH Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, April 8, 2015,
http://datasmart.ash.harvard.edu/news/article/white-paper-regulation-the-internet-way-660.
54.  Ibid.
55.  Tim O’Reilly, Government as a Platform (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010), 11–40.
56.    The social impact of mandated transparency rules has been thoroughly analyzed by three
experts from Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government; see Archon Fung, Mary Graham, and
David Weil, Full Disclosure: The Perils and Promise of Transparency (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2007).
57.  See, for example, Richard Stallman, “Why Open Source Misses the Point of Free Software,”
GNU Operating System, Free Software Foundation, http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/open-
source-misses-the-point
.en.html.
58.  Carlota Perez, Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: The Dynamics of Bubbles
and Golden Ages (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2003).
59.  Heli Koski and Tobias Kretschmer, “Entry, Standards and Competition: Firm Strategies and
the Diffusion of Mobile Telephony,” Review of Industrial Organization 26, no. 1 (2005): 89–
113.
60.    David Evans, “Governing Bad Behavior by Users of Multi-Sided Platforms,” Berkeley
Technology 
Law 
Journal 
27, 
no. 
12 
(Fall 
2012),
http://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/viewcontent
.cgi?article=1961&context=btlj.
61.  Benjamin Edelman, “Digital Business Models Should Have to Follow the Law, Too,” Harvard
Business Review, January 6, 2015, https://hbr.org/2015/01/digital-business-models-should-
have-to-follow-the-law-too.
CHAPTER 12: TOMORROW
1.        Brandon Alcorn, Gayle Christensen, and Ezekiel J. Emanuel, “The Real Value of Online
Education,” Atlantic Monthly, September 2014.
2.        Luis Von Ahn, “Crowdsourcing, Language and Learning,” presentation, MIT Platform
Strategy Summit, July 10, 2015, available at http://platforms.mit.edu/agenda.
3.    Graeme Wood, “The Future of College?” Atlantic Monthly, September 2014.
4.    “There’s an App for That,” Economist, January 3, 2015.
5.        Hemant Taneja, “Unscaling the Healthcare Economy,” TechCrunch, June 28, 2014,
http://techcrunch.com/2014/06/28/software-defined-healthcare/.
6.        Vince Kuraitis, “Patient Digital Health Platforms (PDHPs): An Epicenter of Healthcare
Transformation?” Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society, June 18, 2014,
http://blog.himss
.org/2014/06/18/patient-digital-health-platforms-pdhps-an-epicenter-of-healthcare-
transformation/.
7.        Josh Dzieza, “Why Tesla’s Battery for Your Home Should Terrify Utilities,” The Verge,
February 13, 2015, http://www.theverge
.com/2015/2/13/8033691/why-teslas-battery-for-your-home-should-terrify-utilities.
8.    Daniel Roberts, “How MasterCard became a Tech Company,” Fortune, July 24, 2014.
9.    William D. Cohan, “Bypassing the Bankers,” Atlantic Monthly, September 2014.


---PAGE BREAK---

10.  Matina Stevis and Patrick McGroarty, “Banks Vie for a Piece of Africa’s Mobile Banking
Market,” Wall Street Journal, August 15, 2014.
11.    Daniel Fisher, “Legal-Services Firm’s $73 Million Deal Strips the Mystery from
Derivatives Trading,” Forbes, February 12, 2015; “There’s an App for That,” Economist.
12.  San Francisco Mayor’s Office of Civic Innovation, “Announcing the First-Ever San Francisco
Datapalooza,” blog post, October 12, 2013; San Francisco Mayor’s Office of Civic Innovation,
“Data Jam, 100 Days to Tackle Housing,” blog post, June 7, 2013, http://innovatesf.com.
13.  David Mount, “The Industrial Awakening: The Internet of Heavier Things,” March 3, 2015,
http://www.kpcb.com/blog/the-industrial-awakening-the-internet-of-heavier-things.
14.  Jeremy Rifkin, “Capitalism Is Making Way for the Age of Free,” Guardian, March 31, 2014.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

INDEX
Page numbers listed correspond to the print edition of this book. You can use your device’s search
function to locate particular terms in the text.
Page numbers in italics refer to figures.
A/B testing, 217–18
Accenture, xi, 32–33
access fees, 118–21
access limitation, 126–56, 213–15, 227–28, 240–41, 253, 254, 256–57, 260, 262–63, 264, 266, 271
access tiers, 144–45
accounting, 32, 33, 238–39
Adobe, 29–30, 92–93, 213–14
Adobe Flash Player, 213–14
ADP, 155, 241
advertising, 3, 23, 31, 49, 50, 63, 72, 84–87, 105, 106–8, 113, 119, 120–21, 125, 131, 133–34, 144,
145, 165, 166, 198–99, 215, 229–30, 244, 247–48, 252, 264, 275, 296
advertising campaigns, 72, 88, 148
Affordable Care Act (2010), 271
Africa, 4, 247, 277–78
aggregate feedback, 151–52
agriculture, 19, 42–44, 60, 70–71, 246, 263
Airbnb, vii, viii, 1–12, 21–26, 32, 38, 39, 40, 47, 64–71, 101, 103, 111, 116, 135, 142–43, 149, 151–
52, 165, 175, 192–93, 198, 211, 212, 224, 229–33, 236, 253–54, 262, 295
aircraft industry, 110, 225
airline industry, 71, 137, 235, 237
algorithms, 24–25, 27, 40, 41, 45–46, 47, 68, 71, 146, 152, 170, 191, 278, 280, 286, 296, 297
Alibaba Group, xi, 2, 3, 73, 111, 124–25, 135, 159, 164, 204–7, 214–15, 216, 240
Allsopp’s Arctic Ale, 161–62
Amadeo, Ron, 153
Amazon, vii, ix, 3, 7, 22, 54–56, 56, 63, 64, 69–73, 79, 89, 125, 137, 140, 145, 157–58, 176–78, 194,
204–18, 225, 231, 242–43, 248–49, 251, 262, 270–71, 280
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 54, 177–78
Amazon Word (AZW), 243
Andreessen, Marc, 62, 63
Android, 6–7, 21, 30, 72, 92, 111, 137, 140–41, 153–54, 214, 226, 240


---PAGE BREAK---

Android Open Source Platform (AOSP), 140, 153–54
AngelList, 276
Angie’s List, 72
antitrust regulations, 213–14, 225
AOL, 79
apartment listings and rentals, 67, 231
Apple, ix, 3, 6–7, 23, 52–54, 64, 75, 85, 92, 94, 95, 131, 136, 137, 138, 140, 147, 148, 152–53, 159,
178, 181, 205, 211, 217, 222, 226, 284, 295
Apple iOS, 6–7, 136, 137, 153, 213–14
Apple Mac OS 9, 53, 136, 137, 138, 152–53
Apple Watch, 271
appliances, 64, 110, 143, 157–58, 159, 181, 183–84, 204, 254, 283, 284–85
application programming interfaces (APIs), 55–57, 143, 144–45, 148–49, 153–54, 159, 254, 295
application-specific functions, 52–54
apps, 6–7, 21, 30, 48, 53, 72, 74, 85, 92, 97–98, 103, 111, 132–34, 142, 145, 147–49, 153–54, 166,
178, 185, 190, 200, 212, 213–17, 252–53, 269, 270–71, 275, 282
arbitrage, 171, 258–59
Arthur, W. Brian, 18
Asia, 66, 72, 276
auctions, 60, 84, 161–62, 169–70, 196n
audits, 220, 259
Australia, 70–71
auto industry, 19, 50, 62, 183–84, 200, 206, 225, 254, 262–63, 273, 277, 282, 284
automated price signals, 69–70
Axiom Law, 279
babysitters, 47, 122, 142
backwards compatibility, 53
Baidu, 215, 216
Baldwin, Carliss Young, 54–55, 57
Ballmer, Steven, 52–53
bandwidth, 88, 223
BankAmericard, 137
banking industry, 77, 81–82, 83, 137, 139–40, 170, 175, 243–44, 263, 264, 274–78
Bank of America, 137
Barrow Hematite Steel Co., 19
bars and pubs, 21, 113, 123
batteries, 69, 162, 273, 284
behavior:
actions based on, 145–46, 168
codes of, 164–70, 182
design for, 168–69, 181
negative, 175, 182, 257
Bell Telephone, 29
Benchmark Capital, 16–18, 23
Betamax, 138–39
Bezos, Jeff, 176


---PAGE BREAK---

bidding, 96–97
big-bang strategy, 97–98, 105
Bill of Rights, 255
Billpoint, 83
Bitcoin, 37, 80, 171
Bitter (Bruce Livingstone), 167
Blackberry, viii, 20, 64, 131
Blecharczyk, Nathan, 2
bloatware, 52–53
blockchain protocol, 171–73
blogs, 66, 88, 90, 96, 101–2, 120
Blu-ray, 139
bookmarks, 95–96
Boston University Platform Strategy Research Symposium, xi
bots (automated software), 83, 85, 93, 215
Boudreaux, Don, 236
BranchOut, 184–86
brand effects, 22, 23, 34, 74, 84–85, 295, 299
Brandeis, Louis, 255
brand value, 198–99, 205, 250
broadcasters, 11, 204
broker system, 206
browsers, 95–96, 110, 211, 213–14
Buildingeye, 282
Bungie, 94, 240
bureaucracy, 235–37, 257, 281
Burnham, Brad, 159, 173
business development (BD), 81–82
business-to-business (B2B) platforms, 59, 89, 96–97, 102–3, 106, 155, 219, 285
business-to-consumer (B2C) platforms, 69, 106
Businessweek, 114, 205
buy-it-now option, 169–70, 218
BuzzFeed, 104
Caesar, Julius, 183
California, 70–71, 112–13, 274, 281–83
cameras, 6, 66, 178, 244
Carbon NYC, 123
CareerBuilder, 137
Carfax, 262–63, 282
Carnegie Mellon, 267
cartels, 208–9
cash economy, 276–77
cash flow, 11, 16, 33, 102, 184, 186, 188
CDs, 63, 111
cell phones, 6–7, 42–44, 48, 64, 72, 80, 147, 162, 197, 225–26, 245, 277, 283


---PAGE BREAK---

central processing units (CPUs), 56–58
Chapin, Andrew, 50
charities, 173–74, 244
Chatroulette, 28
check-cashing services, 277
Chesky, Brian, 1–2
Chicago School, 234–35, 237
chicken-or-egg dilemma, 45, 79–81, 86, 89–99, 105, 179
China, 2, 4, 124–25, 140, 159, 198, 204–7, 215, 222, 240
“Chinese wall,” 180
Choudary, Sangeet Paul, 42–44, 122, 170
Cisco, x, 200, 284
Cisco Application Extension Platform (Cisco AXP), 200
Clarity, 96, 117–18, 194
Clark, K. B., 54–55
classified ads, 49, 63, 120, 131, 133–34
click-throughs, 190, 197
cloud-based networking, 30, 56
cloud-based storage, 54, 56, 56, 59, 102, 177–78
cloud computing, 145, 155, 209
Coase, Ronald, 234–35
Coca-Cola, 198–99
code, computer, 53, 79–80, 131–32, 140, 143, 166, 170, 172, 240, 254–55, 267
coffee machines, 143, 157–58, 159
colleges and universities, 8–9, 91, 97–99, 265–68
community-driven curation, 67–68, 78
comparative advantage, 188–89
competition complexities, 210–13
computer programming, 52, 99, 131–32, 267
Confinity, 80, 83
Congress, U.S., 248–49
connectivity platforms, 200–201, 285, 289
consulting firms, 8, 194
consumer relationship management (CRM), 11, 96, 174
consumer-to-consumer marketplace, 2–3, 29
contact information, 163, 190
contracts, 142, 166, 172, 197, 225–26
control systems, 164–65
convex growth, 20, 295, 297
Cook, Tim, 148
co-opetition (co-creation), 194, 212, 227
copyright, 57, 167, 208, 258, 259
core developers, 141–42
corporations, 157–58
governance by, 164, 256–60
image ads for, 229–30


---PAGE BREAK---

sponsorship by, 137, 139–40
corruption, 160, 236–37
cosmetics industry, 206
Coursera, 8, 265, 266, 267
Craigslist, 47, 49, 91–92, 101, 103, 165, 193, 224
credit, 170, 175, 243–44, 263, 275–76, 277
credit cards, 37, 81, 83, 84, 137, 139–40, 175, 226, 243, 275
credit reports, 243–44
crime, 165, 231, 257
critical assets, 220–21
critical mass, 97, 112, 188, 195, 201–2
Croll, Alistair, 191, 196
cross-side effects, 29, 30, 34, 295
crowd curation, 167–70
crowdfunding, 40, 51, 92, 96, 102, 111
crowdsourcing, 12, 267
Cryptography, 171
currency, 5, 15, 36, 37–38, 46, 159, 173–74
customized ads, 244
Cusumano, Michael A., 58, 178–79
Damodaran, Aswath, 16–18
data:
accountability based on, 253–56
aggregators for, 141, 145–46, 244–48, 254, 255, 262–63, 278
big, 11, 247–48, 276
brokers of, 244–45
capture and collection of, 218–19, 264, 296
in communications, 176–78
flow of, 170, 246–48
leveraging of, 217–20
manipulation of, 251–53
in nationalism, 247–48, 260
platforms for, 200
profiles derived from, 48, 119, 127
security of, 230, 243–46, 260
software for, 91–92, 107, 255, 269, 270–71, 275, 276–77, 278, 284, 286
storage of, 54, 56, 56, 59, 102, 171–73, 177–78
strategic, 217–20
tactical, 217–18
tools for, 10–11, 48, 49, 71
databases, 24–25, 42–44, 63, 72–75, 76, 91–92, 107
“Data Brokers: A Call for Transparency and Accountability,” 245
Data.gov, 283
Data Jams, 282
dating services, 26–28, 30, 93, 97–98, 120, 123, 166, 194


---PAGE BREAK---

De Beers, 208–9
decentralization, 159, 171–73, 272–74
deep design, 179–80
defaults, 170, 263, 276
Delicious, 95–96
demand-side economies of scale, 18–20, 32, 34, 226
democracy, 149–50, 257, 283
department stores, 264, 287
designers, graphic, 66, 72, 106, 118–19, 267
design structure matrices, 57–58
diabetes, 269–70
diamond industry, 208–9
digital currency, 171, 274–78
digital message deliveries, 94–95
digital real estate, 174–75, 216
digital rights management (DRM), 31
Diners Club, 84
direct-to-consumer channels, 264
discounts, 22, 25–26
disintermediation, 68–69, 71–72, 78, 161–62, 170–71, 298
disk defragmentation, 200
dispute resolution, 169–70
Djankov, Simeon, 238, 239
doctors, 263, 268, 269, 271, 279
Dorsey, Jack, 97
dot-com bubble, x, 22, 79, 80, 113, 288
Dribbble, 37, 66, 118–19
driverless cars, 284
driver ratings, 254, 264
driving records, 232–33, 277
Dropbox, 32, 102, 109
Drucker, Peter, 210
drug trafficking, 162
Duhigg, Charles, 146
Duracell, 162
DVDs, 63, 111, 139
e-commerce, 56, 91, 111, 124–25, 145, 204–5
Earth Class Mail, 94–95
eBay, vii, ix, 2, 3, 17, 24, 36, 38, 40, 83–84, 85, 91, 93, 111, 112–13, 125, 135, 161–62, 163, 169–71,
172, 173, 196n, 205, 206, 207, 215, 262
economics, 72, 78, 230, 234–39
economies of scale, 18–20, 206
Edison, Thomas, 19, 284
editors, 7, 10, 68, 72, 93, 129–30, 262
education, 7–8, 77, 96, 111, 122, 124, 212, 233, 261, 263, 265–68, 269, 288, 289


---PAGE BREAK---

education platforms, 96, 111, 265–68, 289
Eisenmann, Thomas R., ix, 130
electric lighting, 19, 285
electric power, 19, 69, 247, 284–85
Electronic Arts (EA), 94, 124, 240
electronic health records, 270
electronics, 75, 178, 206
email, 81, 85, 101–4, 185
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 10–11
encyclopaedias, 10–11, 129–30, 133, 149–51
Endomondo, 75
end-to-end design principle, 52–54
energy:
efficiency of, 254, 284–85, 286
industry for, 261, 272–74, 289
resources of, 69–70, 254, 272–74
enhanced access, 112, 118, 119–21, 126, 127, 296
enhanced curation, 121–22, 126–27
enhanced design, 223–24
enterprise management, 173–75
enterprise resource planning (ERP), 11
entrepreneurs, 79–83, 86, 96, 111, 205, 282
environmental issues, 62, 70–71, 233, 237, 272, 274
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (1974), 243–44
Equity Bank, 277–78
e-readers, 178
eToys, 22
Etsy, 65, 73, 149, 212, 262, 299
European Union (EU), 242, 247–48
events listings, 112–15, 126
Excel, 216
excess inertia, 241, 296
exclusive access, 213–15
expert networks, 30, 36, 68, 93, 96, 99, 117–18
extension developers, 141, 142–45, 147, 148–49, 153–54
external networks, 100–101, 102, 103–4, 105
Facebook, 3, 12, 20, 32, 33, 37, 39, 41–50, 66, 90–91, 98–103, 104, 112, 121, 126, 131–35, 132, 133,
145, 151, 159, 163, 168, 181, 184, 185, 197, 204, 216–18, 221, 226, 245, 251–52, 267, 270–71
Fair Credit Reporting Act (1970), 175
fairness, 179–81, 230
fair use doctrine, 259
farm prices, 42–44, 60
FarmVille, 221
Fasal, 42–44
Federal Reserve, 174


---PAGE BREAK---

Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 242, 243–44, 245
FedEx, 61, 249–50, 278
feedback loops, 21, 28, 45–46, 68, 71, 72, 100–101, 108, 139, 167–70, 218–19, 223, 296
feet on street (FOS) sales forces, 43–44, 91
files, 63, 166
encryption of, 200
formats for, 29–30
film industry, 9, 66, 138–39, 163, 178, 259, 267
filters, 38–41, 42, 59, 133, 295, 296–97
financial crash of 2008, 178, 230
financial services industry, 11, 16–18, 33, 164, 171–73, 178, 230, 261, 274–78, 289
fitness and sports activities, 74–76, 245, 270–71
five forces model, 207–10, 212, 213, 221
500px, 37, 47
Fiverr, 116, 193
fixed costs, 9–10, 209, 224–25, 278
follow-the-rabbit strategy, 89–91, 105
food industry, 76, 254, 255, 278
Ford, Henry, 19, 32
Ford Motor Co., 19
Fortune 500, 65
Foursquare, 97, 98
fragmented industries, 131, 262, 265, 268–69, 289
fraud, 175, 196–97, 255, 257, 276
Free: The Future of a Radical Price (Anderson), 22
freelancers (independent contractors), 21, 36, 37, 64, 65, 117–18, 193–94, 196, 210, 213, 233–34,
249–51, 279, 280, 287, 297, 299
free trade, 205, 206, 235
Friedersdorf, Conor, 236
Friendster, 98
FuelBand, 74, 75
full-time employees, 249–50
FUSE Labs, 252–53
games, gaming, 94, 103, 124, 132, 159, 163, 178, 211, 212, 217, 221, 240
“Gangnam Style,” 84, 147
gatekeepers, 7–8, 151–52, 171–73, 243, 253, 262, 265, 268, 275–76, 281, 289, 298
Gawer, Annabelle, 58, 178–79
Gebbia, Joe, 1–2
General Electric (GE), 4, 13, 19, 76, 78, 86, 110, 201, 204, 208, 247, 284
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, 238–39
geographic focus, 98–99, 271
Germany, 96–97, 161, 205
Gillette, King, 109–10
Global 500, 209–10
Go-Jek, 278


---PAGE BREAK---

Goldberg, Whoopi, 23
Goodwin, Tom, 11–12
Google, vii, 3–7, 21–25, 30–33, 49–50, 55, 58, 64, 72, 111, 112, 120, 121, 125, 134, 137, 140–41,
148, 153–54, 159, 198–99, 214–17, 226, 240, 242, 250, 267, 270–71
Google AdWords, 72, 120, 121, 125
Google Maps, 49–50, 55, 148, 200
Google Play, 154
government platforms, 261, 281–83, 289
graphical processing units (GPUs), 56, 57, 58
graphic design, 67, 226
Great Britain, 160, 205
gross domestic product (GDP), 160, 161
Grossman, Nick, 253, 254, 255, 256
Guardian, 144–45
Gurley, Bill, 16–18, 21
Haber-Bosch process, 19
Hachette Book Group, 251
Haier Group, vii, 76, 125, 198–99, 222
Halo, 94, 240
Halo: Combat Evolved, 94
Hammurabi, Code of, 274
hard drives (HDs), 56, 57, 58
hardware, 56, 57–58, 136, 152–53, 178–79
Harvard University, 98–99, 266
hashtags, 58, 104
Havas Media, 11–12
health care, 32–33, 35, 69, 71, 77, 200, 233, 234, 238, 245, 261, 263, 265, 268–72, 277, 280, 289
health insurance, 234, 263, 271–72, 277, 280
Heiferman, Scott, 113–14, 126
heirlooms, 161–62
Here, 49–50
Hertz, 9
heuristics, 123–24
Hilton Hotels, 8, 64
Hipstamatic, 100
homeowners’ insurance, 175, 232
horizontal integration, 33, 74–76, 208
hospitals, 69, 71, 233, 270, 271–72
hosting sites, 88, 198, 223–24
hotel industry, 1–2, 8–9, 10, 12, 64, 67, 101, 111, 142–43, 198, 224, 229–33, 236, 253, 287
Hotmail, 103, 104
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 204, 208, 225
HTTP, 177
Huffington Post, 90
human resources, 14, 39


---PAGE BREAK---

human rights, 159, 160–61
hypercompetition, 209–10, 213
IBM, x, 137, 152, 179, 284
iCloud, 75
identity theft, 244
InCloudCounsel, 279
income streams, 139–41, 143, 144, 215
India, 73, 91
Indiegogo, 96, 124
Indonesia, 278
Industrial Awakening, 285–86
industrial development, 205–10, 224–25, 268
industrial-era firms, 19, 32, 34, 256, 285, 288
Industrial Revolution, 288
Industry Standard Architecture (ISA), 58
information, 40, 42
agencies for, 243–44
age of, 253, 256, 260
asymmetries of, 161–62, 164, 181, 182, 220, 228, 258–59, 262–63, 265, 269, 281, 289
exchange of, 36, 37, 39, 41, 47–48, 51, 134
intensive need for, 262–63, 265, 268, 281, 289
mis-, 129–30
platforms for, 190, 200, 287
units of, 296–97
initial public offerings (IPOs), ix, 91, 204–5
Instagram, 3, 13, 32, 46, 47, 66, 85, 100, 102–3, 104, 204, 217, 218, 299
instant messaging, 131, 198, 211
insurance industry, 9, 62, 71, 142, 164, 175–76, 232, 268, 277
integrated systems, 33, 74, 131
Intel, vii, x, 57–58, 89, 137, 178–81, 270–71, 284
Intel Architecture Labs (IAL), 179–81
intellectual property (IP), 33, 57, 167, 174–75, 180, 258
interaction failures, 190, 192, 196–97
Interbrand, 198–99
interest rates, 170, 244, 276
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 93
internal transparency, 176–79
International Financial Reporting Standards, 238–39
Internet, 24–25, 32, 60–63, 76–79, 95–96, 107–13, 121, 167, 201, 204, 205, 209, 244, 249, 250, 263,
264, 283–89, 299
Internet of things, 76, 201, 204, 283–86, 289
inventory, 9, 11–12, 25, 42, 141, 184, 186, 262
investment, ix, 16, 63, 164, 168–69, 184–86, 209, 278
iPads, 95
iPhone, 3, 6–7, 72, 131, 140, 147, 148, 178, 211, 213–14, 222


---PAGE BREAK---

iStockphoto, 167–68, 173
iTunes, 75, 131, 142, 153, 164, 214, 231
Japan, 66, 205–6
Jassy, Andrew, 177–78
Java programming language, 140
Jawbone, x, 77, 245
job listings, 39, 49, 50, 51, 63, 111, 118–19, 120, 131, 133–34, 137, 184–86, 196, 201, 218
Jobs, Steve, viii, 53, 131, 214
joint venture model, 137, 138
judiciary, 237, 238, 250
JVC, 138–39
Kalanick, Travis, 18, 62
Kelley, Brian P., 157
Kenya, 277–78
Kercher, Meredith, 129–30, 149–50
Keurig Green Mountain, 143, 157–58, 159, 181
Kickstarter, 40, 92, 96, 102, 111
Kindle, 7, 10, 67, 140, 154, 243
Kindle Fire, 140
Knox, Amanda, 129–30, 149–50
Korengold, Barry, 61
Kozmo, 22–23
Kretschmer, Tobias, 257
Kuraitis, Vince, 270, 271
labor:
child, 164
division of, 280
market for, 39, 49, 50, 51, 63, 111, 118–19, 120, 131, 133–34, 137, 196, 201, 218, 235
platforms for, 200, 201, 213, 233–34, 248–51, 279–81, 289
regulation of, 230, 249–51, 260, 288
self-employed, 21, 36, 37, 64, 65, 117–18, 193–94, 196, 210, 213, 233–34, 249–51, 279, 280, 287,
297, 299
unions for, 280, 288
Laffont, Jean-Jacques, 235, 237
law firms, 8, 204, 279
laws and legal systems, 88, 164–70, 182, 230, 247–49, 257, 258, 260, 281
lead generation, 113, 117
Lean Analytics (Croll and Yoskovitz), 191, 196
lean startups, 199, 201–2
Lee Kuan Yew, 160–61
LegalZoom, 204, 225
Lending Club, 77, 275, 276
Lessig, Lawrence, 164–65, 166
Levchin, Max, 79–81


---PAGE BREAK---

Lexis, 204, 225
liability coverage, 175, 232
libertarianism, 79, 80, 236, 238
licensing fees, 61, 131, 258–59
licensing model, 136–37, 138, 139, 214, 235, 296
lightbulbs, 284–85
linear value chains (pipelines), 6, 183–84, 297, 298
LinkedIn, 39, 41–42, 48, 50–51, 103, 111, 119, 170, 173, 184, 197, 218–19, 223, 226, 245
Linux, 137, 138, 154, 200
liquidity, 189–91, 193, 194–95, 201–2, 297
local content regulations, 246–47
logos (icons), 82, 83
“long tail” (software adoption), 216–17, 219
Lyft, 49, 50–51, 67, 213, 227, 250–51, 297
Ma, Jack, 125, 206, 215
MacCormack, Alan, 57
magazines, 72, 151, 197, 244, 264, 275
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 69, 71
mail, 63, 94–95, 171
MailChimp, 109
Malaysia, 160
Management Science (MacCormack and Baldwin), 57
mandis (market-makers), 42–44
Manghani, Ravi, 273–74
manufacturing efficiencies, 208, 209, 261
MapMyFitness, 75
mapping services, 49–50, 55, 148, 200
marginal economics, 72, 78
Marini, Rick, 184–85
marketing, 14, 19, 25, 52–53, 72, 73–74, 84–85, 100, 101, 105, 183–84, 209–10, 267
Marketplace Fairness Act (2013), 249
marketplaces, 60, 91, 190, 204, 249
markets:
access to, 87–88, 98, 194, 215, 218, 220
aggregation of, 68–69, 72–73, 78, 262, 297
controls for, 164–65
data on, 42–44
emerging, 210–11
entry barriers to, 207–8, 215, 219–20
expansion of, 4, 20, 31–32
failure of, xiii, 161–63, 164, 170–71, 182, 234–35, 256, 257, 258–59, 263, 289
free, 149, 161–65, 173–76, 180, 182, 234–36
frictionless entry into, 25–26, 34, 81, 107–8, 111, 117, 124–25, 130, 168, 206, 297
incumbent advantage in, 86, 218, 261, 263
late-mover problem in, 87–88, 98


---PAGE BREAK---

liquidity of, 171, 196
local, 70–71, 117–18, 264
manipulation of, 238, 251–53, 260, 287
micro-, 98–99, 105
multi-sided, 159, 164
new entrants to, 207–10, 262, 296
niche, 88, 216, 223–24, 228, 300
one-sided, 157–58, 159
share of, 16–22, 33, 53, 60–62, 65, 81, 87–88, 112–13, 131–33, 132, 133, 137–40, 152–53, 157,
222–26, 260, 287
strategy for, viii, xi, 10, 16–18, 20, 21, 31–32, 33, 42–44, 57–58, 69–73, 77, 78, 89, 111, 124, 173,
210–11, 272–74, 278
supply and demand in, 69–71, 173, 210–11, 272–74, 278
“thickness” of, 164, 171, 173
two-sided, 81, 89, 93, 110, 119, 175, 196, 215, 218, 295, 298
winner-take-all, viii, 224–27, 228, 279–80, 300
marquee strategy, 94–95, 105
Marriott Hotels, 8–9
massive open online courses (MOOCs), 266–67
mass media, 40, 63, 72, 77, 262, 264
MasterCard, 226, 275
matching services, 17, 47–48
Matharu, Taran, 4–5
McCormick Foods, 76
McGraw-Hill, 204, 208
Mechanical Turk, 249, 280
Medicare, 250
Medicast, 269, 279
Medium, 71–72
Meetup, 113–15, 126
Megaupload, 87–88
membership fees, 123, 125
Mercateo, 96–97
mergers and acquisitions, 208, 216, 220–21, 228
Metcalfe, Robert, 20, 297
Metcalfe’s law, 20, 21, 295, 297
metering tools, 272–73
Microsoft, vii, x, 3, 13, 20, 29, 33, 52–53, 94, 103–4, 110, 124, 131, 140, 152–53, 179, 181, 200, 211,
216, 226, 240, 241, 252, 267, 270–71
Microsoft Outlook, 103–4
Microsoft Vista, 52–53
Microsoft Windows, 30, 53, 140, 152–53, 200, 222, 240
Microsoft Windows XP, 53
middlemen, 68–69, 71–72, 78, 161–62, 170–71, 298
Minerva Project, 268
mining, 225, 263
mislabeled bargains, 161–62, 170–71


---PAGE BREAK---

MIT, ix–x, xi, 214, 266, 267
MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy, ix–x
MIT Platform Strategy Summit, xi, 214
moderators, 151–52
modular design, 54–57, 221
monetary policy, 159, 173–74
monetization, 38, 63, 106–27, 188, 215
MonkeyParking, 233, 234
monopolies, 18–19, 162, 163, 172–73, 182, 208–9, 227, 237, 238, 240–41, 242
Monster, 218–19, 223, 226
mortgages, 237, 243, 263
Mount, David, 285–86
MP3 players, 178
multidirectional platforms, 272–74
multihoming, 213–15, 223–28, 250–51, 297, 300
multinational corporations, 246–48
multi-sponsor decision-making, 139–40
multi-user feedback loop, 46, 100–101
music industry, 63, 71, 75, 87, 111, 134–35, 147, 178, 213, 226, 231, 258, 287, 297
MyFitnessPal, 75, 245
Myspace, 87, 92, 98, 125–26, 131–34, 132, 133, 135, 143, 204, 221, 226
Nakamoto, Satoshi, 171–73
Nalebuff, Barry J., 212
NASDAQ, ix, 80
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), 237
navigation tools, 191, 297
NBC, 204, 225
negative cross-side effects, 30–32, 34, 295
negative externalities, 163, 229–34, 257, 287
negative feedback, 28, 157–58, 166–67
negative network effects, 17, 26–32, 34, 47, 49, 51, 68, 112–15, 120, 121, 123, 126, 151, 229–34,
287, 298
negative same-side effects, 30, 298
Nest, 204, 225
Netflix, 63, 163, 204, 225
Netscape, 62, 110
network matching, 26–28
network orchestrators, 32
News Corp., 126
news feeds, 121, 168, 251–52
newspapers, 63, 144–45, 264, 287
New York City, 61, 113, 123, 229–30, 231, 258–59
New York State, 69–70, 274
New York Stock Exchange, 55, 171
New York Times, 205


---PAGE BREAK---

NeXT, 53
Nigeria, 247
Nike, 4, 74–76, 78, 205, 271
9/11 attacks, 113
99designs, 66, 106
Nintendo, 94, 211, 240
noise, 28, 114, 120, 199, 200
Nokia, 49–50, 64, 131, 226
Novel Writing Month, 4–5
NTT, 89
oDesk, 201
oil and gas industry, 225, 235, 259, 263, 272
OkCupid, xi, 26–28, 30, 195–96
oligopolies, 209, 238
on-boarding effect, 90–91, 97
online courses, 96, 111, 265–68, 289
Open Data, 282
“open in” vs. “open out” websites, 144
open source, 57, 172–73, 254–55
OpenTable, 17, 90, 95, 101, 103, 194, 262
operating system (OS), 6–7, 52–53, 152–53, 211, 222, 226, 240
Palm Pilots, 80, 83
Parker, Geoffrey G., ix, 23–24, 69, 110, 130, 241, 242
parking, 62, 233, 234
partner-against-partner competition, 211, 212, 227
patents, 109, 157, 174–75, 241
payments systems, 8, 56, 79–83, 85, 137, 142, 145, 155, 222, 274–78, 285
PayPal, 17, 21, 23, 24, 37, 79–83, 85, 91, 93, 94, 111, 275
PDF, 29–30, 92–93
peer-to-peer lending, 170, 275–76
percentage of active users, 190, 192, 193
Percival, Sean, 125–26
peripheral applications, 52–57
peripheral hardware, 178–79
personal computers (PCs), 58, 140, 152–53, 178–79, 200
personal digital assistants (PDAs), 80
pharmaceuticals industry, 225
photo-editing tools, 47, 104
photo-sharing sites, 6, 37, 47, 66, 100–103, 104, 118, 142, 167–69, 172, 173, 193, 198, 217, 226, 299
piggyback strategy, 91–92, 105, 184
Pinterest, 3, 168–69
platform-against-partner competition, 211–12, 227
platform-against-platform competition, 211, 227
Platform Leadership (Gawer and Cusumano), 178–79
platforms:


---PAGE BREAK---

adjacent, 222–23, 295, 296, 298
architecture of, 47–48, 164–65, 170–73, 182, 221
assets of, 9, 68–71, 160, 180, 181, 209, 212, 220–21, 238, 260
authors’ research on, ix–xi, 23–24
as business model, vii, 35, 60–62, 64, 66–67, 73–77, 163, 184–86, 188, 258
capitalization of, 9, 16–18, 82, 109, 145, 278
compatibility of, 53, 213–14, 240, 260
competition in, viii, 17–18, 33, 60–62, 68, 73–77, 83, 86, 87–88, 96–97, 131–34, 152–54, 155,
156, 157–58, 174–75, 181, 185–86, 189, 199–200, 203, 207–27, 234–35, 240–43, 256–60, 264,
287, 299
consumers and customers of, viii, 6–8, 26, 29, 31–49, 60–67, 71–74, 78–82, 86–97, 107, 108–21,
125, 134, 135, 145–47, 157–58, 176–78, 180, 187–92, 197–205, 210–23, 240–43, 251–54, 263,
272–78, 295–99
controversial aspects of, 129–30, 149–50, 192–93, 213–14, 229–30
core interaction of, 38–44, 49–59, 119, 134, 141–42, 180, 187, 189–90, 195, 199–200, 201, 202,
295
costs for, 9–10, 25, 37–38, 63, 82, 152–53, 184, 186, 209–10, 224–25, 228, 234, 265, 286, 296,
299
curation and governance of, 12, 14, 26–28, 32, 33, 34, 42, 47, 49, 51, 67–68, 72, 77, 78, 87–88,
111, 121–22, 123, 157–82, 187, 191, 192–93, 295–96, 297, 298
decision-making in, 73, 127, 139–40, 156, 169, 180, 187–88, 253–56
design of, 35–59, 90, 101, 111, 125–28, 134–35, 144, 154–56, 163, 164–65, 170–73, 179–80, 181,
182, 219, 221, 223–24, 228, 283–84, 285, 295
developers or programmers for, 6–7, 21, 30, 92, 106–7, 124, 131–32, 135, 141–49, 156, 157, 166,
173–74, 199–200
disruption caused by, vii, viii, 3, 4, 14, 60–78, 204, 231, 261–89, 296
economic impact of, vii–xi, 3, 12, 14, 60–62, 66, 72, 78, 159–61, 230, 231, 234–35, 237, 246–48,
261–89, 298–99
ecosystem of, 12, 33, 57, 64, 65, 72, 75, 77, 78, 101, 107, 132, 134–35, 152–53, 154, 158–59, 163,
165, 166, 178, 179, 182, 187, 193, 200, 212, 216, 219, 225, 262, 272, 275, 278
efficiencies of, 7–8, 10, 17, 18–20, 47–48, 60, 63, 69, 71, 72–73, 139–40, 181, 186–87, 191–92,
208, 257, 263–64, 269, 284–85, 286
externalities of, 33, 162, 163, 164, 181, 182, 229–34, 242, 257, 260, 287
fees charged by, 9, 10, 37–38, 73, 82, 106–8, 110, 113–27, 169–70, 194, 225–26, 244, 262–63,
296, 299
financial valuation of, 16–18, 33, 60–61, 79, 126
funding of, ix, 16–18, 23, 40, 51, 52–53, 92, 96, 102, 106, 111, 184–86, 276–77
future trends in, 261–89
global impact of, 104, 111, 205, 246–48, 261, 272–74
glossary for, 295–300
growth of, viii, 3–4, 14, 15, 20, 22–24, 34, 59, 76, 81–86, 97, 99–109, 145, 174, 175, 187–88,
195–99, 203–5, 230, 239–53, 259–60, 297
infrastructure of, 64, 73, 134–35, 141–46, 205, 209–10, 298
intermediation of, 68–69, 71–72, 78, 161–62, 170–71, 298
inversion by, 11–12, 15, 32–33, 211
launching of, vii, viii, 11–14, 58–59, 79–105, 88–99, 112–15, 298
layered interactions of, 49–51, 53, 54, 59, 71–72, 144–45, 169


---PAGE BREAK---

leadership in, 33, 106–7, 189, 201, 220–21, 235, 259–60, 286–89
leverage by, 103, 206–7, 228, 263–64
management of, 10–18, 24–25, 79–109, 118–19, 121, 126–28, 134–47, 136, 152–59, 164–67,
176–203, 211, 212, 222–23, 296, 298
marketing of, 14, 19, 25, 52–53, 72, 73–74, 84–85, 100, 101, 105, 183–84, 186, 209–10, 267
match function in, 44, 47–49, 59, 187, 189–92, 193, 194–95, 202, 223, 297, 298
as nation-states, 158–61
network effects in, 16–34, 44–51, 65, 68, 78, 90–91, 108–23, 126, 128, 151, 186, 188, 196, 202,
206, 210–18, 224–34, 247–48, 257, 260, 287, 295–300
off-platform interactions and, 87, 116, 117–18, 213–15, 223–28, 250–51, 256, 297, 299, 300
outside contributors to, 10–11, 14, 74, 91–92, 103–4, 111, 119, 127, 130–33, 133, 148–49, 154–
56, 173–75, 178, 189, 199–200, 206–10, 216, 219, 221, 227, 228, 240–41, 295, 296
pipelines vs., 6–10, 35, 42, 45, 46, 58, 63–68, 73–77, 89, 101, 105, 110, 123, 183–87, 220–21,
231, 258, 264, 297, 298
producers in, viii, 6, 7, 12, 19, 25–51, 60–66, 71, 87, 90–94, 101, 107–21, 125, 134, 135, 149–52,
187–92, 196–98, 203, 209–10, 212, 218–20, 223, 275, 285, 295–99
profit margins of, ix, 33, 61, 130–31, 138–41, 143, 148, 188, 197, 208–9, 215, 220, 225, 231, 233,
242, 259–60, 284, 285, 287, 296
pull-based process in, 44, 45–49, 59, 84, 86, 89, 99–100, 105, 187, 189, 223, 299
push-based process in, 84, 85, 97, 105
re-architecting of, 57–58
regulation of, 166, 199, 225, 227, 229–60, 239, 263, 274, 281–83, 287, 289
revenues of, 3, 16–18, 81–82, 83, 87, 102, 106–27, 138–41, 143, 144, 157–58, 184–88, 194, 215,
225, 285, 287
revolution in, 5, 6–15, 261–89
risk assessment and management in, 77, 117, 154–56, 162, 165–66, 170, 175–76, 180, 182, 192–
93, 232–33, 237–38, 299
sales volume of, 25, 42–44, 82–83, 115–16, 157, 163, 169–70, 183–84, 186, 196, 218
scalability of, 7–8, 18–20, 24–26, 29, 34, 35, 65, 68, 71, 74, 85, 167, 206, 247–48, 262, 298
social impact of, 163, 164–65, 169, 174, 229–60, 239, 280–81, 286–89
strategies for, 204–28
transparency of, 121, 164, 166, 176–79, 182, 243, 253–56, 260
user base of, 58–59, 81–85, 86, 89–99, 118–19, 145–46, 165, 184–86, 190, 203, 215, 218–19,
222–23, 224, 295, 299
PlayStation, 94, 139, 178, 211
PlayStation 3, 139
PlayStation Portable (PSP), 178, 211
PlayStation PSP-2000, 211
“popular in your network,” 197
pornography, 67, 88, 133–34, 152, 164, 167
Porter, Michael, 207–8, 210, 213, 219
positive cross-side effects, 30, 34, 295
positive externalities, 163, 233, 287
positive feedback, 21, 82–83
positive network effects, 17, 20, 26, 28, 29–30, 32–33, 65, 78, 187, 196, 202, 225, 287, 298
positive same-side effects, 29–30, 34, 298
premium listings, 120–21


---PAGE BREAK---

pre-roll advertisements, 223
prices, pricing:
agricultural, 42–44, 60
effects of, 22, 23, 34, 298
fixing of, 169–70, 227, 240–43, 251, 252–53
free (freemium), viii, 22, 108–10, 111, 125–27, 254–55, 258
levels of, 163, 208, 232, 260, 262, 272–73, 286
predatory, 241–43, 258
strategies for, viii, 60, 69–71, 109–10, 115, 208
surge, 252–53
variable, 272–73
printing, 66, 109, 284
privacy and security issues, 79–80, 146, 159, 163, 171–73, 230, 243–48, 260, 285
privacy laws, 247–48
privatization, 232–33, 238
production:
costs of, 224–25
efficiencies of, 18–19
evangelism strategy for, 96–97, 105
fraud in, 196–97
openness of, 149–52
products:
design and development of, 219–20
distribution of, 19, 64, 186, 209–10
launches of, 52–53
lines of, 178–79
name spelling of, 161–62, 170–71
optimization of, 12, 254
services substitutions for, 207, 208
professional services, 8, 39, 50, 51, 73, 96, 103–4, 111, 117–18, 184–86, 190, 209–10, 218–19, 279–
81, 289
Project Homeless Connect, 282
property ownership, 70–71, 124
property rentals, 1–2, 8–9, 10, 12, 64, 67, 101, 111, 142–43, 198, 224, 229–33, 236, 253, 287
proprietary model, 136, 137–39, 140, 146–49, 154–56, 240–43
prostitution, 165, 231
public good, 163, 169, 174, 230, 256–60, 280–81
public relations, 85, 105, 229–30
publishing industry, 7, 10, 63, 64, 67, 68, 71–72, 204, 208, 210, 231, 242–43, 244, 251, 262
QQ social network, 217
Quirky, 47
Quora, 30, 36, 68, 71–72, 93, 103
railroads, 209, 225
random access memory (RAM), 56, 57, 58
Rangaswami, J. P., 245–46


---PAGE BREAK---

rate of conversion to sale, 197
ratings, 157–58, 265
razors-and-blades strategy, 109–10
Real Audio, 222
real estate market, 9, 12, 62, 124, 237, 277, 282
RealNetworks, 222
real-time processing, 247, 252–53
recipients, 100, 101, 104, 105
recruiters, 50, 51, 119, 218–19
redBus, 73, 95
Reddit, 5, 36, 47, 93, 173
Regulation 2.0, 253–56
regulatory capture, 235–37, 257
RelayRides, 9, 10, 67, 230
research and development (R & D), 14, 33, 275
reservations, 8–9, 90, 95, 101, 137, 142, 194
resources:
allocation of, 6, 15, 70–71, 199, 200, 298–99
control of, 208–9, 212, 227
intensive use of, 263–64, 278, 289
model based on, 208–10, 213, 216
restaurants, 36, 37, 76, 90, 91, 95, 101, 113, 120, 142, 170, 194, 259
retail industry, 12, 63, 77, 82–83, 85, 89, 111, 123–24, 141, 145, 157–58, 204–7, 240–49, 251, 264
revenue grabs, 121, 157–58
rewards (incentives), 82, 101, 102, 166, 173–74, 182, 227
R/GA, 76
ride-sharing services, 2, 9, 12, 16–18, 25, 30, 36, 37, 49–50, 60–62, 67, 115, 175, 190, 227, 231, 233,
250–54, 258–59, 264, 278, 287, 297
Ries, Eric, 199, 201–2
Rifkin, Jeremy, 286
Roman military campaigns, 183, 237
Roth, Alvin, 164, 171
royalties, 72, 122
Rudder, Christian, 26–27
Sacks, David, 17, 18
Safaricom, 277–78
safety net, 280–81, 288
Saks Fifth Avenue, 275
sales conversion rate, 191–92
Salesforce, x, 55, 145, 245–46, 267
sales forces, 42–44, 73–74, 91, 125, 145
sales tax, 248–49
same-side effects, 29–32, 34, 298
Samsung, xi, 86, 137, 270–71, 295
San Francisco, 1–2, 18, 61, 233, 278, 281–83


---PAGE BREAK---

SAP, vii, x, 155, 173–75, 216, 219, 241
scrapers (automated software), 91–92, 107
search engine optimization, 120–21, 145, 191, 297
search engines, 24–25, 40, 120–21, 145, 190, 191, 197–98, 215, 216, 242, 297
Sears, Roebuck, 207
seeding strategy, 18, 92–93, 105
self-driving cars, 62
self-governance, 176–80, 182, 246, 253–56
self-serve advertising, 131, 133–34
semiconductor industry, 225
senders, 100, 101–2, 105
sensor data, 246, 286
service interfaces, 176–78, 221
Shapiro, Carl, 19, 240–41
shared model, 137, 138, 140–41, 154–55
shareholders, 11, 164
sharing economy, 10, 298–99
Shleifer, Andrei, 236–37, 238
shopping malls, 123–24
ShopRunner, 206–7
ShopThis!, 275
side switching, 26, 198, 299
Siemens, 76, 204, 247, 284
signal-to-noise ratio, 199, 200
sign-up methods, 66, 81–85, 190
Silicon Valley, 16, 76–77, 112, 252–53, 281–82
siloed industries, 176, 178
Singapore, 160–61, 179
single-side strategy, 95–96, 105
single-user feedback loop, 45–46, 100–101
Siri, 147
Sittercity, 47, 122
Skillshare, 4, 96, 111, 122, 124, 212, 265, 266
Skullcandy, 162
Skype, 200–201
small businesses, 72, 276–77
smart grids, 272–74
smart metrics, 201–2
smartphones, 64, 66, 92, 113, 131, 140
Smith, Adam, 280
Snapchat, 217
social losses, 238, 239
social networks, 3, 11, 36, 41–42, 45, 51, 58, 71, 72, 90–91, 92, 95–104, 113–15, 120–21, 131–33,
152, 163, 185, 198, 204, 217, 218, 221, 226, 245, 251–52
software, 33, 52–54, 57, 62–63, 67, 91–92, 95, 125, 136, 137, 143, 151–53, 159, 170, 173–75, 216–
17, 219, 254–55, 267, 295


---PAGE BREAK---

SolarCity, 273
solar panels, 69, 273
Sollecito, Raffaele, 129–30
Sony, 61, 75, 94, 124, 137, 138–39, 178, 211, 240, 246, 259, 270–71
Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 259
SoundCloud, 71
South by Southwest (SXSW), 2, 97, 98
South Korea, 66, 161
spam, 133, 167
sponsorship model, 137, 139–40, 141
sporting goods, 74–76
Spotify, 48
spreadable value units, 102, 299
Square, 275
SRI International, 147
Stack Overflow, 99, 166, 173
stakeholders, 164, 166, 178, 274
Stallman, Richard, 254–55
Stanford University, 79, 266
startup companies, 86, 91–92, 187–95, 199, 201–2, 209–10, 221, 240, 247, 257–58, 261, 263, 276
status updates, 39, 41, 251
Stigler, George, 234–35
Stock, Ethan, 112–13
stock market, ix, 32, 60, 64, 80, 84, 91, 126, 145, 171, 178, 204–5, 211, 221
“Strategies for Two-Sided Markets” (Eisenmann, Parker and Van Alstyne), ix
subscriptions, 120, 122, 127, 197, 225, 244
subsidies, 107, 123, 124, 188
subsystem interfaces, 56–57
Sun Microsystems, 240
supercomputers, 171
supplier bargaining power, 207, 208, 212
supply chains, 9, 10, 11–12, 65–67, 68, 74, 76, 208, 209–10, 220
supply-side economies of scale, 32, 34, 224, 225, 228, 299, 300
Supreme Court, U.S., 259
SurveyMonkey, 101–2, 103
sustainable advantage, viii, 209–10, 224–27
Swiss Post, 94–95
switching, 213, 224, 225–26, 228, 297, 299, 300
SXSW Festival Web Award, 97
system development kits (SDKs), 152, 153
Taobao, 2–3, 215
Target, 61, 123–24, 146
task allocation, 56
TaskRabbit, 116, 233–34, 249
taxation, 92–93, 165, 230, 248–49, 260


---PAGE BREAK---

taxi industry, 2, 12, 16–18, 49, 60–62, 231, 236, 250, 253, 258–59, 287
technology:
access to, 141, 209–10, 213
creators of, 32, 33
digital, 60, 283–86
high-, 80
information, 3, 11, 36, 38, 77, 199
innovation in, 52–54, 199–200, 203, 216–17, 228, 241, 256, 258–59, 260, 283–89, 296
standards of, 138–39, 141
startups in, ix
valuation of, ix, x
telecommunications industry, 77, 89, 262
telephone networks, 20, 21, 29, 91
television, 9, 10, 85, 138, 144–45, 178, 204, 259, 264
Tencent, 198, 217
Tesla, 273
text messaging, 56, 91, 132, 145
Thiel, Peter, 79–82
Thomson Reuters, vii, x, 55, 200
“Thoughts on Flash” (Jobs), 214
Threadless, 25, 32, 66
“3 A’s test” (actionable, accessible, auditable metrics), 202
3D printing, 66, 284
ticket sales, 112–13
time between interactions, 193
Time Warner, 178
Tinder, 97–98
Tirole, Jean, 110, 235, 237, 242
TopCoder, 267
Toshiba, 75, 139
Toys”R”Us, 22, 207
traffic congestion, 62, 233
transaction fees, 38, 115–18, 122, 125, 127, 142
transportation industry, 60–62, 73, 77, 95, 209, 233, 237–38, 278
travel industry, 13, 37, 71, 72, 111, 137, 142, 232, 245, 287
Travelocity, 137
TripAdvisor, 13, 37, 72
trolls, 166–67
trust (participant curation), 67–68, 189–95, 202, 296, 299
turbines, 247, 273
Twitter, 3, 13, 30, 37, 40, 46, 55, 58, 66, 85, 97, 98, 103, 120, 159, 173, 197
two-sided network effects, 21, 23–24, 29, 34, 119, 219, 242, 296
Uber, vii, viii, 2, 3, 12, 16–18, 17, 20–26, 30–32, 36–38, 41, 49–51, 60–69, 115, 116, 126–27, 135,
151–52, 175, 190, 211–13, 227, 230–32, 236, 249–54, 259, 262, 264, 269, 278, 279, 295, 297
UberPool, 49


---PAGE BREAK---

Uber Safe Rides, 126–27
Udemy, 77, 96, 265
Under Armour, 75–76
UnitedHealthcare, 33
United States, 178, 206, 225, 229–60, 283, 289
Universal City Services Card, 282–83
universal serial bus (USB), 58, 178–81
University of Pennsylvania, 266, 267
University of Southern California, 97–98
Upwork, 3, 8, 21, 24, 32, 36, 37, 64, 65, 73, 116, 117, 164, 193–94, 196, 200, 201, 230, 233–34, 248–
49, 299
users:
acquisition of, 66, 81–85, 97–98, 112–13, 184–95, 201–2, 299
content generated by, 87, 167–70, 218–19
curation by, 151–52, 155
feedback of, 151–52, 155
growth rate of, 191, 192, 202
identities of, 166–67
incentives of, 66, 82, 87, 101, 102, 166, 173–74, 182, 227
loyalty of, 135, 149–52, 156, 166–67, 190–91, 192, 193–94, 197–98, 219–21, 297
manipulation of, 161, 168–69
network access for, 86, 108–9, 112, 117–18, 126, 127, 146–56, 166–67, 213–14
profiles of, 48, 119, 127, 145–46, 163, 190, 195–96, 247
types of, 122–25
utilities, 272–74
value:
of apps, 147, 216–17
creation of, 4, 5, 6–18, 23, 34, 36, 45–51, 58–59, 64–74, 78, 88, 90, 98, 134, 142, 147, 149, 157,
165–67, 181, 185–88, 193–94, 197, 203, 212, 216–28, 262–65, 275, 285, 289, 295–98
de-linking assets from, 68–71
lifetime (LTV), 197, 203
units of, 37, 38–39, 40, 41, 42–44, 51, 59, 90, 92, 93, 100, 101, 102–3, 105, 295, 299
Van Alstyne, Marshall W., ix, 23–24, 69, 106–7, 110, 130, 180, 241, 242
vanity metrics, 201–2
VCRs, 138–39
venture capital, ix, 16–18, 23, 106
vertical integration, 33, 74, 200, 208, 221
video-sharing sites, 37, 39–40, 49, 63, 67, 77, 84, 87–88, 92, 104, 111, 134, 147, 223–24, 299
video streaming, 63, 139, 211, 222
videotape recording, 138–39, 259
Viki, 9, 66
Vimeo, 49, 87, 88, 223–24
virality, 11, 23, 84–85, 92, 99–104, 105, 299
virtuous cycle, 17, 21, 23, 46, 65
Visa, 30, 137, 139–40, 226
visual effects, 252–53


---PAGE BREAK---

Vodafone, 277–78
Voices, 169–70
Wales, Jimmy, 129–30
Wall Street Journal, 62
Walmart, 4, 32, 55–56, 56, 86, 145, 249
washing machines, 183–84
Washio, 233–34
Waterfind, 70–71
water rights, 70–71
Wattpad, 4–5
wealth distribution, 33, 61, 158, 160, 179, 180–81, 279–80, 300
wearable devices, 222, 245, 269–70, 277
web sites, 24–25, 95–96, 110, 112–13, 167, 244
Webvan, 22, 23
WeChat, 198
Wells Fargo Bank, 83
Wernerfelt, Birger, 208
Westinghouse, 284
Westlaw, 204
WhatsApp, 32, 46, 204
Whirlpool, 110, 204, 208, 225
Wii, 94, 211
Wikipedia, 3, 10–11, 66, 67, 129–30, 133, 135, 149–51
“Wikipedia: five pillars,” 150–51
Wintel standard, 140, 152–53
Wolfe, Jerry, 76
Wood, Graeme, 268
Woodard, C. Jason, 55
Woods, Tiger, 94
word processing, 67
workplace chat, 185
work schedules, 233–34
Workshop on Information Systems and Economics (WISE), xi
Xbox, 13, 29, 94, 124, 211, 240, 267
Xbox MMOG, 29
Yahoo, 24–25, 103, 120, 205
Yegge, Steve, 176–78
Yegge Rant, 176–78
Yelp, 36, 37, 72, 120, 121, 170, 262, 283
Yoskovitz, Benjamin, 191, 196
YouTube, 3, 9, 10, 23, 36, 37, 39–40, 49, 66, 67, 71, 77, 84, 87–88, 92, 101, 104, 111, 134–35, 147,
149, 155, 157, 223–24, 258, 299
Zeng, Ming, 214


---PAGE BREAK---

Zhang, Ruimin, 198–99
Zopa, 170, 275
Zvents, 112–13, 126
Zynga, 103, 163, 217, 218, 221
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Geoffrey G. Parker is a professor of engineering at Dartmouth College (effective July 2016) and has
been a professor of management science at Tulane University since 1998. He is also a visiting scholar
and research fellow at the MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy. Before joining academia, he held
positions in engineering and finance at General Electric. He has made significant contributions to the
economics of network effects as codedeveloper of the theory of two-sided networks. Parker’s work
has been supported by the Department of Energy, the National Science Foundation, and numerous
corporations. Parker advises senior leaders in government and business and is a frequent speaker at
conferences and industry events. He received his BS from Princeton and his MS and PhD from MIT.
Marshall W. Van Alstyne is a professor at Boston University and a visiting scholar and research
fellow at the MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy. Van Alstyne is a world expert on information
economics and has made fundamental contributions to IT productivity and to theories of network
effects. His coauthored work on two-sided networks is taught in business schools worldwide. In
addition, he holds patents in information privacy protection and on spam-prevention methods. Van
Alstyne has been honored with six best paper awards and National Science Foundation IOC, SGER,
iCORPS, SBIR and Career Awards. He is an advisor to leading executives, a frequent keynote
speaker, a former entrepreneur, and a consultant to startups and to Global 100 companies. He
received his BA from Yale and his MS and PhD from MIT. Reach him at @InfoEcon.
Sangeet Paul Choudary is the founder of Platform Thinking Labs and a C-level advisor to
executives globally on platform business models. He is an Entrepreneur-in-Residence at the INSEAD
Business School and a Fellow at the Centre for Global Enterprise. He also writes the popular blog
Platform Thinking (platformed.info), recommended as a must-read by the Wall Street Journal, and
his work has been featured in the Harvard Business Review, MIT Technology Review, and Wired. He
is a frequent keynote speaker at leading conferences, including the G20 World Summit 2014 events.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2016 by Geoffrey G. Parker,
Marshall W. Van Alstyne, and Sangeet Paul Choudary
All rights reserved
First Edition
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book,
write to Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.,
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact
W. W. Norton Special Sales at specialsales@wwnorton.com or 800-233-4830
Book design by BTDnyc
Production manager: Anna Oler
ISBN 978-0-393-24913-2
ISBN 978-0-393-24912-5 (e-book)
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
www.wwnorton.com
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd.
Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London W1T 3QT
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

