

---PAGE BREAK---

More Praise for Scenario Planning in Organizations
“All CEOs, university presidents, leaders of national nonproﬁ ts, and politi-
cians face the same problem: coping with uncertainty. Scenario planning 
addresses this central problem. One cannot attend a planning session 
in any large organization without the topic of scenario planning arising. 
Professor Chermack puts the various approaches to scenario planning in 
a highly readable and useful context. For those of us who have used a 
variant of scenario planning for many years, there is much to learn in this 
approach. Professor Chermack is well on his way to becoming a major 
resource for this important planning tool.” 
—Vance Opperman, President and CEO, Key Investment, Inc.; Audit 
Committee Chair, Thomson Reuters; and former President, West 
Publishing Company
“With extensive expertise, Tom Chermack spotlights scenario planning as 
a fundamental tool used by organizations to achieve long-term sustain-
ability. This book helps me guide diverse management teams through 
strategic decision and problem-solving processes using a collaborative 
and forward-thinking approach.” 
—Carla McCabe, Director of Human Resources, Technicolor 
“Scenario planning has beneﬁ tted our entire organization by helping us 
understand a volatile environment and how to move forward. Scenarios 
have helped us think through options, create insights, and spark innova-
tive ideas. Chermack’s approach held us accountable and emphasized 
creative thinking as well as assessing where and how the scenarios add-
ed value.”
—James Steven Beck, MBA, CPA, Vice President—Administration, Eltron 
Research & Development, Inc.
“Professor Chermack has made the mysterious process of scenario plan-
ning available in a format accessible for both leaders of large corpora-
tions and small business owners. Creating a common working language 
about the future is essential for the long-term success of any enterprise. 
Tom’s clear guidelines provide practical tools for organizations to create 
scenarios that will help them discover new ways of thinking, planning, 
and being.”
—Kim Cermak, President and COO, KDC Management, LLC


---PAGE BREAK---

This page intentionally left blank 


---PAGE BREAK---

SCENARIO  
PLANNING  
IN ORGANIZATIONS


---PAGE BREAK---

A Publication in the Berrett-Koehler  
Organizational Performance Series
Richard A. Swanson and Barbara L. Swanson,  
Series Editors


---PAGE BREAK---

SCENARIO  
PLANNING 
IN ORGANIZATIONS
HOW TO CREATE, USE, AND  
ASSESS SCENARIOS
THOM AS J. CHERM ACK


---PAGE BREAK---

Scenario Planning in Organizations
Copyright © 2011 by Thomas J. Chermack
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electron-
ic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in
the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other noncommercial
uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to the publisher,
addressed “Attention: Permissions Coordinator,” at the address below.
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
235 Montgomery Street, Suite 650
San Francisco, California 94104-2916
Tel: (415) 288-0260, Fax: (415) 362-2512
www.bkconnection.com
Ordering information for print editions
Quantity sales. Special discounts are available on quantity purchases by corporations,
associations, and others. For details, contact the “Special Sales Department” at the
Berrett-Koehler address above.
Individual sales. Berrett-Koehler publications are available through most bookstores. They
can also be ordered directly from Berrett-Koehler: Tel: (800) 929-2929; Fax: (802) 864-
7626; www.bkconnection.com
Orders for college textbook/course adoption use. Please contact Berrett-Koehler:
Tel: (800) 929-2929; Fax: (802) 864-7626.
Orders by U.S. trade bookstores and wholesalers. Please contact Ingram Publisher
Services, Tel: (800) 509-4887; Fax: (800) 838-1149; E-mail:  customer .service@ingram
publisher services .com; or visit  www .ingram publisher services .com/ Ordering for details
about electronic ordering.
Berrett-Koehler and the BK logo are registered trademarks of Berrett-Koehler
Publishers, Inc.
First Edition
Paperback print edition ISBN 978-1-60509-413-7
PDF e-book ISBN 978-1-60509-414-4
IDPF e-book ISBN 978-1-60509-908-8
2011-1
Production Management: Michael Bass Associates
Cover Design: Irene Morris
Cover Photos: © Matthias Clamer/Stone+/Getty Images


---PAGE BREAK---

Contents
 
List of Figures 
vii 
 
Foreword by Louis van der Merwe 
xi
 
Preface 
xv
P A R T  O N E
FOUNDATIONS OF SCENARIO PLANNING
 1 Introduction to Performance-Based Scenario Planning 
3
 2 Theoretical Foundations of Scenario Planning  
29
 3 The Performance-Based Scenario System  
61
 4  Scenario Case Study  
71
P A R T  T W O
PHASES OF THE PERFORMANCE-BASED  
SCENARIO SYSTEM
 5 Phase 1—Project Preparation: Understanding Purpose and 
Building Support  
81
 6 Phase 2—Scenario Exploration: Breathing In  
101
 7 Phase 3—Scenario Development: Digging Deeper  
127
 8 Phase 4—Scenario Implementation: Putting Scenarios to Use  169
 9 Phase 5—Project Assessment: Documenting Results 
189


---PAGE BREAK---

vi 
CO NTENTS
P A R T  T H R E E
LEADING SCENARIO PROJECTS
10 Managing Scenario Projects 
217
11 Human Perceptions in the Scenario System  
233
12 Initiating Your First Scenario Project 
241
 
References 
247
 
Index 
259
 
About the Author 
271


---PAGE BREAK---

 vii
List of Figures
 1.1 Scenario Planning Deﬁnitions and Outcome Variables
 1.2 Steps in Developing and Using Scenarios
 2.1 A Theory of Scenario Planning
 2.2 A Map of North America
 3.1 The Context of Scenario Planning
 3.2 Conceptual Model of the Scenario System
 3.3 The Performance-Based Scenario System
 3.4 The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario-Building Component
 3.5 The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Deployment 
Component
 4.1 Technology Corporation Organization Chart
 4.2 Technology Corporation’s Small Business Innovation Research/Small 
Business Technology Transfer Proposals Submitted 2007–2008
 4.3 Technology Corporation’s Small Business Innovation Research/Small 
Business Technology Transfer Proposals Funded 1984–2008
 4.4 Technology Corporation’s Active Projects 1984–2008
 5.1 The Performance-Based Scenario System—Project Preparation Phase
 5.2 Scenarios Are Like Cherry Trees
 5.3 Technology Corporation’s Time Line and Scope
 6.1 The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Exploration Phase
 6.2 The Basic Process of a SWOT Analysis
 6.3 Technology Corporation’s Basic Process for SWOT Analysis
 6.4 Technology Corporation’s SWOT Analysis
 6.5 Technology Corporation’s Innovation-Development of Intellectual 
Property


---PAGE BREAK---

viii 
LIST O F FIGURES
 6.6 Technology Corporation’s Business Idea
 6.7 Rummler and Brache’s (1995) Nine Performance Variables
 6.8 Swanson’s (2007) Performance Diagnosis Matrix 
 6.9 Technology Corporation’s Performance Diagnosis Matrix
 7.1 The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Development Phase
 7.2 Brainstorming Key Forces
 7.3 Technology Corporation’s Brainstorm Activity
 7.4 Ranking Forces by Relative Impact on the Strategic Agenda
 7.5 Technology Corporation’s Brainstormed Forces—Simpliﬁed and Ranked 
by Relative Impact on the Strategic Agenda
 7.6 Ranking Forces by Relative Uncertainty
 7.7 Uncertainty/Impact Matrix for Technology Corporation
 7.8 Quadrants of the Ranking Space
 7.9 Technology Corporation’s Quadrants
 7.10 The Critical Uncertainties
 7.11 Developing the Scenario Matrix
 7.12 Technology Corporation’s Scenario Matrix
 7.13 Developing the Scenario Matrix Using Additional Critical Uncertainties
 7.14 Technology Corporation’s Scenario Matrix
 7.15 Template for Scenario Plot Construction
 7.16 The Scenario Quality Assessment Checklist
 7.17 The Scenario Quality Assessment Checklist—Technology Corporation
 8.1 Performance-Based Scenario Planning—Scenario Implementation Phase
 8.2 Technology Corporation’s Revised Business Idea
 8.3 Signals for Technology Corporation Scenarios
 8.4 Using Scenarios to Examine Organizational Elements 
 8.5 Wind-Tunneling Summary for Technology Corporation
 9.1 The Performance-Based Scenario System—Project Assessment Phase
 9.2 Participant Satisfaction Survey
 9.3 Stakeholder Satisfaction Survey
 9.4 The Conversation Quality and Engagement Checklist


---PAGE BREAK---

  
LIST O F FIGURES 
ix
 9.5 The Scenario Expertise Audit
 9.6 The Strategic Gains and Losses Matrix
 9.7 The Strategic Gains and Losses Matrix for Technology Corporation
 9.8 A Comprehensive Plan for Assessing Scenario Projects
 9.9 Comprehensive Scenario Project Assessment for Technology Corporation
 10.1 The Scenario Project Worksheet
 12.1 The Performance-Based Scenario System


---PAGE BREAK---

This page intentionally left blank 


---PAGE BREAK---

 xi
Foreword
Louis van der Merwe
IT COMES AS NO SURPRISE that in our world of discontinuities and vola-
tility, the use of scenarios as part of strategic planning processes has taken 
off. According to the Bain & Company annual survey of the most-used 
management tools, scenario work has risen considerably. Scenario use has 
risen from 40 percent of those surveyed in 1999 to 70 percent in 2006 
(Economist, 2006). The Economist goes on to say, “As a result of its scenario 
planning, the New York Board of Trade decided in the 1990s to build a 
second trading ﬂoor outside the World Trade Centre, a decision that kept it 
going after September 11th, 2001.”  
As the environment becomes more volatile, one wrong assumption 
about future conditions or markets could put you out of business or set your 
organization back years. Leaders of organizations and governments need to 
skillfully use state-of-the-art tools and methods in order to steer their orga-
nizations away from dangers and to identify new opportunities. Appreciat-
ing how a speciﬁc method works and its underpinning theory is important 
for practitioners and leaders alike.
Lewin’s (1951) famous quote “There is nothing so practical as a good 
theory” (p. 169) is probably overused. However, it is particularly relevant 
for scenario planners, because the practical utility of theory has not yet been 
emphasized.
This book is aimed at the evolving community of practitioner-scholars 
involved in scenario work across the globe. Chermack’s theory building, to-
gether with that of scholars such as Richard Swanson, Susan Lynham, and 
others, is based on traditional scientiﬁc inquiry (Swanson & Holton, 2005), 
naturalistic inquiry (Denzin & Lincoln 2000), as well as action research 
(Reason & Bradbury, 2001). Chermack has based this work on his own ex-
perience as a practitioner and researcher as well as what he has learned from 
the deep tradition of scenario practitioners. This book provides the emerg-
ing scenario builder with a practical and theoretical foundation on which to 
build a competent practice.


---PAGE BREAK---

xii 
FO REWO RD
For the ﬁrst time, the theoretical foundations of scenario planning 
have been put forth.
Providing the theoretical foundations for the scenario method for the 
ﬁrst time through this book is important and essential for advancing prac-
tices. An example for thinking about scenario use can be illustrated by re-
calling what happened when you last purchased a car. What did you notice 
when you drove your car out onto the streets? You probably noticed how 
many people were driving the same car! It may have appeared as though 
there were many more cars like yours than you had noticed before, when in 
fact there is only one more of the same car on the road—yours! Becoming 
aware of your selective observation (which is a skill that develops when sce-
nario work is done well) enables you as a decision maker to notice relevant 
dynamics more quickly than someone who has not explored the what-ifs.
A rigorous theory base stabilizes scenario practice and lays the founda-
tions for establishing best practice. Chermack’s work provides an excellent start 
to articulating this body of theory. Theory can be deﬁned as “a scholarly descrip-
tion of what works best and why.” This book provides that basis and will 
guide practitioners and leadership toward best practice. While it provides 
practical how-to’s, it argues strongly for the theory underpinning this prac-
tice, as well as useful metrics for measuring the impact of scenario work. 
Chermack’s writing takes the reader onto the cutting edge of strategy 
making—namely, strategy making as strategic conversation. Here you will 
get the big picture of scenario-based strategy in a framework that allows you 
great freedom to bring in your own experiences as tools. Alternatively, if you 
are new to scenario planning, a high level of detail is shared. For example, 
a calibrated instrument for measuring the quality of strategic conversation 
is provided, as well as recommended tools for measuring other aspects of 
dynamic organizations. Chermack has contributed an emphasis on perfor-
mance. It may be assumed that scenarios add value, but it is in the best 
interests of the art of scenario planning to create a tradition of documenting 
the actual results.
The discipline of scenario planning needs to establish a track record of 
its contributions. Assessing scenario work is overdue, and, like the estab-
lishment of underlying theory, doing so will stabilize scenario practice and 
boost quality. Chermack has described an elegant approach to assessment 
that provides the practitioner with many different tools for pinning down 
scenario impact. The invitation is for scholar-practitioners to add to this 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
FO REWO RD 
xiii
body of knowledge, through their action research, reﬂection, and inquiry. A 
comprehensive, theory-based practice that emphasizes assessment will create 
a professional cadre of competent practitioners for scenario work.
We have learned from MIT’s Peter Senge and the community of prac-
titioners building learning organizations that learning faster than competi-
tors is the ultimate competitive advantage. Scenario-based strategy is in 
essence a learning and unlearning methodology. Pioneers such as the late 
Don Michael (1973) in his book Learning to Plan and Planning to Learn and 
Arie de Geus (1988) in his popular Harvard Business Review article “Plan-
ning as Learning,” ﬁrst drew attention to the fundamental role of learning 
in organizations as the basis for competitive advantage.
While developing the scenario method in Royal/Dutch Shell, Group 
Planning, Pierre Wack aimed scenario work at shifting the assumptions in 
the minds of decision makers. This process enabled them to notice emergent 
dynamics in the environment, before competitors, as they had visited and 
studied them during the scenario-building process. This capacity of aligned 
assumptions with the capability to self-correct early provided Royal/Dutch 
Shell with a signiﬁcant competitive advantage when oil prices were volatile 
in the 1970s. The assumptions on which they had based their decisions were 
inﬂuenced by the scenario development process and therefore held a wider 
view of their world.
Because scenarios can be powerful tools, they have been used in widely 
differing application areas. Herman Kahn used them to shift attention 
onto the impending dangers of a nuclear holocaust, and Royal/Dutch 
Shell leaders used scenarios for decision-making. In South Africa, sce-
narios were used to push people toward “the high road” and away from 
“the low road” of racial conﬂict and economic destruction. Engaging the 
emerging South African national leadership in a conversation about the 
future scenarios they might be confronted with resulted in avoiding popu-
list policies that compromised the future of the economy. The list of ap-
plication areas grows.
Initially, scenario practice was learned via an apprenticeship model. 
If you were fortunate enough to be a member of the Royal/Dutch Shell 
Group Planning, you could learn from the masters, such as Pierre Wack, 
Ted Newland, Arie de Geus, Kees van der Heijden, and Peter Schwartz. 
The ﬁrst public courses for learning the craft of scenario development 
emerged in the early 1990s. Early teaching was based on simulating a typical 


---PAGE BREAK---

xiv 
FO REWO RD
scenario project providing practice and coaching in the essentials of the var-
ious phases of developing a set of scenarios.
The recently established Scenario Planning Institute at Colorado State 
University is destined to provide a home for scholar-practitioners and capac-
ity building for scenario-based strategy. It promises to become a center for 
high-quality scenario work, training of skilled scenario practitioners, and 
the dissemination of performance-based scenario planning. 
I wish you all the success with the scenarios you develop. May you grow 
with other practitioners in the ﬁeld and use this book and scenarios to make 
the world a better place.
Louis van der Merwe
Centre for Innovative Leadership 
June 2010


---PAGE BREAK---

 xv
Preface 
THE FUTURE OFTEN ACTS like a drunken monkey stung by a bee—it is 
confused and disturbing, and its behavior is completely unpredictable. Or-
ganization leaders are struggling with an uncertain and fast-changing en-
vironment. Many are frustrated by the promise of tools for managing the 
future that come up short. A variety of terms has been used to describe the 
environment, such as whitewater, the rapids, VUCA (volatile, uncertain, com-
plex, and ambiguous), and turbulent. These terms all emphasize that business 
decision making is an activity that has reached high levels of frustration and 
confusion. Signs point to increasing complexity and uncertainty. This means 
choosing among options will become even more challenging, and carving a 
path into the future will require more diligent use of better tools.
Traditional approaches to business planning have had their day. Linear 
approaches to strategic planning worked in the 1950s and 1960s because 
the environment was relatively stable. Linear approaches only lead to disap-
pointment in today’s environment because they cannot account for uncer-
tainty—they assume that the environment of tomorrow will be the same as 
today’s. Scenario planning is a revolutionary alternative to traditional stra-
tegic planning because it recognizes the unpredictable nature of the future. 
Early scenario planners helped organization leaders see that the future was 
not going to consist of historic trends, projected forward. Instead, recogniz-
ing their problematic assumptions of a stable environment, decision makers 
found a way to think about alternatives in scenario planning. Scenario plan-
ning makes uncertainty a part of the plan. Many companies have been able 
to avoid major strategic losses due to the alternative way of thinking found 
in scenario planning.
The most valuable advantage of creating and using scenarios is the rec-
ognition that uncertainty is a basic feature of organizational environments. 
By accepting the reality of uncertainty—and making it a part of how plan-
ning happens—decision makers can widen the scope of what is assumed 


---PAGE BREAK---

xvi 
P REFACE
to be true about what the future might hold. A more open view of what is 
possible allows decision makers to be more prepared and adjust with mini-
mal delay and disruption. An expanded view of the terrain is developed by 
changing perceptions among key people in organizations. A primary out-
come of scenario planning is to shift perceptions. Scenario planning is a tool 
for helping decision makers reperceive the potential future in alternative 
ways. Having these alternative ways of seeing helps decision makers avoid 
surprises and prepare for a variety of plausible futures. 
Over the last thirty years, scenario planning has been used in a variety 
of contexts and organizations (Ogilvy, 1995, 2002; Ogilvy & Schwartz, 
2000). For example, scenarios have been employed with great success in 
anticipating the oil shocks in the 1970s, potential outcomes of Hurricane 
Katrina, the events of September 11, 2001, and developing responses to 
bridge collapses and other emergencies. Certainly, each of these events had 
numerous management issues, and some were more effectively directed 
than others. In each case, scenarios were developed that told stories quite 
similar to how reality unfolded (D’arcy, O’Hanlong, Orszag, Shapiro, & 
Steinberg, 2006; Hoffman, 2002; Lynch, 2005). Although there are many 
anecdotes of scenario use, few have rigorously studied scenario planning, 
and the process has been modiﬁed and changed as needed. As a result, sce-
nario planning means different things to different people, and the reported 
approaches are incomplete. 
The purpose of this book is to provide a complete approach to sce-
nario planning that includes key pieces missing from existing literature. 
These missing pieces are the theoretical foundations of scenario planning, 
a detailed guide to using scenarios once they have been developed, and a 
structure for assessing the impact of scenario projects. The theoretical foun-
dations of scenario planning are important for understanding how scenario 
planning works. Such an understanding is critical for anyone serious about 
using scenario planning to steer an organization into the future. Precisely 
how to use scenarios is not well covered in the literature, either. This book 
provides detailed suggestions for putting scenarios into practice and using 
them to support organizational change. Finally, not a single text on the 
topic deals with how to assess the impact of scenario projects. This book 
provides a clear, concise guide to assessing the beneﬁts of scenario planning 
in organizations. These three contributions make a complete scenario plan-
ning system that is the focus of this book.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P REFACE 
xvii
AUDIENCES
This book is for thoughtful people trying to move their organizations for-
ward—leaders, managers, decision makers, practitioners, consultants, and 
executives. This book provides the tools for facilitating scenario planning in 
organizations and is therefore a guide. This book is also a text for university 
courses focused on organization and business planning. Although this sug-
gestion may indicate two separate audiences, I argue that they are one and 
the same. Students in business planning courses are usually also managers, 
decision makers, practitioners, consultants, or executives. Again, these are 
people struggling to move their organizations forward amid a great deal of 
chaos and uncertainty. 
STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK
This book features three parts: (1) Foundations of Scenario Planning, (2) 
Phases of the Performance-Based Scenario System, and (3) Leading Sce-
nario Projects.  
Part One is focused on the foundations of scenario planning. These 
chapters review scenario planning, its history, development, and inﬂuen-
tial ﬁgures. Performance-based scenario planning—the contribution of this 
book—is described and explained. Chapter 1 describes the development 
and evolution of scenario planning. Key deﬁnitions, outcomes, and major 
approaches are reviewed. Chapter 2 is a synthesis of the theoretical foun-
dations of scenario planning, and is a comprehensive review of the major 
content disciplines that inform the practice of scenario planning. Chapter 3 
situates scenario planning in the organization system, and Chapter 4 pres-
ents a case study. Part One provides a sense of the context in which scenario 
planning was developed as a strategic tool, as well as an understanding of 
the position of scenario planning inside organizations.
Part Two presents the phases of the scenario system. These are Chapters 
5 through 9, covering the major phases of scenario planning: (1) project 
preparation, (2) scenario exploration, (3) scenario development, (4) scenario 
implementation, and (5) project assessment. These are the chapters that be-
come a guide for using the scenario system. Detailed examples are provided, 
and the core case study that is presented in Chapter 4 is expanded further 
in each subsequent chapter. The examples illustrate key outcomes of each 
phase.


---PAGE BREAK---

xviii 
P REFACE
Part Three presents tips for managing and leading scenario projects. 
Chapter 10 describes several pitfalls in scenario planning and how they can 
be avoided or overcome. Chapter 11 summarizes some cutting-edge neurol-
ogy research and how it relates to cognitive activity and human perceptions 
in the scenario process. Finally, Chapter 12 offers suggestions for getting 
started on your own scenario projects, followed by a summary of the book. 
MY OWN FASCINATION WITH  
SCENARIO PLANNING
What continues to fascinate me about scenario planning is its potential ap-
plication to almost any context, problem, issue, or situation, and its evolv-
ing nature. There are many nuances throughout the facilitation of scenario 
projects. As a result, there are always opportunities for improving scenario 
planning and ﬁnding ways to increase its effectiveness. For timely examples, 
Noah Raford is studying how to maintain dialogue over electronic media 
such as Twitter, Facebook, and other Web 2.0 technologies in scenario plan-
ning (see http://news.noahraford.com/?p=129). Others are working on 
how scenario planning is used in nonproﬁt organizations, communities, 
and nations. As the world’s problems evolve in their complexity, there is 
only increasing utility for scenario planning.
Scenario planning is a decision-making tool that can be used to explore 
and understand a variety of issues in a variety of organizations and issues. 
For example, scenarios can be used to consider the future of global climate 
change, global water supply, natural resources, as well as business and com-
munity decisions (such as in the Mont Fleur scenarios that explored the end 
of apartheid in South Africa). These are all issues that involve complex dy-
namics including diverse sets of stakeholders and varying knowledge bases, 
and they are likely to require interdisciplinary collaboration to address. Any 
situation in which a group of people is trying to work out how to create 
aligned movement toward a common goal can consider scenario planning a 
potentially useful tool.
Human perceptions in scenario planning are another fascinating topic 
for me. As I continue to witness strategic insights among participants in 
scenario projects, I wonder why some participants have them and some 
don’t. What are the characteristics of individuals that lend them to thinking 
deeply about problems? What are the characteristics of scenarios that help 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P REFACE 
xix
people open up their thinking? These questions pose challenges to what is 
known about scenario planning and how to maximize its impact. Neurosci-
ence research is getting close to helping us understand how the brain learns 
and what happens physiologically during these strategic insights, but there 
is still a long way to go. 
A lot about scenario planning remains unknown. Each scenario project 
I work on reveals more about how to do it better next time. This book in-
troduces scenario planning and its foundations, explains how to do it, and 
describes how to tell whether it produces beneﬁts. This is a book for people 
who want to improve the way their organizations prepare for the future. 
Readers are encouraged to access the latest research on scenarios from my 
website (www.thomaschermack.com) and to e-mail me reports of their ex-
periences. I have also recently established the Scenario Planning Institute at 
Colorado State University, and readers who want to get more involved can 
engage at www.scenarioplanning.colostate.edu.
Finally, scenario planning is a lot of fun! Scenario planning is a blend 
of creative and analytical activities. There’s nothing like arranging complex 
variables into stories that make sense, are rigorously researched, and can 
move an audience. Seeing the moment when new understanding comes to-
gether for a participant is exciting and rewarding. Indeed, helping people 
think in new and interesting ways has immediate impact that can be applied 
in a variety of situations. Wack (1984) may have put it best when he wrote, 
“In our times of rapid change and discontinuity, crises of perception—the 
inability to see a novel reality emerging by being locked inside obsolete as-
sumptions—have become the main cause of strategic failures” (p. 95). Sce-
nario planning is a way to avoid such crises of perception by learning how to 
see the environment differently and perhaps a little more completely. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Some people say that writing a book is an inherently personal endeavor. 
Mine has been a humbling experience. This book is the result of thou-
sands of interactions, conversations, scholarly debates, e-mails, and other 
exchanges with a variety of people over the last ten years. So, while it has 
been a personal experience, I could not have written this book by myself.
Richard A. Swanson’s name should appear as the second author of this 
book. I offered it to him, but he would not accept it. He read, critiqued, 


---PAGE BREAK---

xx 
P REFACE
edited, moved, improved, shifted, guided, and reviewed every word on these 
pages. His contributions made the ﬁnal product much more useful than it 
would have been without his generosity. Thanks are not enough to cover 
my appreciation for his direction and guidance, but it is all I can do in this 
preface. Thank you, Dick.
Thanks to Susan A. Lynham and Louis van der Merwe for their men-
torship and guidance. Many conversations, experiences, and stories from 
Susan and Louis have been foundational to my thinking about scenario 
planning. I am grateful for the guidance and advice of two such accom-
plished professionals. Thank you, Susan and Louis.
Thanks to Evie Chenhall, Janet Colvin, Jennifer Fullerton, Maggie 
Glick, Lea Hanson, Chris Harper, Stacey Herr, Martin Kollasch, Kyle 
Stone, and Joy Wagner. Their contributions appear in some of the materials 
for the Technology Corporation case, and their comments, suggestions, and 
reviews have improved this book.
Thanks to Ziad Labban, Dave Peck, John Weatherburn, Paul Grim-
mer, Steve Beck, Joanne Provo, and Monica Danielson. Writing a book 
about scenario planning requires experience in using its tools. These indi-
viduals all provided learning opportunities and gave me access to situations 
in which to learn how to apply scenario techniques.
Thanks to Kees van der Heijden, Art Kleiner, Peter Schwartz, Napier 
Collyns, George Burt, George Wright, Paul Schoemaker, and Louis van der 
Merwe. These individuals have inﬂuenced and inspired me, and their ef-
forts have established the scenario planning discipline. Thank you.
Thanks to the late Pierre Wack and Ted Newland. These two visionary 
thinkers sought a way to think differently about the future. Their work has 
inspired many and is certainly the foundation of my own thinking about 
scenario planning in organizations. 
Finally, thank you to the outstanding team at Berrett-Koehler and, in 
particular, Steve Piersanti and Jeevan Sivasubramaniam. 
Thomas J. Chermack
December 2010  
Fort Collins, Colorado
www.thomaschermack.com
www.scenarioplanning.colostate.edu 


---PAGE BREAK---

 1
P
A
R
T
O
N
E
FOUNDATIONS OF 
SCENARIO PLANNING
C H A P TE RS
 
1 Introduction to Performance-Based Scenario Planning
 
2  Theoretical Foundations of Scenario Planning 
 
3 The Performance-Based Scenario System 
 
4 Scenario Case Study 
IF WE LOOK BACK over the history of planning in organizations, we can 
see a fundamental illusion that is beginning to come to light. The illusion 
is that planning can function like a machine, that the steps of organiza-
tional planning need only be carried out. The basis of that illusion is an as-
sumption that things more or less stay the same. Today, our rhetoric would 
indicate we have realized our erroneous assumption, but actions indicate 
otherwise. The world is changing faster than ever, yet many planners and 
decision makers behave in opposition to what they know is true about the 
world—they seek the answer, as if there is only one correct answer and their 
job is to ﬁnd it.
A key premise of this book is that things are ever-changing. Planning 
therefore needs to take a different approach, one that assumes tomorrow’s 
world will be fundamentally different from today’s. Scenario planning ex-
plores a variety of outcomes, a variety of potential answers, and uses them 
to create awareness and readiness. The hardest part of scenario planning is 


---PAGE BREAK---

2 
F O UNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
recognizing our desperate clinging to a single answer and consciously shift-
ing toward an open future of vast potential—both positive and negative. 
This book asks its readers to take a journey. To interact with their environ-
ment. To ask difﬁcult questions that lead to more difﬁcult questions. To 
become comfortable with ambiguity. 
Part One consists of Chapters 1 through 4. These chapters provide a 
working knowledge of scenario planning. 
Chapter 1, “Introduction to Performance-Based Scenario Planning,” es-
tablishes the nature of the business environment, describes why traditional 
approaches to strategy are no longer effective, and lays out the development 
of scenario planning as a major evolution in planning under uncertain con-
ditions. This is an extensive chapter that provides a comprehensive back-
ground of the need for scenario planning, and the critical breakdowns of 
existing approaches to scenario planning. Unlike existing approaches, per-
formance-based scenario planning provokes conversations about expecta-
tions, delivers a variety of options for putting scenarios to use, and makes 
assessment a required part of the project. 
Chapter 2, “Theoretical Foundations of Performance-Based Scenario 
Planning,” presents the major disciplines that form the theoretical basis for 
scenario planning. This chapter examines the connections between scenario 
planning and learning theory, mental model theory, decision-making the-
ory, and performance improvement theory, among others. This chapter is a 
comprehensive treatment of the knowledge required for effective scenario 
planning. While not required for immediate application, this chapter re-
veals many nuances about what scenario planning is and how it works.
Chapter 3, “The Performance-Based Scenario System,” situates scenario 
planning within the organization. Drawing on system theory concepts, this 
chapter generally outlines the position of scenario planning as a subsystem 
in organizations. This chapter also presents the performance-based scenario 
system, which is the focus of Part Two.
Finally, Chapter 4, the “Scenario Case Study,” presents a short descrip-
tion of a real organization (disguised for the purposes of conﬁdentiality). 
The case illustrates the phases of the performance-based scenario system 
described throughout Part Two.


---PAGE BREAK---

 3
Introduction to  
Performance-Based  
Scenario Planning
This book describes a method for including the realities of uncertainty in 
the planning process. Uncertainty and ambiguity are basic structural fea-
tures of today’s business environment. They can best be managed by includ-
ing them in planning activities as standard features that must be considered 
in any signiﬁcant decision. 
This book focuses on avoiding crises of perception. Scenario planning 
is a tool for surfacing assumptions so that changes can be made in how deci-
sion makers see the environment. It is also a tool for changing and improv-
ing the quality of people’s perceptions. Uncertainty is not a new problem, 
but the degree of uncertainty and the effects of unanticipated outcomes are 
unprecedented. Learning how to see a situation—complete with its uncer-
tainties—is an important ability in today’s world.
This chapter presents some of the challenges posed by today’s fast-
changing environment. A tool for dealing with those challenges has tradi-
tionally been strategic planning. Basic approaches to strategic planning are 
described; however, the rate and depth of change have increased over time 
to the point that those methods are no longer useful. Scenario planning 
emerged as an effective solution in the 1970s, and the ensuing history of 
scenario planning is discussed here. This chapter also describes a variety 
of major approaches to scenario planning, including their shortcomings. 
The fundamental problem with existing approaches to scenario planning 
is that they are not performance based. Evidence of this critical oversight is 
presented by reviewing the deﬁnitions and outcomes of scenario planning as 
1


---PAGE BREAK---

4 
F O UNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
they are described by major scenario planning authors. The outcomes they 
promote are generally vague and unclear. Finally, this chapter introduces 
performance-based scenario planning—which is the contribution of this book.
DILEMMAS
Some authors prefer to use the term dilemma instead of problem because the 
term problem can imply that there is a single solution (Cascio, 2009; Johan-
sen, 2008). Most often, strategic decision making involves ambiguity and 
a realization that numerous solutions are possible. Each usually comes with 
its own caveats and difﬁcult elements that must be considered. Hampden-
Turner (1990) saw dilemmas as a dialectic and used the description “horns 
of the dilemma” to describe this way of observing speciﬁc dynamics in the 
environment. This way of describing complex dynamics takes a ﬁrst step 
into looking for underlying systemic structure.
This book focuses on complex problems or dilemmas with unknown so-
lutions. Therefore, its intent is to develop the understanding and expertise 
required to explore difﬁcult, ambiguous problems and consider a variety 
of solutions in a wildly unpredictable and turbulent environment. Because 
there are no clear answers to questions of strategy and uncertainty, decision 
makers are compelled to do the best they can. These types of problems are 
the most complex, most ambiguous, and often the most deeply rooted. Ex-
perienced scenario planning practitioners have demonstrated their capacity 
to detect blind spots, avoid surprises, and increase the capacity to adjust 
when needed. Most important, modern-day dilemmas take place in an en-
vironment the likes of which we have never seen before. 
THE ENVIRONMENT
Organizations operate in environmental contexts. These contexts include 
and are shaped by social, technological, economic, environmental, and po-
litical forces. The external environment has received much attention in liter-
ature from a variety of disciplines. Emery and Trist published a seminal work 
on the importance of the external environment in 1965. They suggested a 
four-step typology of the “causal texture” of the external environment: 
Step 1—a placid, randomized environment
Step 2—a placid, clustered environment


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
5
Step 3—a disturbed, reactive environment
Step 4—a turbulent ﬁeld
Few would disagree that most contemporary organizations are heavily 
steeped in turbulent ﬁelds. Turbulent ﬁelds are worlds in which dynamic 
processes create signiﬁcant variance. These turbulent ﬁelds embody a seri-
ous rise in uncertainty, and the consequences of actions therein become in-
creasingly unpredictable (Emery & Trist, 1965). These four different types 
of environments have existed over time, but today we are dealing with tur-
bulent ﬁelds beyond the original conceptualization. 
Reminding readers of Emery and Trist’s classiﬁcation, Ramirez, Selsky, 
and van der Heijden (2008) use the ideas of turbulence and complexity to 
frame their edited book Business Planning for Turbulent Times. They make 
their case that turbulence and environmental complexity are undeniable 
features of the business environment by citing research showing signiﬁcant 
increases in published material focused on turbulence and uncertainty. It 
could be argued that these descriptors are more relevant today than they 
were in 1965. 
Another description of the external environment uses the terms volatil-
ity, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity for the acronym VUCA (Johan-
sen, 2007). VUCA originated at the U.S. Army War College, which has 
since become known as VUCA University. Indeed, the elements of volatil-
ity, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity are undeniably present in the 
operating environment of any organization—the only question is the degree 
to which each element may be in play. 
These external environment elements have equal and opposite forces 
that must be understood and emphasized. For example, to overcome volatil-
ity, one must use vision; to address uncertainty, one must develop under-
standing; complexity yields to clarity; and ambiguity can be addressed with 
agility. Each of these solutions is based on an open-ended, continuous learn-
ing orientation (Johansen, 2007).
The general societal environment and organizations within it continue 
to evolve to new heights of complexity, turbulence, volatility, uncertainty, 
and ambiguity. The rate of change is not likely to slow, and most decision 
makers are simply trying to keep up. Timelines for strategic thinking are 
short. Organizations operating on a minimum of resources will ﬁnd that 
eventually something must be given up. For many, the time to think stra-
tegically is sacriﬁced. Logically, this reaction is just the opposite of what is 


---PAGE BREAK---

6 
F O UNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
required if decision makers are to have any chance at navigating a chaotic 
environment that is challenging them.
A BRIEF EVOLUTION OF STRATEGIC PLANNING
Military planning has long concentrated on strategy principles dating 
back to early Chinese philosophers such as Sun Tzu and Japanese philoso-
phers such as Miyamoto Musashi, as well as ancient scholars like Niccolò 
Machiavelli. These early opinions about battle positioning have heavily 
inﬂuenced modern thinking about strategy (Cleary, 1988; Greene, 1998). 
Through several world and national wars, the notion of planning for stra-
tegic warfare positioning has evolved dramatically (Frentzell, Bryson, & 
Crosby, 2000). While the history of military planning is extensive and has 
evolved in many ways completely on its own, military strategy has bor-
rowed and contributed concepts from and to corporate planning over the 
years (Frentzel et al., 2000).
Alfred Sloan advanced corporate planning practices at General Motors 
in the 1930s. The concept of planning as a central organizational activity 
was further advanced by Igor Ansoff and Alfred Chandler. These strategy 
thinkers spent their time in the 1950s and 1960s trying to convince managers 
that their companies needed strategies. During this period, frequent links and 
parallels were drawn with military strategy and the events of the era. Eco-
nomic forecasting was the key tool in the strategist’s arsenal of weapons for 
blasting a path to the desired future. This approach to planning continued 
through the 1960s and generally involved three phases—namely, deﬁning 
the desired future, creating the plan (or steps to achieve the desired fu-
ture), and then implementing the plan (Micklethwait & Woolridge, 1996). 
These phases also denoted the initial division between strategy formation 
and implementation, with the formation being a process reserved for senior 
executives and the CEO, and implementation being the job of managers. 
Strategic planning became increasingly complex over the next decade with 
the introduction of several levels of planning. A notable contribution of this 
time period was the Boston Consulting Group’s Growth Share Matrix. The 
matrix was intended to indicate a general strategy to executives and manag-
ers based on templates of opportunities and strategies in any industry.
In response to the demands of World War II, planning became a top 
priority for most industries. The military also heightened its connection to 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
7
the research coming out of the RAND Corporation that was headed by 
Herman Kahn (Kahn & Weiner, 1967; Ringland, 1998). The developments 
in Kahn’s “future-now thinking” quickly translated into military efforts to 
predict the future (Kahn & Weiner, 1967), and military planning groups 
added physicists and mathematicians specializing in modeling (Ringland, 
1998). Although much of the planning strategies used by the military were 
classiﬁed, it seems clear that the thinking going on in Stanford Research 
Institute’s Futures Group, and that of Herman Kahn himself at the Hud-
son Institute, provoked what became more widely known as simulations, or 
events that positioned participants in hypothetical situations.
Later, Forrester’s (1961) work at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology also contributed greatly to the development of simulations, and his 
expertise was sought for military operations on several occasions. One of the 
applications of Forrester’s systems dynamics modeling was to uncover counter-
intuitive possibilities in the future. The essence of the Forrester systems 
dynamics models is to develop the underlying causal relationships that drive 
a speciﬁc dynamic. Through a process of identifying and modeling the size 
of stocks and the strength of ﬂows, complex dynamics could be captured. 
These models also enabled an evidence-based argument about how speciﬁc 
dynamics might unfold in the future.
Military groups began using simulations to allow individuals to experi-
ence situations without the implications of their actions in those situations 
translating into reality (Frentzel et al., 2000). The emphasis on war games, 
the advent of computer modeling, and other technology produced by the 
military and industry in the 1950s and 1960s have led to elaborate train-
ing strategies involving virtual reality and devices such as ﬂight simulators. 
Military planning has incorporated some of the early scenario planning 
concepts, but the core point of differentiation has been a lasting focus on 
prediction in military planning (Frentzel et al., 2000).
Michael Porter’s work on business strategy took a cue from some of the 
military planning concepts and applied them to business organizations. His 
work concentrated on the idea that there can be both unique solutions to 
strategic problems and general solutions that may be examined for relevance 
to any strategic situation (Porter, 1985). Porter’s work then shifted to the 
idea of competitive advantage and that, indeed, generic paths for achieving 
competitive advantage are freely available to any corporation and its plan-
ning analysts (Porter, 1985). Porter also stressed the idea that organizations 


---PAGE BREAK---

8 
F O UNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
should think of themselves as value chains of separate activities. Planning 
took a serious turn to focus on analysis until Japanese companies were per-
forming as anomalies in Porter’s planning framework. Lengthy, formal, and 
involved approaches to planning came under tough scrutiny by overseas 
business leaders; eventually, even the Harvard Business School explored 
more simpliﬁed approaches to strategy.
The shift in thinking toward simplicity had an effect on most organiza-
tions. Many corporations ridded themselves of their planning departments 
as the concept of reengineering took center stage in the 1990s. Strategy con-
sulting ﬁrms like McKinsey and the Boston Consulting Group shifted their 
expertise to reengineering to capture the rising demand. Planning practices 
in the 1990s and early 2000s became hybrids of everything from formalized 
annual retreats that attempted to re-create the days of planning, to simple 
strategies that could be communicated and rolled out to employees on busi-
ness cards.
In light of the negative and devastating effects of many reengineering 
efforts, some companies have attempted to revive practices of strategic 
thinking in their organizations, and some companies have managed to 
hold onto their formal planning processes. The 1990s also brought about 
a concentration on developing strategic vision. Jim Collins, in his best-
selling book Good to Great (2001), demonstrated how vision-led organiza-
tions are sustainably more proﬁtable than others. He combined this point 
with a leadership theory called Level Five leadership that he described as 
a combination of ﬁerce resolve and humility. This approach was thought 
to be the solution—somewhere between the bureaucratic formalized plan-
ning that was deemed a failure in the past and a strategy written on a 
cocktail napkin.
PHILOSOPHICAL VIEWS ON STRATEGY
There are three overarching paradigms of strategy (van der Heijden, 1997, 
2005b). These philosophies are critical to understanding the context in 
which planning takes place. Although it is tempting to “choose” one of 
these philosophies with which one ﬁnds alignment, it is important to realize 
that all three of these views are valid. To place scenario planning in context, 
we must consider the backgrounds of each of these views: rationalist, evolu-
tionary, and processual. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
9
THE RATIONALIST SCHOOL
The rationalist school features a tacit and underlying assumption that there 
is indeed one best solution. The job of the strategist becomes one of produc-
ing that one best solution or the closest possible thing to it. Classic ratio-
nalists include Igor Ansoff, Alfred Chandler, Frederick Taylor, and Alfred 
Sloan (Micklethwait & Woolridge, 1996). The rationalist approach to strat-
egy dictates that an elite few of the organization’s top managers convene, 
approximately once each year, and formulate a strategic plan. Mintzberg 
(1990) lists other assumptions underlying the rationalist school:
• Predictability; no interference from outside
• Clear intentions
• Implementation follows formulation
• Full understanding throughout the organization
• The belief that reasonable people will do reasonable things
The majority of practitioners and available literature on strategy is of 
the rationalist perspective (van der Heijden, 1997, 2005b). Although it is 
becoming clear that this view is limited, and as the belief in one correct 
solution wanes, the rationalist perspective is still alive and well, and fully 
embedded in many organizational planning cycles.
THE EVOLUTIONARY SCHOOL
With an emphasis on the complex nature of organizational behavior, the 
evolutionary school suggests that a winning strategy can only be articulated 
in retrospect (Mintzberg, 1990). Followers of this theory believe that sys-
tems can develop a memory of successful previous strategies. In this case, 
strategy is thought to be a “process of random experimentation and ﬁltering 
out of the unsuccessful” (van der Heijden, 1997, p. 24). Organizations with 
strong cultures and identities often have trouble seriously thinking about 
alternative futures because the company brand is so inﬂuential.
The issue with this perspective is that it is of little value when consider-
ing alternative futures. This view can sometimes reduce organization mem-
bers to characters of chance, inﬂuenced by random circumstances.
THE PROCESSUAL SCHOOL
The processual school asserts that although it is not possible to deliver opti-
mal strategies through rational thinking alone, organization members can 


---PAGE BREAK---

10 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
instill and create processes within organizations that make it a more adap-
tive, whole system, capable of learning from its mistakes (van der Heijden, 
1997, 2000). Incorporating change management concepts to inﬂuence pro-
cesses, the processual school supports that successful evolutionary behavior 
can be analyzed and used to create alternative futures. Van der Heijden 
(1997, 2000) offers the following examples of metaphors for explaining the 
three strategic schools:
• The rationalistic paradigm suggests a machine metaphor for the 
organization.
• The evolutionary school suggests an ecology.
• The processual school suggests a living organism.
Because van der Heijden views scenarios as a tool for organizational 
learning, he advocates the integration of these three strategic perspectives. 
“Organizational learning represents a way in which we can integrate these 
three perspectives, all three playing a key role in describing reality, and 
therefore demanding consideration” (van der Heijden, 1997, p. 49). It is 
widely accepted that effective scenario building incorporates all three of these 
perspectives (Georgantzas & Acar, 1995; Ringland, 1998; Schwartz, 1991).
HISTORY OF SCENARIO PLANNING
Scenario planning is a participative approach to strategy that features di-
verse thinking and conversation. Diverse thinking and conversation are 
used to shift how the external environment is perceived (Selin, 2007; Wack, 
1984, 1985a, 1985b). The intended outcomes of scenario planning include 
individual and team learning, integrated decision making, understanding 
of how the organization can achieve its goals amid chaos, and increased 
dialogue among organization members (Chermack 2004, 2005). These 
outcomes collectively prepare individuals and organizations for a variety of 
alternative futures. When used effectively, scenario planning functions as 
an organizational “radar,” scanning the environment for signals of potential 
discontinuities.
Scenario planning ﬁrst emerged for application to businesses in a com-
pany set up for researching new forms of weapons technology in the RAND 
Corporation. Kahn (1967) of RAND pioneered a technique he titled 
“future-now thinking.” The intent of this approach was to combine detailed 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
11
analyses with imagination and produce reports as though people might 
write them in the future. Kahn adopted the name “scenario” when Holly-
wood determined the original term outdated and switched to the label 
“screenplay.” In the mid-1960s, Kahn founded the Hudson Institute, which 
specialized in writing stories about the future to help people consider the 
“unthinkable.” He gained the most notoriety around the idea that the best 
way to prevent nuclear war was to examine the possible consequences of 
nuclear war and widely publish the results (Kahn & Weiner, 1967).
Around the same time, the Stanford Research Institute (SRI) began 
offering long-range planning for businesses that considered political, eco-
nomic, and research forces as primary drivers of business development. The 
work of organizations such as the SRI began shifting toward planning for 
massive societal changes (Ringland, 1998). When military spending in-
creased to support the Vietnam War, an interest began to grow in ﬁnding 
ways to look into the future and plan for changes in society. These changing 
views were largely a result of the societal shifts of the time.
The Hudson Institute also began to seek corporate sponsors, which ex-
posed companies such as Shell, Corning, IBM, and General Motors to this 
line of thinking. Kahn and Weiner (1967) then published The Year 2000, 
“which clearly demonstrates how one man’s thinking was driving a trend in 
corporate planning” (Ringland, 1998, p. 13). Ted Newland of Shell, one of 
the early corporate sponsors of scenario planning, encouraged Shell to start 
thinking about the future. 
The SRI “futures group” was using a variety of methods in 1968–1969 
to create scenarios for the U.S. education system reaching to the year 2000. 
Five scenarios were created; one entitled “Status Quo Extended” was se-
lected as the ofﬁcial future (ofﬁcial future is a generic term to denote a de-
sired future that has been “selected” by senior management). This scenario 
suggested that issues such as population growth, ecological destruction, and 
dissent would resolve themselves. The other scenarios were given little at-
tention once the ofﬁcial future was selected. The ofﬁcial future reached the 
sponsors, staff at the U.S. Ofﬁce of Education, at a time when President 
Richard Nixon’s administration was in full swing in 1969. The selected 
scenario was quickly deemed impossible because it was in no way compat-
ible with the values that Nixon was advocating then (Ringland, 1998). The 
ofﬁcial future provided little insight into major issues of the time, and it 
failed to do more than present a report of present trends playing out into 


---PAGE BREAK---

12 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
the future as they were expected to. The SRI went on to do work for the 
Environmental Protection Agency, with Willis Harman, Peter Schwartz, 
Thomas Mandel, and Richard Carlson constructing the scenarios.
Earlier, Jay Forrester (1981) of MIT was using similar concepts to de-
scribe supply-and-demand chains. The use of scenario concepts in his proj-
ect was speciﬁcally aimed at stirring up public debate rather than solving a 
dilemma or issue. In other words, he used scenarios as tools for entertaining 
multiple sides of an issue and exploring the various viewpoints. The results 
were published by Meadows, Meadows, and Randers in 1992. 
Scenario planning at Shell was well on its way. Ted Newland suggested in 
1967 that thinking six years ahead was not allowing enough lead time to ef-
fectively consider future forces in their industry (Wack, 1985a). Shell began 
planning for 2000. Newland was joined by Pierre Wack, Napier Collyns, 
and others. When the Yom Kippur War broke out in 1973 and oil prices 
rose sixfold, Shell was prepared. The ability to act quickly has been credited 
as the primary reason behind the company’s lead in the oil industry over 
the years.
Shell’s success with the scenario planning process encouraged numer-
ous other organizations to begin thinking about the future in this different 
way. Because the oil shock was so devastating to views of a stable future, by 
the late 1970s the majority of the Fortune 100 corporations had adopted 
scenario planning in one form or another (Linneman & Klein, 1979, 1983; 
Ringland, 1998).
The success of scenario use was short-lived. Caused by the major re-
cession and corporate stafﬁng reductions of the 1980s, scenario use was 
on the decline. It is also speculated that planners oversimpliﬁed the use of 
scenarios, confusing the nature of storytelling with forecasting (Godet & 
Roubelat, 1996; Ringland, 1998; Sharpe, 2007; Wright, van der Heijden, 
Burt, Bradﬁeld, & Cairns, 2008). According to Kleiner (1996, 2008), the 
time had come for managers to realize that they did not have the answers to 
the future. Porter (1985) led a “back to the basics” approach suggesting that 
corporations use external forces as a platform for planning. In this time of 
evaluating how planning happens, many consulting ﬁrms began developing 
scenario planning methodologies. Huss and Honton (1987) described three 
approaches of the time: (1) intuitive logics, introduced by Pierre Wack; (2) 
trend-impact analysis, the favorite of the Futures Group; and (3) cross-
impact analysis, implemented by Battelle. Royal Dutch/Shell continued 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
13
to have success with scenario planning through two more oil incidents in 
the 1980s, and slowly, corporations cautiously began to reintegrate the ap-
plication of scenarios in planning situations. Scenario planning has been 
adopted at a national level in some cases, and its methods have been suc-
cessful in bringing diverse groups of people together (Kahane, 1992; van 
der Merwe, 1994). For example, scenarios were used to explore the potential 
transformation of South Africa at the end of apartheid (Kahane, 1992). Sce-
narios have also been used as tools for community building and dialogue 
(van der Merwe, 1994).
PUBLICATION ACTIVITY IN FUTURES  
AND SCENARIO PLANNING
As the world has become more uncertain, the need and therefore the popu-
larity of scenario planning have increased. Scenario planning has seen con-
siderable growth as a topic of publication in academic journals since the 
mid-1990s (Ramirez et al., 2008). In addition, scenario planning as a spe-
ciﬁc strategic management tool has also seen a rise in use, according to Bain 
& Company’s annual Management Tools Survey (Ramirez et al., 2008).
DEFINITIONS OF SCENARIO PLANNING
Scenario planning is still a relatively young discipline, and many variations 
have been developed. The diversity of thought concerning scenario plan-
ning is an asset in that it has brought about a variety of interpretations 
about what scenario planning is. However, the use of a variety of methods 
mandates close and careful study to determine what is effective and what 
is not. Variety can also be found in the available deﬁnitions and stated out-
comes of scenario planning. Figure 1.1 provides a list of deﬁnitions in the 
scenario planning literature.
OUTCOMES OF SCENARIO PLANNING
Many of the deﬁnitions examined here do not explicitly state the outcome 
variables of scenario planning, which indicates that some authors may be 
unclear about the aims of their deﬁnitions. This also suggests that scenario 
planning professionals are just beginning to consider the importance of 


---PAGE BREAK---

14 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
F I G U R E  1.1 Scenario Planning Definitions and Outcome Variables
Author
Date
Definition
Dependent Variables
Porter
1985
“An internally consistent view of what the 
future might turn out to be—not a forecast, 
but one possible future outcome” (p. 63)
A view of one 
possible future 
outcome
Schwartz
1991
“A tool for ordering one’s perceptions about 
alternative future environments in which one’s 
decisions might be played out” (p. 45)
Ordered perceptions 
about alternative 
future decision-
making 
environments
Simpson
1992
“The process of constructing alternate futures 
of a business’ external environment” (p. 10)
Constructed 
alternate futures 
Bloom and 
Menefee
1994
“A description of a possible or probable 
future” (p. 223)
A described possible 
or probable future
Collyns
1994
“An imaginative leap into the future” (p. 275)
An imagined future
Thomas
1994
“Scenario planning is inherently a learning 
process that challenges the comfortable 
conventional wisdoms of the organization by 
focusing attention on how the future may be 
different from the present” (p. 6)
Challenged 
comfortable 
conventional 
wisdoms about the 
future
Schoemaker
1995
“A disciplined methodology for imagining 
possible futures in which organizational 
decisions may be played out” (p. 25)
Imagined possible 
decision-making 
futures
Van der 
Heijden
1997
(1) External scenarios are “internally 
consistent and challenging descriptions of 
possible futures”; (2) an internal scenario is  
“a causal line of argument, linking an action 
option with a goal,” or “one path through a 
person’s cognitive map” (p. 5)
Descriptions of 
possible futures; 
explicit cognitive 
maps
De Geus
1997
“Tools for foresight-discussions and 
documents whose purpose is not a prediction 
or a plan, but a change in the mind-set of the 
people who use them” (p. 46)
Changed mind-sets
Ringland
1998
 “That part of strategic planning which relates 
to the tools and technologies for managing 
the uncertainties of the future” (p. 83)
Managed future 
uncertainties 
Bawden
1998
“Scenario planning is one of a number of 
foresighting techniques used in the strategic 
development of organizations, which exploit 
the remarkable capacity of humans to both 
imagine and to learn from what is imagined”
Human imagination 
and learning made 
explicit
(continued)


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
15
deﬁning what they do and explicitly stating what they intend to achieve by 
doing it.
Figure 1.1 shows that almost half of the available deﬁnitions date from 
1997 to the present. Such a surge of publication activity related to scenario 
planning suggests a recent increased use of this strategic tool. Of interest 
is that the ﬁrst available deﬁnition of scenario planning is offered in 1985, 
yet the process has been applied in practice since the 1960s. The increase in 
recent scholarly literature around scenario planning suggests that the pro-
cess is developing and maturing with the help of professionals concerned 
F I G U R E  1.1 Scenario Planning Definitions and Outcome Variables (continued)
Author
Date
Definition
Dependent Variables
Fahey and 
Randall
1998
“Scenarios are descriptive narratives of 
plausible alternative projections of a specific 
part of the future” (p. 6)
Plausible alternative 
projections of a 
specific part of the 
future
Alexander 
and Serfass
1998
“Scenario planning is an effective futuring 
tool that enables planners to examine what is 
likely and what is unlikely to happen, 
knowing well that unlikely elements in an 
organization are those that can determine its 
relative success” (p. 35)
Examined future 
likelihoods and 
unlikelihoods
Tucker
1999
“Creating stories of equally plausible futures 
and planning as though any one could move 
forward” (p. 70)
Stories of equally 
plausible futures that 
inform planning
Kahane
1999
“A series of imaginative but plausible and 
well-focused stories of the future” (p. 511)
Plausible stories of 
the future
Kloss
1999
“Scenarios are literally stories about the  
future that are plausible and based on  
analysis of the interaction of a number of 
environmental variables” (p. 73)
Informed, plausible 
stories about the 
future
Wilson
2000
“Scenarios are a management tool used to 
improve the quality of executive decision 
making and help executives make better, 
more resilient strategic decisions” (p. 24)
Improved executive 
strategic decision 
making
Godet
2001
“A scenario is simply a means to represent  
a future reality in order to shed light on 
current action in view of possible and 
desirable futures” (p. 63)
A represented future 
reality


---PAGE BREAK---

16 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
that scenario planning does not suffer the same inadequacies and criticisms 
that have been leveled against general strategic planning processes (Fahey & 
Randall, 1998; Mintzberg, 1994). 
The dependent variables of Figure 1.1 can be synthesized into four ma-
jor outcome categories of scenario planning:
• changed thinking, 
• informed narratives or stories about possible or plausible futures, 
• improved decision making about the future, and 
• enhanced human and organization learning and imagination. 
Of signiﬁcant note is that none of the available deﬁnitions of scenario 
planning includes an outcome of performance improvement. Due to the 
depth of expertise and high costs usually associated with the practice of 
scenario planning, it is surprising that performance improvement has not 
been an explicit outcome of this strategic process. Some may simply assume 
that scenario planning will result in performance improvement. However, 
although such an assumption may be logical or known based on practical 
experience, there is little evidence that the practice of scenario planning 
actually results in performance improvement. Building this evidence can 
only help bolster the practice of scenario planning as a strategic activity. The 
lack of focus on performance improvement may be attributed to general 
difﬁculties in measuring the effects of scenario planning projects. Perfor-
mance must be included and developed as a critical outcome expectation of 
scenario planning and as part of the deﬁnition of scenario planning. One 
approach to linking scenario planning to performance is described in detail 
in Chapter 9.
In an attempt to construct an integrative deﬁnition of scenario plan-
ning, it is important to include the outcomes stated in the available deﬁni-
tions highlighted in the next chapter in Figure 2.4. The following deﬁnition 
of performance-based scenario planning synthesizes the outcomes in Figure 
2.4 and adds the performance orientation:
Performance-based scenario planning is a discipline of building a set of 
internally consistent and imagined futures in which decisions about the 
future can be played out, for the purpose of changing thinking, im-
proving decision making, fostering human and organization learning 
and improving performance.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
17
The performance orientation changes the game for scenario planning. 
An expectation of performance improvement forces a conversation about 
outcomes, without diminishing the capacity to wonder about the future. 
Having a performance improvement perspective means that there will be 
a way of determining whether the scenario project produced any beneﬁts 
for the organization. So far, this question has been infrequently asked, and 
answers are often vague and unrelated to the initial reason for engaging in 
scenario work. It is important to clarify that a performance orientation does 
not preclude additional unexpected outcomes from emerging. They often 
do, and they can be very powerful. The performance orientation deﬁnes 
targets, identiﬁes areas of potential leverage, and works to shift the think-
ing inside the organization. Logically, a performance orientation mandates 
assessment of the project. As noted, Chapter 9 lays out a comprehensive ap-
proach to assessing scenario projects. 
LEARNING
Scenario planning most certainly involves learning. Arie de Geus (1988, 
1997) wrote the foundational treatise “Planning as Learning” and later a 
book titled The Living Company in which he compiled decades of research 
showing that the companies in history with the greatest longevity were 
those that framed planning as a learning process and used tools like sce-
nario planning to keep learning about how to maintain ﬁt in their environ-
ments. Most likely, de Geus’s views were inﬂuenced by Pierre Wack and 
Ted Newland at Royal Dutch/Shell as Wack was famous for stressing, “Our 
real target was the microcosms of our decision-makers: unless we inﬂuenced 
the mental image, the picture of reality of critical decision-makers, our sce-
narios would be like water on stone” (Wack, 1984, p. 58). 
Don Michael’s (1995) view of strategic learning (detailed in his book 
Learning to Plan and Planning to Learn) is quite suitable to the purpose of 
scenario planning: 
It is imperative to free the idea of learning from its conventional seman-
tic baggage. Learning used to mean (and for the most part still means) 
learning the answer—a static shift from one condition of knowledge 
and/or know-how to another. This deﬁnition of learning leads to organiza-
tional and stakeholder rigidiﬁcation. But in the current and anticipated 


---PAGE BREAK---

18 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
conditions of dramatic unpredictability, learning must be a continuous 
process involving:
1. Learning to re-perceive or re-interpret a situation,
2. Learning how to apply that re-perception to the formulation of pol-
icy and the speciﬁcation of action (including evaluation of policy 
and action),
3. Learning how to implement those policies and intended actions, 
and
4. Learning how to keep these three earlier requirements alive and 
open to continual revision. (p. 46)
APPROACHES TO SCENARIO PLANNING
There are varying approaches to scenario planning. Each has developed out 
of various schools of thought, and it is important to review the alterna-
tives here before proceeding. The major approaches to scenario planning 
reviewed here include these:
• Royal Dutch/Shell and Global Business Network
• The French School
• The Futures Group
• Wilson and Ralston
• Lindgren and Bandhold
• Reference scenarios
• Decision Strategies International
• Procedural scenarios
• Industry scenarios
• Soft creative methods
These approaches to scenario planning have all developed in practice. No 
doubt, the different techniques have evolved under slightly different circum-
stances, and each contributes to the body of scenario planning knowledge. 
ROYAL DUTCH/SHELL AND GLOBAL BUSINESS NETWORK
The overarching view utilized by the Global Business Network (GBN) was 
born out of Shell’s application of scenario technology. GBN was founded by 
Peter Schwartz, Jay Ogilvy, Stewart Brand, Lawrence Wilkinson, and Na-
pier Collyns. Pierre Wack ﬁrst began applying Herman Kahn’s concepts in 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
19
the 1960s and reﬁned them into a proprietary framework stressing the big 
picture ﬁrst, then zooming in on the details. Wack believed that to begin 
with the details was to miss some key dimensions of the building process. 
Schwartz took over as the head of Shell’s scenario division and eventually 
established a company, GBN, with a handful of other colleagues offering 
a variety of strategic business services worldwide. Schwartz (1991) gives a 
conceptual overview of the scenario building process in The Art of the Long 
View. At the center of GBN was a network of “remarkable people” (or RPs, 
as they became known) ﬁrst used by Wack to challenge and shift the think-
ing and assumptions of decision makers within Royal Dutch/Shell.
Step 1 is to identify a focal issue or decision. Scenarios are built around 
a central issue outward toward the external environment. Scenarios based 
ﬁrst on external environmental issues such as high versus low growth may 
fail to capture company-speciﬁc information that makes a difference in how 
the organization will deal with such issues (Schwartz, 1991). Accepted best 
practice is to engage the decision makers ﬁrst in a conversation to uncover 
their current assumptions and concerns about the external environment and 
how they might unfold.
The second step is to identify and study the key forces in the local en-
vironment, which is logical after selecting a key focusing issue or question. 
Step 2 examines the factors that inﬂuence the success or failure of the deci-
sion or issue identiﬁed in the ﬁrst step. Scenarios must be developed to shed 
light on the issue or question. Analyses of the internal environment and 
strengths and weaknesses are commonly conducted in this step as a way of 
identifying the internal dynamics that help or hinder strategy development.
Once the key factors have been identiﬁed, the third step involves brain-
storming the driving forces in the macroenvironment. These include po-
litical, economic, technological, environmental, and social forces. Driving 
forces may also be considered the forces behind the key factors in Step 2 
(Schwartz, 1991). 
Step 4 consists of ranking the key factors (from Step 2) and the driving 
forces (from Step 3) on the basis of two criteria: (1) the degree of importance 
for success and (2) the degree of uncertainty surrounding the forces themselves. 
“Scenarios cannot differ over predetermined elements because predetermined 
elements are bound to be the same in all scenarios” (Schwartz, 1991, p. 167).
The results of the ranking exercise are to separate the important few 
from the unimportant many forces that are at play in the environment. 


---PAGE BREAK---

20 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
One method of developing distinctive story lines is to identify two axes along 
which the eventual scenarios will differ. Another method is to simply develop 
stories that can be contained within the key driving forces at work. Again, 
these stories are intended to shed light on the focusing issue or question. Step 
5, then, is the development and selection of the general scenario logics ac-
cording to the matrix resulting from the ranking exercise. The logic of a 
given scenario will be characterized by its location in the matrix. “It is more like 
playing with a set of issues until you have reshaped and regrouped them in such 
a way that a logic emerges and a story can be told” (Schwartz, 1991, p. 172). 
Step 6, ﬂeshing out the scenarios, returns to Steps 2 and 3. Each key 
factor and driving force is given attention and manipulated within the ma-
trix developed in the scenario logics of step 4. Plausibility should be con-
stantly checked from this point, for example, “if two scenarios differ over 
protectionist or non-protectionist policies, it makes intuitive sense to put a 
high inﬂation rate with the protectionist scenario and a low inﬂation rate 
with the non-protectionist scenario” (Schwartz, 1991, p. 178).
Step 7 examines the implications of the developed scenarios. The initial 
issue or decision is “wind tunneled” through the scenarios. It is important 
to examine the robustness of each scenario through questions such as these: 
What will we do if this is the reality? Does the decision look good across 
only one or two scenarios? What vulnerabilities have been revealed? Does a 
speciﬁc scenario require a high-risk strategy? 
The ﬁnal step is to select “leading indicators” that will signify that 
actual events may be unfolding according to a developed scenario. Once 
the scenarios have been developed, it’s worth spending some time selecting 
identiﬁers that will assist planners in monitoring the course of unfolding 
events and how they might impact the organization. 
THE FRENCH SCHOOL
When he took over the Department of Future Studies with SEMA group 
in 1974, Michel Godet began conducting scenario planning. His methodol-
ogy was extended at the Conservatoire Nationale des Arts et Métiers with 
the support of several sponsors. Godet’s work is based on the use of “per-
spective,” advocated by the French philosopher Gaston Berger (Ringland, 
1998). Godet’s approach began by dividing scenarios into two categories: 
situational scenarios, which describe future situations; and development 
scenarios, which describe a sequence of events that lead to a future situation 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
21
(Georgantzas & Acar, 1995). Godet also identiﬁes three types of scenarios 
that may exist in either category: trend-based scenarios follow what is most 
likely, contrasted scenarios explore purposefully extreme themes, and ho-
rizon/normative scenarios examine the feasibility of a desirable future by 
working backward from the future to the present. Godet’s approach has 
evolved and now includes several computer-based tools that help highlight 
interdependencies between interrelated variables that may be ignored by 
more simple procedures (Ringland, 1998).
The French School approach is a structural analysis that is divided into 
three phases. Phase 1 begins the process by studying internal and external 
variables to create a system of interrelated elements. This approach focuses 
on a detailed and quantiﬁed study of the elements and compilation of data 
into a database. A cross-impact matrix is constructed to study the inﬂuence 
of each variable on the others.
Phase 2 scans the range of possibilities and reduces uncertainty through 
the identiﬁcation of key variables and strategies. Future possibilities are 
listed through a set of hypotheses that may point to a trend in the data. 
Advanced software reduces uncertainty by estimating the subjective prob-
abilities of different combinations of the variables.
Phase 3 is the development of the scenarios themselves. Scenarios are 
restricted to sets of hypotheses; and once the data have been compiled and 
analyzed, scenarios are built describing the route from the current situation 
to the future vision (Godet & Roubelat, 1996).
THE FUTURES GROUP
The Futures Group was a Connecticut-based consulting ﬁrm that devel-
oped a trend-impact analysis approach to scenario planning. This approach 
requires three phases: preparation, development, and reporting and utiliz-
ing (Ringland, 1998).
The preparation phase includes deﬁning a focus, issue, or decision, and 
then charting the driving forces. Several questions should be answered in this 
phase: What possible future developments need to be probed? What variables 
need to be looked at for assistance in decision making? What forces and 
developments have the greatest ability to shape future characteristics of the 
organization?
The development phase includes constructing a scenario space, select-
ing alternative worlds to be detailed, and preparing scenario-contingent 


---PAGE BREAK---

22 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
forecasts. Selecting a scenario space means examining the various future 
states that the drivers could produce. Illogical and nonplausible situations 
should be rejected. Selecting alternative worlds to be detailed involves lim-
iting the number of future stories, since it would be impossible to explore 
every option. The key is to select plausible futures that will challenge cur-
rent thinking. Preparing scenario-contingent forecasts is listing trends and 
events that would be required for the plausible future to exist. Depending 
on the assumptions of each alternative world, indicators are selected that 
might “signal” the direction in which the organization is heading.
Reporting and utilizing scenarios are covered brieﬂy and quickly with-
out enough detail for a user to apply. However, the futures group is one of a 
few approaches to even mention these activities.
DECISION STRATEGIES INTERNATIONAL
Paul Schoemaker has outlined an approach to scenario planning with many 
similarities to the methodology used by the Global Business Network, as 
might be expected since Schoemaker spent a bit of time in the planning 
department at Royal Dutch/Shell.
Step 1 deﬁnes the scope of the project. This includes setting a time 
frame, examining the past to identify rates of change, and roughly estimat-
ing the expected future rate of change. “The unstructured concerns and 
anxieties of managers are good places to start” (Schoemaker, 1995, p. 28).
Step 2 is to identify the key stakeholders. Obvious stakeholders include 
customers, suppliers, competitors, employees, shareholders, and government 
workers. The identiﬁcation of the roles that each of these groups might play, 
how the roles have changed in past years, and the distribution of power ac-
cording to the issue are all factors to be examined in this step.
Basic trends are identiﬁed in Step 3. The political, economic, societal, 
technological, legal, environmental, and industry trends are analyzed in 
connection with the issues from the ﬁrst step. “Brieﬂy explain the trend, 
including how and why it exerts its inﬂuence on your organization” (Schoe-
maker, 1995, p. 28). Trends can be charted in inﬂuence diagrams or matri-
ces to help make relationships explicit. Examining trends can be useful, but 
remember that trends are put together by experts, and scenarios ask, “What 
if the experts are wrong?”
Step 4 considers the key uncertainties. What events, whose outcomes are 
uncertain, will signiﬁcantly affect the issues of concern to the organization? 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
23
A further examination of political, societal, economic, environmental, legal, 
and industry forces emphasizing the most uncertain elements “will reveal 
the most turbulent areas” (Schoemaker, 1995, p. 28). Relationships among 
the uncertainties should also be identiﬁed. For example, “if one economic 
uncertainty is ‘level of unemployment’ and the other ‘level of inﬂation,’ 
then the combination of full employment and zero inﬂation may be ruled 
out as impossible” (Schoemaker, 1995, p. 29). 
Once the trends and uncertainties have been identiﬁed, initial scenario 
construction can begin. A simple approach is to identify extreme worlds 
by putting all positive elements in one and all negatives in another. Alter-
natively, various strings of outcomes can be clustered around high or low 
continuity, ﬁnding themes, or the degree of uncertainty. The most common 
technique is to cross the top two uncertainties of a given issue.
Step 6 checks the initial scenarios for plausibility. Schoemaker identi-
ﬁed three tests for internal consistency, dealing with the trends, the outcome 
combinations, and the reactions of major stakeholders. The trends must be 
compatible with the chosen time frame; scenarios must combine outcomes 
that ﬁt (e.g., full employment and zero inﬂation do not ﬁt); and the major 
stakeholders must not be placed in situations they do not like but have the 
power to change (e.g., OPEC will not tolerate low oil prices for very long) 
(Schoemaker, 1995).
From the process of developing initial scenarios and checking them for 
plausibility, general themes should emerge. Step 7 is to develop learning sce-
narios by manipulating plausible outcomes. The trends may be the same in 
each scenario, but the outcomes, once considered plausible, can be shifted 
and given more or less weight in different scenarios. These scenarios “are 
tools for research and study rather than for decision-making” (Schoemaker, 
1995, p. 29).
After constructing learning scenarios, areas that require further research 
are identiﬁed. These are commonly referred to as “blind spots” (Georgantzas 
& Acar, 1995; Schoemaker, 1995; Schwartz, 1991; van der Heijden, 1997). 
Companies can use these scenarios to study other industries—for example, 
to consider plausible outcomes of advances in multimedia and then study 
current research in that area.
Step 9 reexamines the internal consistencies after completing additional 
research. Quantitative models are commonly developed in this stage. For 
example, Royal Dutch/Shell has developed a model that keeps oil prices, 


---PAGE BREAK---

24 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
inﬂation, gross national product (GNP), growth, taxes, and interest rates in 
plausible balances. Formal models can be used to ﬂesh out possible second-
ary effects and also to serve as another check for plausibility. The models 
can also help to quantify the consequences of various scenarios.
Step 10 is to determine the scenarios to be used for decisions. Trends 
will have arisen that may or may not affect or address the real issues of 
the organization. Schoemaker identiﬁed four criteria for effective decision 
scenarios. First, scenarios must have relevance to be effective but also chal-
lenge current thinking in the organization. Second, scenarios must be in-
ternally consistent and plausible. Third, scenarios must be archetypal, or 
they should describe fundamentally different futures, rather than simply 
vary on one theme. Finally, each scenario should describe an eventual state 
of equilibrium. “It does an organization little good to prepare for a plausible 
future that will be quite short” (Schoemaker, 1995, p. 32), yet many argue 
that planning cycles are getting shorter.
WILSON AND RALSTON
Perhaps the most detailed procedural account of scenario planning yet pub-
lished, Ian Wilson and Bill Ralston based their 2006 book The Scenario-
Planning Handbook on the Shell method but have made modiﬁcations 
throughout. Based on over ﬁfteen years of experience as senior consultants 
at SRI, Ralston and Wilson have put their experience and knowledge to the 
test. This is a modern method that lays out an all-encompassing how-to 
manual for corporate executives. Wilson and Ralston’s approach is detailed 
in Figure 1.2.
LINDGREN AND BANDHOLD
In 2003, Mats Lindgren and Hans Bandhold published Scenario Planning: 
The Link between Future and Strategy. The book details their interpretation 
of the scenario planning process in a model they call the TAIDA method. 
TAIDA stands for tracking, analyzing, imaging, deciding, and acting; and 
the method is a simpliﬁed version of the intuitive logics approach to sce-
nario planning, which is based on the work led by Pierre Wack and Ted 
Newland at Shell. The book is essentially a practitioner’s shorthand manual 
for exploring the basic concepts of scenario planning, with a useful appen-
dix of methods that can be used in a variety of places throughout the sce-
nario planning process. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
25
REFERENCE SCENARIOS
Ackoff (1970, 1978, 1981) identiﬁed four modes for organizations to cope 
with external change. Inactivity involves ignoring changes and continuing 
with business as usual. Reactivity waits for changes to happen and then de-
veloping a response. Preactivity involves trying to predict changes and estab-
lishing organizational position before they happen, and proactivity calls for 
interactive involvement with the external environment in order to “create 
the future for stakeholders” (Georgantzas & Acar, 1995, p. 364). Within 
these four modes, Ackoff uses the term reference scenario to mean the refer-
ence projections a ﬁrm would have if no signiﬁcant changes occurred in the 
environment. Ackoff’s call for strategic turnaround starts with an idealized 
scenario of a desirable future. To be effective, such a scenario should be in-
teresting and provocative—it should show what to change to evade the mess 
of problems in an organization’s given strategic situation.
F I G U R E  1.2  Steps in Developing and Using Scenarios (summarized from 
Wilson and Ralston, 2006)
Step 1.  Develop the case for  
scenarios.
Step 2.  Gain executive under- 
standing, support,  
and participation
Step 3. Deﬁne the decision focus.
Step 4. Design the process.
Step 5. Select the facilitator.
Step 6. Form the scenario team.
Step 7.  Gather available data,  
views, and projections.
Step 8.  Identify and assess key  
decision factors.
Step 9.  Identify the critical forces  
and drivers.
Step 10.  Conduct focused research on 
key issues, forces, and drivers.
Step 11.  Assess the importance and un- 
certainty of forces and drivers.
Step 12.  Identify key “axes of 
uncertainty.”
Step 13.  Select scenario logics to cover 
the “envelope of uncertainty.”
Step 14.  Write the story lines for the 
scenarios.
Step 15.  Rehearse the future with 
scenarios.
Step 16.  Get to the decision 
recommendations.
Step 17.  Identify signposts to monitor.
Step 18.  Communicate the results to 
the organization.


---PAGE BREAK---

26 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
PROCEDURAL SCENARIOS
Amara and Lipinski (1983) and Chandler and Cokle (1982) use very similar 
methods for constructing scenarios but prepare separate forecasts for each 
principal factor or variable. Chandler and Cokle (1982) “also deﬁne scenar-
ios as the coherent pictures of different possible events in the environment 
whose effect on a set of businesses should be tested through linked models” 
(p. 132). The manipulation of macroeconomic models is a mechanism by 
which vague assumptions are translated into projected values of wholesale 
prices, gross domestic product (GDP), or consumer expenditures for an 
entire industry. The models used in these approaches are computer driven 
(Georgantzas & Acar, 1995) and provide a good example of procedural sce-
narios incorporating intuitive and quantitative techniques. 
INDUSTRY SCENARIOS
Porter (1985) asserted that scenarios traditionally used in strategic planning 
have stressed macroeconomic and macropolitical issues. He further claimed 
that in competitive strategy the proper unit of analysis is the industry and 
deﬁnes industry scenarios as the primary, internally consistent views of how 
the world will look in the future (Porter, 1985). The essence of this view 
holds that there are two loops in building these industry scenarios. In this 
approach, industry analysis is within the larger unit of building industry 
scenarios. Industry-focused scenarios can help an organization in analyzing 
particular aspects of a business (Porter, 1985), but some have argued that 
beginning with a narrow focus will miss key dimensions (Wack, 1985a). 
SOFT CREATIVE METHODS APPROACH
Brauers and Weber (1988) formulated an approach with three basic phases: 
analysis, descriptions of the future states, and synthesis. The analysis phase 
brings organization members to a common understanding of the problem. 
Based on this consensus, the problem can be further bounded and struc-
tured. Brauers and Weber recommend the use of soft creative methods for 
the analysis phase, including morphological analysis, brainstorming, brain-
writing, and the Delphi technique. The second phase examines the possible 
development paths of the variables chosen in the analysis. The synthesis 
phase considers interdependencies among the variable factors to build dif-
ferent situations for the future states. These eventual scenarios are then fed 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
27
through a complex computer program for linear programming and cluster 
analysis (Brauers & Weber, 1988).
WHERE EXISTING SCENARIO PLANNING 
METHODS HAVE FALLEN SHORT
This chapter has reviewed the major approaches to scenario planning avail-
able in published works. These approaches all have similarities, while some 
deviate largely from Pierre Wack’s original method. Important similarities 
among the existing methods include a technique for identifying items that 
could potentially shift the organization and its focus, a structured way to 
think about the future that introduces multiple possibilities, and a craft of 
innovation and creativity. However, the existing methods lack some critical 
elements as well. Important pieces that are not found in available work on 
scenario planning are
• a presentation of the theoretical foundations, 
• a clear guide for how to use scenarios, and 
• a detailed guide for assessing the impact of scenario projects.
CONCLUSION
This book uses the scenario planning approach developed by Pierre Wack 
and Ted Newland at Royal Dutch/Shell and later documented by Peter 
Schwartz, Kees van der Heijden, and others at the Global Business Network 
as its key foundation. This approach features a qualitative, “intuitive logic” 
way of reasoning that separates organizational issues into things that are 
predetermined and things that are truly uncertain. When truly uncertain 
forces have been isolated, energy can be spent trying to understand those 
forces and how they might play out across a range of possible futures. Wack’s 
primary goal was to shift the thinking and the mental models of managers 
inside Shell, and thus also the assumptions that framed their decision mak-
ing. This book features an interpretation and extension of Wack’s work with 
a focus on performance. The foundation set by Wack and Newland at Shell 
is solid and effective, yet it also provides opportunities for improvement.
No doubt there are myriad other scenario planning processes based on 
combining various elements of those described in this chapter. The point is 


---PAGE BREAK---

28 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
simply that scenario planning has been developed in practice by numerous 
practitioners in various kinds of organizations and parts of the world. Clari-
fying the approach selected for any scenario project is helpful in eliminating 
confusion about the philosophies, steps, and theoretical basis on which the 
project will be built. 
The unique contributions of this book are that it presents the underly-
ing theory and research that explain scenario planning as an effective orga-
nizational intervention, detailed descriptions of what to do with scenarios 
once they have been developed, and ways to assess the performance contri-
bution of a scenario project. None of the existing texts on scenario planning 
provide a theoretical explanation of how scenario planning works, and none 
provide detailed accounts of inquiry into what the outcomes of the experi-
ence really are. Nor do any cover a variety of methods for putting scenarios 
to use and checking to see that they were effective. As a result, this book 
targets reﬂective practitioners, executives, and academics who want to work 
through complex, ambiguous problems while at the same time understand 
how their actions affect the issues they are facing.
This chapter has described the state of the external environment that 
calls for scenarios and summarized the evolution of planning in organiza-
tions. A comprehensive list of scenario planning deﬁnitions has been pro-
vided, as well as the major approaches to scenario planning. The argument 
for performance-based scenario planning has been made. 


---PAGE BREAK---

 29
Theoretical Foundations  
of Scenario Planning
Theory is a dirty word in some managerial quarters. That is rather 
curious, because all of us, managers especially, can no more get along 
without theories than libraries can get along without catalogs—and for 
the same reason: theories help us make sense of incoming information.
—mintzberg (2005, p. 249)
Pierre Wack told a story about approaching a cliff. He talked about how 
the odds of falling over the cliff increase as you walk closer to the edge. He 
asserted that the best way to avoid falling over a cliff is to help people see 
the characteristics of the cliff in advance. He helped them see how tall and 
steep the cliff is. He taught them to calculate how many different kinds of 
cliffs there are, how to recognize when a cliff is coming, and which kind it 
is. Pierre’s story was an attempt to explain what a cliff was and how the cliff 
worked to prevent people from falling over it.
Most strategy and scenario planning texts provide readers with processes. 
Follow the steps and “do” your corporate strategy, they claim. Instead, this 
book provides a framework with numerous tools. The framework is designed 
to give the user a domain in which to exercise judgment. The tools described 
are aimed at helping decision makers decide their own speciﬁc course of ac-
tion within the framework. Some have referred to scenario planning as more art 
than science. This chapter argues that scenario planning should remain artful, 
but it also must evolve into a theoretically and scientiﬁcally grounded art. 
The purpose of this chapter is to present the theoretical foundations 
of scenario planning. These principles are critical to understanding what 
2


---PAGE BREAK---

30 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
scenario planning is and how it works (Torraco, 1997). The performance-
based scenario system described in this book (presented in detail in Part 
Two) is based on the theories and theoretical principles outlined in this 
chapter. The tools and techniques provided in this book have been applied 
in the practice of scenario planning and have demonstrated results. 
THE UTILITY OF THEORY IN  
SCENARIO PLANNING
A discussion of theory in the context of scenario planning is important 
for several reasons. First, the topic of theory is generally absent from the 
scenario literature. The only scenario planning text that includes a discus-
sion of theory is Scenario-Driven Planning by Georgantzas and Acar (1995). 
However, their treatment of theory is limited to less than two pages. There 
are valuable insights to be gained from relevant theory domains that aid 
in understanding the practice of scenario planning. Scenario planning has 
grown as a practitioner’s art and has received little academic attention. A 
responsible analysis of any phenomenon should cover the theoretical basis 
that makes the logic clear for understanding why practitioners take the ac-
tions that they do. This can work in reverse as well: insights gained from 
practicing a phenomenon can lead to a great depth of knowledge. To date, 
the majority of what is understood about scenario planning is based on 
knowledge gleaned from years of practice. This chapter suggests that much 
can be learned by studying related theory disciplines with an ultimate goal 
of integrating knowledge from practice and knowledge from close and care-
ful study of the phenomenon.
A theory of scenario planning (Chermack, 2004, 2005) is used as an 
organizer for this chapter. The disciplines reviewed here provide support for 
this theory, as each discipline is reviewed in its relationship and contribu-
tion to the organizing theory.
THE SIX DOMAINS OF SCENARIO  
PLANNING THEORY
The proposed building blocks of a theory of scenario planning are based 
on extensive literature review (Chermack, Lynham, & Ruona, 2001; Geor-
gantzas & Acar, 1995; Schwartz, 1991; van der Heijden, 1997; Wack 1985a, 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
31
1985b). The literature around scenario planning puts forth six key domains 
from which theories can be drawn to establish a theoretical foundation of 
scenario planning (see Figure 2.1): 
• Dialogue, conversation quality, and engagement
• Learning
• Mental models
• Decision making
• Leadership
• Organization performance and change
These theoretical domains appear over and over again in the scenario litera-
ture. However, none of the current writings synthesize these elements in a 
comprehensive and clear manner. The use of these domains is intended to 
describe what the phenomenon of scenario planning is and how it works 
(Torraco, 1997). To be clear, this chapter presents a view of how scenario 
planning accomplishes its stated outcomes. 
Scenario
Planning
Organization
Performance
and Change
Dialogue,
Conversation
Quality and
Engagement
Learning
Decision
Making
Mental
Models
Leadership
Support
F I G U R E  2.1  A Theory of Scenario Planning


---PAGE BREAK---

32 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
DIALOGUE, CONVERSATION QUALITY, AND ENGAGEMENT
Dialogue, conversation quality, and engagement are critical to the scenario 
planning process because they are the mechanism by which scenario plan-
ning happens. They are means for shifting the thinking inside the organiza-
tion. As the chapters on scenario development and scenario implementation 
will describe in detail, dialogue, conversation, and engagement are the fun-
damental means for sharing mental models and developing a shared under-
standing of the organization and its external environment. 
The speciﬁc work that informs how scenario planning involves dia-
logue, conversation, and engagement includes Rogers’s communication the-
ory; Nunnally, Miller, and Wackman’s communication work; Argyris and 
Schon’s work on advocacy and inquiry; and Lewin’s theorizing on group 
dynamics. Each of these is described later, and the link to scenario planning 
is illustrated.
Definition
Dialogue and conversation are deﬁned, respectively, as “conversation be-
tween two or more persons” (Oxford English Dictionary, 2001, p. 213) and 
“informal interchange of thoughts, information, etc., by spoken words; oral 
communication between persons; talk; colloquy” (Oxford English Diction-
ary, 2001, p. 187). Bohm’s work (1989) sheds additional light on the subject:
I give a meaning to the word “dialogue” that is somewhat different 
from what is commonly used. The derivations of words often help to 
suggest a deeper meaning. “Dialogue” comes from the Greek word dia-
logos. Logos means “the word” or in our case we would think of the 
“meaning of the word.” And dia means “through”—it doesn’t mean 
“two.” A dialogue can be among any number of people, not just two. 
The picture or image that this derivation suggests is a stream of meaning 
ﬂowing among and through us and between us. This will make possible 
a ﬂow of meaning in the whole group, out of which may emerge some 
new understanding. (p. 6)
Contrast this with the word “discussion,” which has the same root as 
“percussion” and “concussion.” It really means to break things up. It 
emphasizes the idea of analysis, where there may be many points of 
view, and where everybody is presenting a different one—analyzing 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
33
and breaking up. That obviously has value, but it is limited, and it will 
not get us very far beyond various points of view. (p. 7)
Description
Dialogue, conversation quality, and engagement, are the means by which 
ideas, experiences, knowledge, beliefs, assumptions, and tendencies are 
shared throughout the scenario project. Scenarios deal with the two 
worlds—the world of facts and data, and the world of ideas and percep-
tions (Wack, 1985a). Dialogue, conversation quality, and engagement allow 
people to experiment with ideas and perceptions by taking facts and data 
into imagined or speculative worlds.
Rogers’s Work on Communication Theory
Carl Rogers spent much of his career focusing on individual experience. He 
eventually posited three conditions for health in relating to other people: 
(1) congruence, (2) unconditional positive regard, and (3) empathetic un-
derstanding. By congruence, Rogers (1957) means “a match or ﬁt between 
an individual’s feelings and outer display” (p. 97). Otherwise, individuals 
match their thoughts and actions. Unconditional positive regard is simply 
an attitude that one consciously tries to hold toward people; Rogers found 
that he experienced deeper levels of trust by doing so (Rogers, 1961; Rogers 
& Skinner, 1956). In addition, Rogers found that when people were re-
minded to use this attitude, they developed deeper levels of trust with 
others. Rogers’s third condition, empathetic understanding, is focused on 
the beneﬁts of listening. A willingness to explore what it is like to be an-
other person is a skill that Rogers found to bring him closer to those he 
was trying to help (Rogers, 1961). Others have also drawn attention to 
empathy as a key skill for knowledge workers in the twenty-ﬁrst century 
(Pink, 2006). 
Miller, Nunnally, and Wackman’s Work  
on Communication in Families
Nunnally developed a large body of work in the area of communication 
in interpersonal relationships and among family members. These works 
feature the self-awareness wheel as their primary contribution to under-
standing communication, dialogue, and conversation (Miller, 1971; Miller, 
Nunnally, & Wackman, 1976, 1979; Miller, Wackman, & Nunnally, 1982; 


---PAGE BREAK---

34 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Nunnally, 1971; Nunnally & Moy, 1989). The self-awareness wheel helps 
individuals recognize their own sensations, feelings, intentions, and actions 
in the context of how they relate to others (Miller et al., 1979). The wheel 
can be used as an individual or a 360-degree assessment tool, when appro-
priate levels of trust have been established 
While not speciﬁcally intended for use in scenario projects, the utility 
of the self-awareness wheel is to gain a better understanding of how any in-
dividual functions in relation to others. Linking to Rogers’s work, the goal 
is to develop congruence among these ﬁve aspects around a given issue.
Argyris and Schon’s Work on Advocacy and Inquiry
Argyris and Schon (1996) are well-known for their scholarship in balanc-
ing advocacy and inquiry in organizations. This balance is a combination 
of pushing for individual goals and respecting that humans are part of the 
larger organizational whole. They are most recognized for differentiating 
Model I and Model II learning loops. Argyris and Schon (1996) have pro-
posed that a signiﬁcant perceptual shift takes place when individuals begin 
to pay attention to their behavior and evaluate it as they would another 
person’s behavior. The ability to reﬂect on one’s own behavior is a uniquely 
human trait and constitutes Model II learning. When individuals focus on 
learning how they and others learn, a shift has taken place in terms of how 
that individual engages in learning activities. Emphasizing common goals, 
shared interests, and group efforts to achieve them, these understandings 
contribute to the idea of reﬂecting on the learning process. This reﬂection 
is known as Model II learning or double loop learning, and it contributes to 
the theoretical underpinnings of scenario planning.
Lewin’s Work on Group Dynamics
Lewin’s (1951) famous T-groups were a breakthrough in understanding 
communication among group members. The key contribution arose when 
researchers allowed a participant to be present for an analysis of her ob-
served behavior earlier in the day (Lewin, 1948). The participant happened 
to be a woman, and she argued directly with Lewin about his inaccurate 
interpretations of things she did (Lewin, 1951). Conversation ensued, and 
a new method of intergroup skills training was born. Certainly, group 
interactions are critical in scenario planning. The importance of sharing 
insights, perceptions, and ideas will become clear as this book unfolds.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
35
Linking These Theories to Scenario Planning
These theories explaining what communication is and how it works are 
relevant in scenario planning because they describe the mode for creat-
ing shared understandings of the internal and external environments. The 
engagement of multiple stakeholders participating in an ongoing dialogue 
about organization strategy has been called the strategic conversation. 
Van der Heijden (1997) found that strategy is best approached as a con-
versation, rather than an activity bound as an annual event. The strategic 
conversation integrates all of the theories just described into a way of think-
ing and acting about the future. He believed both formal and informal as-
pects of strategy work together to form the strategic conversation. In other 
words, the informal, water-cooler conversations can be as important and 
inﬂuential as the strategy meetings that take place behind closed doors. The 
strategic conversation can take on a life of its own as organization members 
become involved in how their individual efforts link to the goals of the 
organization as a whole. The strategic conversation requires the kind of re-
ﬂective thinking and respectful, empathetic communication that has been 
described earlier. 
LEARNING THEORY
Learning theory is a critical foundational theory domain for scenario plan-
ning. In fact, several prominent scenario planning experts have described 
planning as essentially a learning activity (de Geus, 1988; Schwartz, 1991; 
van der Heijden, 1997), basing their argument on the logic that learning is a key 
driver of organizational performance (Swanson & Holton, 2001). The useful-
ness of learning in scenario planning is in the assumption that a core goal of any 
planning system is to reperceive (Wack, 1984) the organization and how it ﬁts 
with the environment (Godet, 1987, 2000; Wilson, 1992, 2000). 
Definition
Learning has been deﬁned in many ways, and there are many speciﬁc philo-
sophical orientations toward the learning process. Learning will be gener-
ally taken here to mean “the process of gaining knowledge or skill” (Oxford 
English Dictionary, 2001, p. 247). In the context of scenario planning, 
learning is deﬁned speciﬁcally as a process of gaining knowledge about the 
internal and external environments and how they interact.


---PAGE BREAK---

36 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Description
The learning literature has identiﬁed ﬁve relevant meta-theories of learn-
ing—namely, behaviorism, cognitivism, humanism, social learning, and 
constructivism (Swanson & Holton, 2001). Each of these perspectives is dis-
tinctive in its purity, but it should be noted that in practice “they are usually 
adapted and blended to accomplish speciﬁc objectives” (Swanson & Holton, 
2001, p. 150). Scenario planning seems to most effectively incorporate a 
blend of social learning, cognitivsm, and constructivism (Chermack & van 
der Merwe, 2003; de Geus, 1997; van der Heijden, 1997). Thus, principles 
of social, cognitive, and constructivist learning are presented here to explain 
how learning takes place in scenario building and planning systems.
The Individual Construction of Meaning
Piaget (1977) used examples of biological adaptation to illustrate his con-
cepts of assimilation, accommodation, and equilibration. His early fascina-
tion centered on the variability of a snail’s adaptation to the surrounding 
environments. Piaget adopted the view that new behavior changes the genes 
of the organism and thus results in new structures. He eventually arrived 
at the belief that behavior and the organism must be viewed as a whole 
system, and the goal is to achieve a balance between organism and envi-
ronment. Piaget deﬁned this concept of equilibration as a dynamic process 
of self-regulated behavior that balances two intrinsic polar behaviors, as-
similation and accommodation. Equilibration is thought of as a dynamic 
process that is reached only occasionally as the learner is constantly taking 
in new information (assimilation), analyzing, and sometimes changing it 
(accommodation). 
Similarly, De Geus viewed the organization as a living entity. “Like all 
organisms, the living company exists primarily for its own survival and im-
provement: to fulﬁll its own potential and to become as great as it can be” 
(1997, p. 4). Because a critical aim of scenario planning is to reveal assump-
tions and mental models, individuals interpret and construct meaning, or, 
more precisely, reinterpret and reconstruct meaning once their assumptions 
have been revealed to them. This is a classic example of Piaget’s assimila-
tion and accommodation. De Geus (1997) stated, “Corporations also have 
a form of learning by accommodation. . . . [L]ong-lived companies ﬁnd 
ways to respond to signals of change in the business environment, by chang-
ing their own internal structure” (p. 18). Truly great companies have the 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
37
foresight and innovation required to change the environment and set the 
pace for the industry.
Participants in scenario planning are continuously constructing indi-
vidual meaning. They are taking in new information (assimilation) and 
modifying or changing it (accommodation) in attempts to reach equilibra-
tion (understanding). As information is processed, the mental models of 
the individuals change and result in new structures for understanding the 
business environment and how to negotiate within it. 
There are two major aspects of scenario planning where construction 
of individual meaning takes place (Wack, 1985b). One is the analysis and 
research that takes place during the development of scenario stories. The 
step of ranking the driving forces in the environment in terms of relative 
impact on the future provokes a conversation during which the individuals 
developing the scenarios adjust their assumptions. These adjustments are a 
result of the assimilation and accommodation process. The second example 
of construction of meaning is when scenario thinking/assumptions are em-
bedded in organizational decision making (Wack, 1985a). 
Social Influences on Construction
Vygotsky (1962/1986) introduced three social inﬂuence concepts relevant 
in scenario planning: (1) the zone of proximal development, (2) the idea of 
“scaffolding,” and (3) the cultural-historical approach. 
The Zone of Proximal Development. The zone of proximal development 
is deﬁned as “the distance between his actual development, determined with 
the help of independently solved tasks, and the level of the potential devel-
opment of the [learner], determined with the help of tasks solved by the 
[learner] under the guidance of [experts] and in cooperation with his more 
intelligent partners” (Vygotsky, 1962/1986, p. 84). Through intelligence 
testing, Vygotsky determined that there were “optimal” periods within which 
to teach speciﬁc subjects. In brief, the zone of proximal development is the 
optimal period for almost any learning, that space between what we can 
accomplish on our own and what we can accomplish with some guidance.
Scenario planning targets the zone of proximal development, and the 
zone is often perceived as the learning capacity of the client. Vygotsky 
(1978) referred to the zone of proximal development as “the place where the 
client’s newly acquired, but as yet disorganized concepts ‘meet’ the logic of 
experienced reasoning” (p. 24). The meeting of experienced reasoning with 


---PAGE BREAK---

38 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
the disorganized concepts of the client often produces a novel insight into 
the strategic positioning of the organization (van der Heijden, 2005a)—
what has been referred to as an “aha” experience (van der Merwe, 2002).
The Idea of Scaffolding. Vygotsky proposed that as learners struggle 
to formulate concepts, an inner dialogue occurs, and he argued that the most 
effective learning occurs when the learner and the expert jointly construct 
meaning (of an experience) through dialogue, thus drawing the learner out 
to the potential level of performance (Fosnot, 1996). 
The notion of dialogue as a critical component of learning has been ex-
tended and developed into the concept of scaffolding. The famous example 
of this involves studying children and their mothers engaged in dialogues 
(Fosnot, 1996). Mothers often imitate babies, varying the response only 
slightly, but enough to provide an example for the child to imitate (Fos-
not, 1996). The mother and child are thought of as constructing meaning 
together, the mother providing the “scaffolding,” or the upper limit of the 
zone of proximal development. 
The role of the scenario planning facilitator is to provide “scaffolding” 
for members of the organization. “Scaffolds need to be built around the 
existing knowledge structure to allow the client to relate new experiences 
to existing knowledge” (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 56). Thus, the planners provide 
the necessary scaffolding to draw up clients’ thought-processing abilities to 
the limit of their zones of proximal development. Schwartz (1991) also em-
phasized the notion of drawing managers out to “think the unthinkable.” 
Changing the mental models of managers is a necessary condition for suc-
cessful scenario planning, and the scenario planner must be capable of pro-
viding the scaffolding required to do so.
Kolb’s Learning Loop
Van der Heijden (1997, 2005a) supported a view of learning based on the 
idea of continuous development rather than seeking one right answer. In 
so doing, he incorporated Kolb and Rubin’s (1991) learning loop into his 
description of effective strategic thinking. Kolb and Rubin’s learning loop 
integrates many of the ideas advocated by Piaget and others. The learn-
ing loop features (1) concrete experience, (2) leading to observation and 
reﬂection, (3) fueling the formation of abstract concepts, (4) which are then 
tested in new situations. These elements are involved in a continuous, rein-
forcing feedback loop.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
39
The learning loop integrates several distinguishing features, according 
to van der Heijden (1997, 2005b). Among these features are the notions 
that learning is a process that originates with a given experience. Reﬂection 
on the experience brings an awareness resulting in new patterns and trends 
that were not previously perceived. Mental models are shifted through an 
internal process of incorporating new patterns into old models, new actions 
are taken to test the implications of our new models, and all of this results 
in yet another new experience (Kolb & Rubin, 1991). “The learning loop 
describes the strategy development process in its integration of experience, 
sense-making, and action into one holistic phenomenon” (Kolb & Rubin, 
1991, p. 34). 
The Social Construction of Reality
The basic tenet of the social construction of reality is implied by the term: 
that reality is constructed by society, and it is constructed socially. The ba-
sic proposition set forth by the concept of the sociology of knowledge is 
from Marx (1953)—that human consciousness is determined by social be-
ing. Social constructionism also draws from Marx’s concepts of ideology 
and false consciousness. The task for Berger and Luckmann (1966) was to 
address how the sociology of knowledge is concerned with what passes for 
knowledge in society. Berger and Luckmann approached reality from two 
perspectives, objective and subjective.
Objective Reality. In an examination of society as an objective real-
ity, Berger and Luckmann (1966) posited that being fully human requires 
social interaction: “the process of becoming human takes place in an inter-
relationship with an environment . . . the developing human interrelates 
with a given natural environment and also with a speciﬁc cultural and social 
environment” (p. 21). Thus, social order is a product of human interactions 
and cannot be “derived from the laws of nature.”
One critical element in formulating a social order is the natural ten-
dency for humans to habitualize (Berger & Luckmann, 1966). As human 
beings, we tend to form habits to reduce options so that we don’t have to 
think about every thing we do. Institutionalization occurs when there is a 
reciprocation of habitualization. For example, family roles are established 
through the reciprocal habitualization that a person will do X (Berger & 
Luckmann, 1966). Institutionalization implies control, and these recip-
rocal actions are built up “in the course of a shared history” (Berger & 


---PAGE BREAK---

40 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Luckmann, 1966). Institutions become integrated through socially ar-
ticulated and shared meanings established between individuals (Berger & 
Luckmann, 1966). The shared meanings that are stored in the human con-
sciousness are referred to as sedimented. Intersedimentation takes place when 
several individuals share common experiences that are incorporated into the 
system of society. 
The concept of legitimation refers to the “second-order objectivation 
of meaning,” or the building from simple to complex social structures. Le-
gitimation explains and justiﬁes the institutional order by ascribing valid-
ity to meanings and designating normative characteristics to the meanings 
themselves (Berger & Luckmann, 1966). Legtimation occurs at several lev-
els—incipient (signaled by the presence of linguistics), theoretical proposi-
tions (folk sayings, proverbs), explicit theories (the purpose of a department 
within an organization), and symbols (theories that connect the theoretical 
propositions, such as the purpose of the entire organization).
Subjective Reality. The individual is not a born member of society; 
rather, the individual is inducted into society by a process. This process is 
called internalization. Berger and Luckmann (1966) referred to primary so-
cialization as “the ﬁrst socialization an individual undergoes in childhood, 
through which he becomes a member of society” (p. 37). Through this pro-
cess, objective reality becomes available and then is internalized into the 
individual consciousness. Secondary socialization is the internalization of in-
stitutional subworlds. “Secondary socialization requires the acquisition of 
role-speciﬁc knowledge” (Berger & Luckmann, 1966, p. 41)and refers to 
the process by which an individual is inducted into a further subgroup of a 
society. A ritual often signiﬁes this process. 
The maintenance of subjective reality is held within primary and sec-
ondary socialization. Socialization is an ongoing event; and although there 
are different levels of socialization, primary socialization is inevitable. 
Through each successive secondary socialization, reality moves further and 
further from the consciousness of the individual, as the meaning of reality 
is placed further into the social domain. “The most important vehicle of 
reality-maintenance is conversation” (Berger & Luckmann, 1966, p. 67). 
Speech takes place as the background of a world as it is taken for granted. It 
is through communicative interaction with other members of a society that 
meaning is derived and negotiated within a social structure. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
41
DECISION-MAKING THEORY
Decision-making theory is critical to understanding what scenario planning 
is and how it works because decisions are often one of the outcomes of sce-
nario planning (Wright & Goodwin, 2009).
Definition
A decision is “an act or process of reaching a conclusion or making up one’s 
mind” (Oxford English Dictionary, 2001, p. 267).
Description
In the business context, decisions must have considerable forethought; how-
ever, one of the pitfalls of strategic planning has been in its inﬂexibility, 
causing planned decisions that do not account for changes within the envi-
ronment (Mintzberg, 1994; Morecroft, 1983). Brehmer (1990, 1992) speci-
ﬁed that decisions in applied contexts differ from the traditional cognitive 
decisions studied by psychologists in the following four ways:
• There is a series of decisions rather than a single decision.
• The decisions are interdependent—current decisions constrain future 
decisions.
• The environment changes autonomously and as a result of decisions 
made.
• It is insufﬁcient for the correct decisions to be made in the correct 
order—they must also be made at a precise moment in real time. 
Decision theory also clariﬁes four barriers to effective decision making:
• Bounded rationality
• Exogenous variables
• Knowledge stickiness and friction
• Policies and decision premises
Bounded Rationality. Bounded rationality is a main source of deci-
sion failure. Put simply, the mental abilities of human decision makers have 
limitations. Morecroft (1983) outlined the notion of bounded rationality 
as developed by the Carnegie School of Thought, a pioneering research 
foundation for decision making. Bounded rationality is deﬁned as “the severe 
limitations on the information processing and computing abilities of human 


---PAGE BREAK---

42 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
decision makers” (1983, p. 133). According to Simon (1957), bounded 
rationality is a property of decision making that inhibits objectively ratio-
nal decisions because (1) all feasible alternative courses of action cannot be 
generated by the individual, (2) individuals cannot collect and process the 
information that would predict the consequences of an alternative, and (3) 
individuals cannot accurately assess the values of anticipated consequences. 
This simply means that humans cannot effectively cope with all of the 
available information and alternatives in making decisions. Furthermore, 
bounded rationality predicts that three main features will be present in hu-
man organizations:
• Factored decision making—decision making will be broken down into 
subdecisions for subgroups.
• Partial and certain information—research shows that ultimately, 
“decisions are made on relatively few sources of information that are 
readily available and low in uncertainty” (Morecroft, 1985, p. 133).
• Rules of thumb—rules of thumb, or heuristics, are built up over time 
that, through experience, make the gathering of information 
unnecessary.
Scenarios and Bounded Rationality. Scenarios appear to have util-
ity in reducing bounded rationality. Scenarios communicate a vast amount 
of information in a story. Research has shown that scenarios are effective 
because they are highly memorable, conversational, and narrative in na-
ture (Dorner, 1996; Martin, 1982; Morecroft, 1985). “Cognitive science 
research tells us that memorable information is more likely to be acted 
upon than is information that remains unconscious and not retrieved from 
memory. Therefore, anything that tends to make information more memo-
rable will have a greater likelihood of assuming signiﬁcance” (Martin, 1982, 
p. 103). This point explains the importance placed on the selection of ti-
tles for developed scenarios. Schwartz (1991) stated that “if the names are 
vivid and memorable, the scenarios will have a much better chance of mak-
ing their way into the decision-making and decision-implementing process 
across the company” (p. 248). Important information about the future is 
often too imprecise and complex for display in tables and graphs (Brehmer, 
1992), and thus, stories have several advantages: (1) they provoke an open-
ness to multiple perspectives, (2) they aid in coping with complexity, and (3) 
they give meaning to events (Martin, 1982). 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
43
In an experiment testing consumer preferences, Stanford MBA students 
were asked to assess the persuasiveness of an advertisement from a Califor-
nia winery (Martin, 1982). Given a choice among numerical data from the 
winery’s sales division, a policy statement about the winery’s strict quality 
standards, and a story about the founder of the winery and his procedures 
for delivering a quality product, results showed an overwhelming preference 
for the story precisely because it contained the same, or very similar, data 
in a form that was easy to remember. Although the use of stories in this 
context varies slightly from the use of scenarios in a planning context, some 
parallels can be drawn. For example, this research demonstrates the avail-
ability heuristic that suggests an event made more available from memory 
will be more easily acted upon. In this sense, events made more available 
from memory through inclusion in a scenario can reduce the time required 
for managers or individuals to react to signals in the environment.
Scenarios might be helpful to decision makers in coping with their own 
bounded rationality by providing a vast amount of information in a detailed 
story exhibiting features that are easily remembered. Although scenarios 
can be helpful in addressing this core cause of decision failure, it should 
be acknowledged that bounded rationality, as a feature of being human, 
can never be completely solved. What is further required is a series of case 
studies, or research regarding the speciﬁc impact of scenario planning on 
individual habits of information gathering, synthesis, and decision making.
Exogenous and Endogenous Variables
Exogenous variables are variables that are external to the process under con-
sideration and that come from outside the system. Decision makers have 
tended to think of all variables as exogenous, mainly because these variables 
are easily recognizable as external and are not often hidden by being coupled 
to the system. Forrester (1961, 1994) was among the ﬁrst to take issue with 
a tendency for models (and therefore decisions) to incorporate only exog-
enous or external variables. Forrester argued that some variables are actually 
coupled to the system and are embedded in the information feedback loops. 
These were referred to as endogenous variables. Endogenous variables are 
internal variables that are often produced in the feedback within the system, 
and they then become coupled with the inputs to the system. Policies often 
have endogenous variables associated with them. Decisions that consider 
only exogenous variables, therefore, overlook critical inputs to the system, 


---PAGE BREAK---

44 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
and decisions made without considering such variables have consequences 
that become magniﬁed because of their association with feedback processes.
Scenarios and Exogenous Variables
There is a variety of scenario planning methods, and each of them differ 
slightly. However, all approaches advocate a systems view of the organiza-
tion. The important link between scenario planning and systems theory 
has been outlined in detail (Senge, 1990, 1994), the implications of which 
include the examination of internal and external elements of the system. 
Van der Heijden’s (1997, 2005b) approach to scenario planning begins with 
mapping the organization as a system in what he terms the business idea. 
Furthermore, he suggested the use of interviews, internal analysis, teams, and 
remarkable people as methods for avoiding a focus solely on external forces. 
Senge (1990, 1994) has developed systems archetypes that are essen-
tially common combinations of feedback loops that inhibit systems. The 
use of these archetypes as diagnosis tools forces scenario planners to con-
sider system outputs that become system inputs—exogenous variables that 
become endogenous variables, addressing Forrester’s (1961, 1994) concern. 
The systems view incorporates the consideration of internal and external 
variables and focuses on how they interact to change the system.
Stickiness and Friction
Stickiness and friction are characteristics of information and knowledge, 
respectively. Generally, the term stickiness refers to a characteristic of infor-
mation and is associated with the cost of its transfer. Friction is a character-
istic of knowledge that dampens motions in a social setting. Socialization 
itself causes a friction that catches minor errors before they can be magniﬁed 
through feedback processes to a point at which they can cause a catastro-
phe. Stickiness, or the cost associated with transferring information, causes 
a problem for decision makers when expertise is needed. With automation 
threatening to replace humans in many work and decision-related settings 
(thus eliminating social friction), a concern has emerged about potential 
increases in minor errors that lead to drastic decision failures.
Stickiness. Organizations are increasingly relying on knowledge-in-
tensive processes managed and operated by interdisciplinary teams (Ford & 
Sterman, 1998). Stickiness in this context refers to the difﬁculty in informa-
tion transfer between or among people. Von Hippel (1998) deﬁned stickiness 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
45
as “the incremental expenditure required to transfer that unit of information 
to a speciﬁed locus in a form useable by a given information seeker. When 
this cost is low, information stickiness is low; when it is high, stickiness is 
high” (p. 629). Discussions of stickiness have included the simple recogni-
tion that a cost is associated with the transfer of information, as well as the 
distinction between stickiness and friction (Rochlin, 1998). That informa-
tion becomes “sticky” is important in decision making because often exper-
tise or knowledge of a speciﬁc domain is required for decisions. For example, 
McKinsey consultants who are on call and will ﬂy anywhere in the world to 
make their expertise available are a result of the fact that knowledge becomes 
incredibly sticky and an example that the costs associated with transferring 
the information or knowledge can become quite high (Rochlin, 1998). 
Friction. In social and political realms, “morals, ethics, knowledge, his-
tory and memory may all serve as the sources of ‘social friction,’ by which 
gross motions are damped, impetuous ones slowed and historical ones ab-
sorbed. Such friction is essential to prevent the persistence and multiplica-
tion of social and political movements once their driving force is removed” 
(Von Hippel, 1998, p. 132). Friction can be described as the nuances and 
double-checks that occur in the social interactions among humans in work 
processes, such as those found in the operation of an aircraft carrier ﬂight 
deck (Rochlin, LaPorte, & Roberts, 1987). Such double-checks only exist 
as a result of social interaction among multiple individuals. Authors such as 
Roch lin (1998), Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1998), and Von Hippel (1998) argued 
that as technology threatens to replace many such human processes, deci-
sion failure will increase because the loss of friction will allow many errors to 
continue that were previously prevented during the course of normal social 
interaction among the humans involved in the process. For example, friction 
would not exist if computer automation were to take over the launching and 
landing procedures aboard aircraft carriers (Rochlin et al., 1987).
Frictionless knowledge (Rochlin, 1998) would initially be more efﬁ-
cient, but it would also allow for a drastic increase in decision errors. Drey-
fus and Dreyfus (1998) argued that their own model of novice, advanced 
beginner, competence, proﬁciency, and expertise provides the experiential 
elements required to reach the potential of true human intelligence. Fric-
tionless knowledge would be knowledge that develops a “set of rules and 
principles that produce expert-quality performance in an entire domain of 
skill” (Rochlin, 1998, p. 284). In this view, frictionless knowledge could 


---PAGE BREAK---

46 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
be easily transferred to or among countless individuals, and it would not be 
sticky as there would be no cost in transferring the knowledge. However, 
Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1998) argued for the necessity of the experience and 
thus the buildup of friction required for true expertise. 
Scenarios, Stickiness, and Friction. Scenario planning is posited as a 
tool for reducing the cost of information transfer and increasing the friction 
among knowledgeable organizational decision makers. By reducing the cost 
of information transfer, in theory, decisions can be made more effectively 
and efﬁciently. By increasing the friction among decision makers, small er-
rors may be caught and perspectives can be added that might have otherwise 
been overlooked.
Scenarios and scenario planning seem to address information stickiness 
by providing a forum for multiple individuals to develop similar expertise 
about the potentials of the organization. The strategic conversation (van der 
Heijden, 1997, 2005b; Wright & Goodwin, 1999) is one example of how 
developing a shared mental model, and thus a shared language, can reduce 
the stickiness of information within the organization. The process of creat-
ing a shared mental model facilitates the process of information transfer. 
By requiring frequent and intense interaction, scenario planning reduces 
the cost of information transfer, making information less sticky (Wright & 
Goodwin, 1999). 
Scenarios might further help decision makers take full advantage of the 
necessary friction required for expertise in organizational decision making. 
The process of scenario building requires intense interaction for extended 
periods of time among managers and executives involved in the decision-
making process. Through this interaction and friction, important forces in 
the environment are often detected that would not have been if a single 
decision maker were attempting to construct scenarios individually. 
In scenario planning, van der Heijden (1997, 2005b) makes use of “re-
markable people” (Wack, 1985b) to provide even more friction. Remark-
able people are “those experts who are not in regular contact with the 
client organization, such that an original contribution can be expected” 
(Wack, 1984, p. 67). Remarkable people often provide insight, prevent 
groupthink, help with information gathering and processing, increase the 
friction and interaction among planning team members, and expand the 
rationality of the group. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
47
Policies and Decision Premises. In this context, a policy is deﬁned 
as “a formal statement giving the relationship between information inputs 
and resulting decision ﬂows” (Forrester, 1994, p. 58). Policies, decision prem-
ises, and decision rules are all terms that describe this same phenomenon. 
“Informal policy results from habit, conformity, social pressures, ingrained 
concepts of goals, awareness of power centers within the organization, and 
personal interest” (Forrester, 1994, p. 58). Decision policies, premises, or 
rules can be thought of as the guiding norms within the context that help 
individuals make decisions when they are uncertain about the information 
at hand or the “best practices” that offer guidance. It is argued here that such 
policies, premises, or rules are developed according to the mental model in 
use as mental models house our biases, values, and beliefs about how the 
world works. Thus, to change or expand the decision rules, one must change 
the mental model.
Scenarios and Decision Premises. Decision premises and policies are 
linked to mental models. Because premises and policies “result from habit, 
conformity, social pressures, ingrained concepts of goals, awareness of power 
centers within the organization, and personal interest” (Forrester, 1994, 
p. 58), they can be changed through the alteration of mental models. The 
key idea with regard to decision premises is that through the expansion of 
mental models, guiding decision policies are revised to accommodate a more 
adequate view of the world and the system within which the individual is 
operating. 
Scenarios may also provide a venue for testing new decision policies by 
manipulating forces and potential responses to them in an experimental 
environment. Decision makers can play out the possibilities of given deci-
sion policies and examine their long-term effects. Furthermore, by creating 
shared mental models and a strategic conversation within the organization, 
policies undergo constant scrutiny, modiﬁcation, and adjustment to assure 
that they provide decision makers with an informed perspective when con-
fronted with an uncertain situation.
MENTAL MODEL THEORY (COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY)
Mental model theory is important in scenario planning because of its abil-
ity to help understand individual learning and perceptions in organizations 
(Morecroft, 1990, 1992; Senge, 1990; Wack, 1984; Weick, 1979, 1990). 


---PAGE BREAK---

48 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Mental models encompass people’s assumptions, values, experiences, beliefs, 
and ideas. Reperceiving the organization and its environment is thought to 
occur through learning that forces participants to reexamine their assump-
tions and alter their mental models (Wack, 1984, 1985a). While it may 
sound simple, shifting mental models is a delicate process. Mental models 
are not like computer hard drives that, once full or faulty, can simply be 
removed or replaced. 
Definition
Doyle and Ford (1999) deﬁned a mental model as “a relatively enduring and 
accessible, but limited, internal conceptual representation of an external sys-
tem (historical, existing or projected) whose structure is analogous to the 
perceived structure of that system” (p. 414).
Description
Originally introduced by Forrester (1961), mental models are the lenses 
through which we see the world. They incorporate our experiences, learn-
ing, biases, values, and beliefs about how the world works. These models 
embody how individuals see the world, how individuals know and think 
about the world, and how individuals act in the world. Furthermore, as a 
result of action and learning, mental models are altered, leading to differ-
ent ways of seeing the world, knowing and thinking about the world, and, 
again, acting in the world. Mental models are constantly being adjusted, 
reﬁned, and re-created in dynamic and ever-changing environments. Men-
tal models both affect experience (active) and are affected by experience 
(passive). Having brieﬂy established the active and passive roles of mental 
models in the construction and interpretation of reality, we can now turn to 
a detailed attempt at deﬁning them.
Clarifying Mental Models. Different streams of decision-making lit-
erature refer to mental models, representations and cognitive maps. Each of 
these terms warrants clariﬁcation and description.
Mental Models. Allee (1997) stated that mental models are “important 
cornerstones for building knowledge and deﬁning some of the cognitive 
processes that support change and learning” (p. 11). Senge (1990) deﬁned 
mental models as “deeply ingrained assumptions, generalizations, or even 
pictures or images that inﬂuence how we understand the world and how we 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
49
take action. Very often, we are not consciously aware of our mental models 
or the effects they have on our behavior” (p. 8). 
Doyle and Ford (1998) explored the concept of mental models in de-
tail: “Mental models are thus the stock in trade of research and practice in 
system dynamics: they are the ‘product’ that modelers take from students 
and clients, disassemble, and reconﬁgure, add to, subtract from, and return 
with value added” (p. 4). After providing a comprehensive literature review 
of the terms from both the systems dynamics and cognitive psychological 
perspectives, and some discussion in Systems Dynamics Review, Doyle and 
Ford eventually offered the following revised deﬁnition of mental models: 
“A mental model of a dynamic system is a relatively enduring and acces-
sible, but limited, internal conceptual representation of an external system 
(historical, existing or projected) whose structure is analogous to the per-
ceived structure of that system” (p. 414). Weick (1979, 1985, 1990) has ar-
gued consistently that mental models guide, shape, and provide the basis on 
which individuals interpret and make sense of organizational life.
Representations. Cognitive psychology literature focuses on mental rep-
resentations. Representations refer to the way humans build “stand-ins” for 
reality in their minds. “One of the functions of representations is to stand 
in for things outside the system; once a system has representations, it can 
operate on them and not need the world” (Bechtel, 1998, p. 297). The con-
cept of representation can best be introduced by considering that the mind 
and brain are involved in “coordinating the behavior of an organism in its 
environment” (Bechtel, 1998, p. 297). To coordinate such behavior, an or-
ganism must create some working understanding of its environment, and it 
does so by constructing a mental representation, or model of that environ-
ment (Johnson-Laird, 1983). 
Freyd (1987) suggested that mental representations are also dynamic: 
“perceivers are sensitive to implicit dynamic information even when they 
are not able to observe real-time changes” (p. 427). The signiﬁcance of 
Freyd’s research is its suggestion that the human mind is itself anticipatory 
in its perception and construction of events. That is, the human mind natu-
rally anticipates possible future sequences of actions based on immediate 
perceptions.
Cognitive Maps. Cognitive maps apply metaphor to the notion of men-
tal models. Weick (1990) recounted a favorite story about a Hungarian mili-
tary unit on maneuvers in the Swiss Alps:


---PAGE BREAK---

50 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Their young lieutenant sent a reconnaissance unit out into the icy wil-
derness just as it began to snow. It snowed for two days, and the unit 
did not return. The lieutenant feared that he had dispatched his people 
to their deaths, but the third day the unit came back. Where had they 
been? How had they made their way? Yes, they said, we considered our-
selves lost and waited for the end, but then one of us found a map in 
his pocket. That calmed us down. We pitched camp, lasted out the 
snowstorm, and then with the map we found our bearings. And here we 
are. The lieutenant took a good look at the map, and discovered, to his 
astonishment, that it was a map of the Pyrenees. (This story was related 
by the Nobel Laureate Albert Szent-Gyorgi and was turned into a poem 
by Holub, 1977.) (p. 4) 
Thus, the “cognitive map” refers to the way the mind creates a map 
or model of a territory, or situation that it uses as a reference point. Weick 
(1990) further explained that any map, no matter that it may be an incor-
rect one, provides some reference point and increases the likelihood that 
an individual or group will be able to navigate unfamiliar terrain. Weick’s 
point seems to be that it is better to operate with a set of assumptions that 
may be incomplete than to forego operating completely.
Global Business Network, a consulting ﬁrm with specialization in sce-
nario planning and strategic thinking, suggests a story of map use to illus-
trate its point—a point that differs a bit from that of Weick (1990):
This map [Figure 2.2] was made in 1701 by a Dutch mapmaker named 
Herman Moll, working in London. He based his map on the explora-
tions of the Spanish, who came up the western side of the Americas, 
and originally encountered the southern point on the map, the tip of 
today what we call the Baja Peninsula. And actually the ﬁrst maps were 
right. Everything north of that was drawn as terra incognitas, one great 
land mass. But then a few years later, around 1635, the Spanish sailed 
to the northern points along this map and encountered what we call the 
Straits of Juan de Fuca and the Puget Sound. Being good Cartesians, 
they connected the northern point with the southern point and created 
the Island of California. 
Now, this would only be a historical curiosity were it not for the problem 
of the missionaries, because the missionaries actually used this map. They 
would land near what is today Monterey and go inland to bring the word 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
51
of God to the American Indians. Now, if you’re on the western shores and 
you want to go inland, what do you have to do? Well, of course, you have 
to take your boats with you. So these poor missionaries disassembled their 
boats, packed them on mules, hauled them across California and 12,000 
feet up the Sierra Nevada, and then down the other side—only to ﬁnd a 
beach, that went on and on, and on, and on. Until, of course, they ﬁnally 
recognized that they were in the middle of the deserts of Nevada, and there 
was no Island of California. So they wrote to the map-makers in Spain and 
said, “Hey, listen, there’s no Island of California; your map is wrong!” And 
the mapmakers would write back and say, “No, no, no! You’re in the wrong 
place; the map is right!” 
Well, ﬁnally, in 1685, the Spanish changed their maps. Sixteen years 
later, when Moll was challenged by the Spanish about his map, he claimed, 
F I G U R E  2.2 A Map of North America


---PAGE BREAK---

52 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
“I have actually talked to sailors who sailed all the way around the Island of 
California. It’s an island.” Finally, in 1721, he changed his maps too.
So, what’s the point? The point is, if you get your facts wrong, you get 
your map wrong. If you get your map wrong, you do the wrong thing. But 
worst of all once you believe a map, it is very, very hard to change. We all 
have deeply ingrained maps—all of us—and particularly successful corpo-
rate executives. Because, of course, they are successful precisely because they 
have had good maps of the world as they have understood it. They would 
not have risen to positions of power if they did not understand their busi-
ness, the business environment, the evolution of their industry, and also 
function effectively using this map. However, these executives have a prob-
lem: the map that got them to the top is unlikely to be the map that they 
need for the future. And worst of all, challenging those deeply ingrained 
perceptions takes an enormous amount of skill, intelligence, information, 
and judgment. (www.gbn.org/scenarios/maprap, accessed April 14, 2003)
These two stories illustrate conﬂicting notions about the purposes and 
pitfalls of cognitive maps. We are therefore left with something of a para-
dox: any map is better than no map; however, an inaccurate map often leads 
to an undesired location. Scenarios work to continuously adjust the maps, 
based on new understandings of the terrain. New understandings of the 
terrain come from rigorous research and constant “strategic” conversations 
with other “explorers” of the terrain. 
LEADERSHIP THEORY
Leadership is included here as a key ingredient of scenario planning because 
leadership is a critical component of any organization change and develop-
ment effort. As with any other change project, if the leadership of the orga-
nization is not involved and supportive, the project is likely to fail. Because 
leadership is such an extensive topic itself, a lengthy review will be avoided 
here. Instead, some recent research, led by colleagues Rochell McWhorter 
and Susan Lynham, is summarized as an emerging foundation for develop-
ing links between leadership capabilities/capacities and scenario planning. 
Definition
The Oxford English Dictionary (2006) deﬁnes leadership as “[a]n act or in-
stance of guidance or direction” (p. 549). 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
53
Description
Leadership is obviously critical in organizations. The body of work examin-
ing and analyzing leadership is far too vast to examine in depth here. Sufﬁce 
it to say that leadership is clearly a complex phenomenon concerned with 
how decision makers move organizations forward and inspire people around 
them. Leaders drive virtually all aspects of organizational life, including 
policy, human resource practices, structure, and compensation, among many, 
many others.
Emerging Research Linking Scenario Planning and Leadership
Research thus far on leadership as a critical component of scenario plan-
ning has focused on interviews with scenario planning experts (Lynham, 
1998, 2000a, 2000b, 2002a, 2002b; McWhorter, Lynham, & Porter, 
2008). Studies have explored the link between leadership development and 
scenario planning by asking experts to describe their interpretation of this 
relationship. Some exciting developments have included descriptions of sce-
nario planning used as a leadership development activity. Companies have 
been experimenting by asking emerging leaders to manage various aspects 
of the scenario planning effort as a development activity. Interviews have 
suggested that leaders in some organizations are realizing that planning will 
be an increasingly critical skill set for the future, and they expect their fu-
ture potential leaders to be familiar with scenario planning techniques (Mc-
Whorter et al., 2008). 
Kleiner and Roth’s (2000) Oil Change: Perspectives on Corporate Trans-
formation and Lynham’s (2000a) The Development of a Theory of Responsible 
Leadership for Performance provided strong additional conceptual starting 
points. Several emerging research studies are promising in that they suggest 
a clear link between leadership and scenario planning; however, such re-
search is in the early stages of documenting this link technique (McWhorter 
et al., 2008). Additional studies will clarify the strength and importance 
of the relationship between leadership development and scenario planning, 
but for now, the suggestion is that leadership must be involved with and 
supportive of any scenario project in order for it to succeed. Perhaps in the 
near future, scenario projects can be designed speciﬁcally as leadership de-
velopment activities. More research must be done to understand how leader-
ship is linked to scenario planning and how the two systems interact. 


---PAGE BREAK---

54 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
ORGANIZATION PERFORMANCE AND CHANGE
Performance is one of the most talked-about aspects of organizational im-
provement efforts. Swanson’s (1999) discussion of performance improvement 
foundations provided a broad yet well-deﬁned perspective of performance 
along with the means to assess it, describe it, and explain it in more detail. 
Although the performance perspective has received criticism on the grounds 
that it neglects the human elements in organizations and improvement ef-
forts, “the best [performance improvement] theory and practice will in the 
end validate the need for and contribution of human expertise to [perfor-
mance improvement]” (Swanson, 1999, p. 4). The collective inﬂuence of 
dialogue, conversation quality and engagement, learning, decision making, 
mental models, and leadership on organization performance and change 
was shown in Figure 2.1. These elements combine to create performance-
based scenario planning.
Definition
Performance has been deﬁned as “the valued productive output of a system 
in the form of goods or services” (Swanson, 1999, p. 5). 
Description
Performance occurs in four core domains: organization, process, group, 
and individual. Performance has also been placed at the center of a lengthy 
debate over the intended outcome of organizational interventions. The 
perspective advocated here is that performance is necessary, although not 
necessarily sufﬁcient, for organizational effectiveness. Clearly, responsible 
scholars and practitioners must address both of these perspectives and 
concerns, and the position argued in this model is that the scenario plan-
ning system inherently requires that both learning and performance are 
necessary outcomes. Research in this area also suggests it is a promis-
ing area to continue exploring (Phelps, Chan, & Kapsalis, 2001; Visser & 
Chermack, 2009).
Levels of Performance
Regarding the link between performance and strategy, Rummler and Brache 
(1995) stated, “The most powerful strategy implementation tools we have 
found are those that help us effectively design and manage performance at 
the organization, process and job/performer levels” (p. 84). Thus, a clear 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
55
strategy for evaluating the outcomes of the scenario planning processes is to 
evaluate changes in performance at these three levels. 
The Organization Level. Rummler and Brache (1995) deﬁned per-
formance at the organization level in terms of three core variables: organiza-
tion goals, organization design, and organization management. Organization 
goals frequently include a focus on productivity, cycle time, cost, and proﬁt 
improvement efforts. Performance-focused analysts “design an organization 
that enables the goals to be met” (Rummler & Brache, 1995, p. 37); thus, 
a focus on the input-output relationships within the organization allow a 
design that accommodates and supports the organization’s goals. Goals, per-
formance, resources, and interfaces between functions are all areas requiring 
frequent assessment to “help identify what needs to get done (goals), the 
relationships necessary to get it done (design), and the practices that remove 
the impediments to getting it done (management)” (Rummler & Brache, 
1995, p. 43). The organization level of performance provides the foundation 
for understanding, analyzing, and managing performance at the process and 
individual levels.
The Process Level. Commonly viewed as how work is accomplished, 
processes can be more speciﬁcally deﬁned as value chains in which each step 
adds value to the previous step. Based on a view that effective process pro-
duces effective organizations, Rummler and Brache (1995) asserted that 
process goals, design, and management are the key variables to address for 
improving process performance. Process goals are considered subgoals of 
organization goals, and they should be designed to efﬁciently convert pro-
cess inputs to process outputs. Managing, analyzing, and adjusting processes 
goals, performance, resources, and interfaces ensure the maintenance of high 
levels of process performance (Rummler & Brache, 1995). Targeted as the 
level with the greatest opportunity to contribute to performance improve-
ment, the process level is largely ignored and often misunderstood. 
The Job/Performer Level. Jobs must be designed to support process 
steps, enabling the achievement of process goals and, in turn, organization 
goals. Job goals must be aligned with process goals, and jobs must be de-
signed and structured such that the performer can achieve those job goals 
(Rummler & Brache, 1995). Job management is considered a function of (1) 
performance speciﬁcations, (2) task support, (3) consequences, (4) feedback, 
(5) skills and knowledge, and (6) individual capacity. These components of 


---PAGE BREAK---

56 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
job management, if effectively addressed, help job performers achieve pro-
cess goals, leading to the fulﬁllment of organization goals.
Scenario Planning and the Levels of Performance 
Improvement
The link between scenario planning and performance improvement theory 
seems obvious, yet scenario planning is increasingly applied without a per-
formance need and without a theoretical basis, making evaluation a difﬁcult 
exercise. Thus, the importance of the performance need in the performance 
improvement context cannot be overstated. Van der Heijden et al. (2002) 
identiﬁed a “lack of purposefulness” (p. 3) as a major reason that scenario 
projects fail. It is in the performance need, determined by a thorough analy-
sis, that such purposefulness can be discovered and acted upon (Holton, 
1999; Swanson, 1994).
Scenario Planning at the Organization Level
Scenario planning must produce results at the organization level. While 
evaluation efforts have been minimal, one study in particular attempted to 
analyze the link between engagement in scenario planning and ﬁrm perfor-
mance. Phelps, Chan, and Kapsalis (2001) evaluated scenario planning proj-
ects in the water and IT industries. In the water industry, ﬁrm performance 
measures included return on capital employed, water quality, variance in 
water pressure over time, and supply interruptions. In the IT industry, ﬁrm 
performance measures included annual growth rates of client companies, 
return on capital employed, and net proﬁts. The authors concluded that 
scenario planning had a considerable positive effect on ﬁrm performance 
in the water industry, although the service score showed a considerable de-
crease. The IT industry also showed a positive association between scenario 
planning and performance, although it was less powerful and was based on 
a questionably small sample size. Further studies such as these are needed 
to establish the link between scenario planning and performance in terms 
of economic beneﬁt. Studies focused on the relationship between scenario 
planning and the achievement of organization goals are particularly advo-
cated as one step in a comprehensive program of scenario evaluation.
Several case studies—for example, Royal Dutch Shell (Wack, 1985a, 
1985b), British Airways (Moyer, 1996), and Nokia (van der Heijden et al., 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
57
2002)—examine the abilities of organizations to revive and renew them-
selves, and the fact that these companies are still ﬂourishing despite some 
extremely challenging situations is one indicator that scenario planning 
might help an organization and its leaders cope with uncertainty. A compa-
ny’s ability to survive may be the most basic indicator of performance at the 
organization level. Other indicators may be speciﬁc to industry or company, 
but effective scenario planning will select these speciﬁc indicators, measure 
them, and address them. 
Scenario Planning at the Process Level
Only one study was found that explicitly examined the effects of scenario 
planning on process capabilities or functions. A case study by Burt and van 
der Heijden (in Ringland, 2002) had as one of its primary aims the recon-
ﬁguration of supply chain processes. While it is clear that scenario thinking 
might be used to develop alternative processes and explore more efﬁcient 
means of delivering products and services, scenarios have rarely been ap-
plied in this context. However, some scenario projects such as the IT com-
pany International Computers Ltd. (Ringland, 2002) have incorporated 
systems diagrams to map information markets in process formats; or, as 
in the case of Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Tessum, 1997), systems diagrams 
were used to map early warning systems as processes of contingency plan-
ning. Van der Heijden et al. (2002) suggested that organizational change is 
effectively brought about through process change, although “process gain 
requires persistence and consistency over an extended period” (p. 84). 
Some preliminary conceptual arguments for using scenarios in the pro-
cess context include the use of scenarios as “cognitive objects” (P. E. John-
son, personal communication, April 2003) in which scenarios are vehicles 
for process management and knowledge transfer. These are key areas for 
further investigation that might use scenarios to explore alternative pro-
cesses for improved efﬁciency and storage spaces for descriptions of knowl-
edge work. Research studies that document the effects of scenarios applied 
to processes would provide much value by potentially providing an addi-
tional application area for scenarios. As Rummler and Brache (1995) stated, 
“[T]he process level has been the least understood level of performance” 
(p. 44); as such, the process level provides the most potential for improving 
performance.


---PAGE BREAK---

58 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Scenario Planning at the Job/Performer Level
Perhaps more than any other level, anecdotal evidence has supported the 
claim of individual performance improvement. Whether through learning 
via intense trend analysis (Wack, 1985b), shared mental models (van der 
Heijden, 1997), or increased availability of information for more precise, 
long-view-oriented decision making (Schwartz, 1991), virtually all reports 
of scenario application address the performance of the individual. However, 
none reports an empirical study, with measures of individual performance 
improvement. Van der Heijden et al. (2002) stated that scenarios help in-
dividuals reperceive reality from multiple perspectives, provide a forum for 
people to think creatively, and are effectively used as communications tools. 
These uses of scenarios are all aimed at improving performance, although 
there is little beyond participant claims of improvement in these areas.
INTEGRATING THE THEORETICAL 
FOUNDATIONS FOR A THEORY OF  
SCENARIO PLANNING
Scenario planning is believed to contribute to organization performance 
through the collective effect of each of the theories described in this chapter. 
To some, this explanation may seem obvious, but such a system of concepts 
explaining how scenario planning contributes to the organization and its 
goals is not found in the literature. The goal of this chapter has been to 
justify the theory of scenario planning and to capture what scenario plan-
ning is and how it works (Torraco, 1997). In the proposed theory, conversa-
tion quality and engagement, learning, decision making, mental models, 
and leadership are positioned as drivers of organization performance and 
change. What is unique about scenario planning is that it integrates these 
critical drivers of organization performance and change (Visser & Cher-
mack, 2009).
The components of the theory of scenario planning are useful in un-
derstanding what scenario planning is and how it works in numerous ways. 
First, the theory provides a thinking tool for conceptualizing how sce-
nario projects might be facilitated. It presents several “targets”—or items 
that scenario planning is designed to change. The results of these changes 
are intended to alter how participants view the internal and external envi-
ronments. Participants can therefore reperceive their environment and the 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
59
options contained within it. Second, the components of the theory provide 
convenient measurement points for assessing and evaluating the outcomes 
of scenario planning. Finally, this theory provides a way of categorizing new 
knowledge that is generated about scenario planning. To be sure, theories in 
organization sciences require adjustment, reﬁnement, and development as 
new insights are gained.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has reviewed the major theory domains that inform the prac-
tice of scenario planning: (1) dialogue, conversation quality, and engage-
ment; (2) organizational learning; (3) mental models; (4) decision making; 
(5) leadership, and (6) organization performance and change. These theo-
retical foundations have been explored in detail, with an aim of explaining 
how each one is relevant in scenario planning practices and models. The 
theoretical foundations were integrated into a theory of scenario planning 
that attempts to present a conceptual explanation of what scenario plan-
ning is and how it works. This chapter is critical in understanding scenario 
planning practices as theories, and theoretical foundations provide a set of 
“hooks” on which to hang knowledge as one navigates through the imple-
mentation of any scenario planning project. In addition, the theories pre-
sented in this chapter help to identify the elements that must be considered 
in any scenario planning project intended to contribute to enhanced orga-
nizational performance.


---PAGE BREAK---

This page intentionally left blank 


---PAGE BREAK---

 61
The Performance-Based 
Scenario System
This chapter situates scenario planning in the organizational context. It 
explains how scenario planning ﬁts into the organizational system as a sub-
system with its own inputs, processes, outputs, and feedback loops. 
To accomplish this goal, the state of the economic, business, and soci-
etal environment and its inﬂuence on organizational activity is described. 
Not only does the environment make the case for scenario planning, but it 
also sets up the reality of systems within systems and ever-changing condi-
tions. This chapter also explains organizations as systems, describes scenario 
planning as a system within the organization, and introduces the phases of 
scenario planning that form the content for Part Two of this book.
THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONTEXT
The nature of the environment was established in Chapter 1. To reiterate, 
things change too rapidly for forecasts or other predictive planning models 
to be useful. There are no signs that the rate of change will slow. Coupled 
with the rate of change is its depth. Economic hiccups are deeper and di-
sasters more devastating than ever. Decision makers are just trying to make 
sense of a context that changes signiﬁcantly and frequently. Many have tried 
other tools and been frustrated by the lack of ability to understand and ac-
count for uncertainty. Today’s business context plainly leaves people in the 
midst of turbulence. 
3


---PAGE BREAK---

62 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
SYSTEMS WITHIN SYSTEMS
Much has been written about systems theory applied in business organiza-
tions, so there is no need for a lengthy explanation here. But what does require 
some explanation is viewing strategy itself as a system within the larger or-
ganization system. 
Within its environmental context, each organization relies on a perfor-
mance system. For public companies, the most common measure of this 
performance system is stock market performance. This overall performance 
measure over time is thought to include other indicators of performance, 
such as product innovation, competitor successes and failures, and market 
share, among others. Any of these indicators can also serve as overall perfor-
mance indicators. The performance system for any organization is the set 
of components that decision makers have organized to sell products, goods, 
and services. 
Within this performance system is the planning system. Decision mak-
ers and organizational leaders engage in planning as a means of inﬂuencing 
organizational performance, and as such, the planning system is a system 
within the performance system. Planning has always been intended as a 
means of satisfying the innate human need to think about the future, but 
in an organizational context, it is also intended as a means for people to 
consider the results of their potential activities. Most commonly, decision 
makers engage in planning in hopes of maximizing optimal growth, pro-
duction, or delivery of services, which are then sold to optimize proﬁt. All 
of this is happening amid the chaos of the external environmental context 
(Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1 positions the performance system within the organizational 
and contextual environment, and the planning system within the perfor-
mance system. Of course, this is a simpliﬁed view, but the key point to stress 
is that planning is a system within the organization system. However, plan-
ning is most often viewed as a process—a series of steps to be carried out to 
“do” the plan without regard for its inputs and outputs.
PLANNING AS A PROCESS
Most planning models are process models indicating the required plan-
ning steps, but a systems approach may provoke new insights related to 
planning. Such a reconceptualization creates new ways of thinking about plan- 
ning performance. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
63
The availability of countless guides to organizational planning and 
strategy serves as testament to the fact that there are as many different sets 
of steps for planning as there are consultants to help organizations through 
them. Much of the research concerning various planning processes is con-
ﬂicting or ambiguous (Hitt, Hoskisson & Ireland, 1990; Micklethwait & 
Woolridge, 1996). Unfortunately, planning is mostly thought of as a stand-
alone process or event in organizations with little concern for the nature of 
the organizational engagement in strategy or its ultimate outcomes (Mick-
lethwait & Woolridge, 1996). Thus, a problem is that most approaches to 
planning are divorced from the inputs to, and outputs from, the strategy 
system.
The basic design school model of strategy is based on a process ap-
proach to planning and summarizes the early approaches to strategy in a 
delineated, step-by-step model (Mintzberg, 1994). Notably, the basic de-
sign school model is still the basis of strategy in most organizations today. 
The design school model uses the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and 
threats (SWOT) analysis as its foundation. 
This basic design school model has been used to integrate a variety 
of common approaches to planning in organizations. The foundation of 
F I G U R E  3.1  The Context of Scenario Planning
Work Teams
and
Individuals
STEEP Forces
Competitive Forces,
Organizational Culture
and Other Players
Individual
Characteristics,
Interactions and
Internal Politics
The Natural and
Social Worlds
Planning
System
Organizational
and Contextual
Environment
Performance
System


---PAGE BREAK---

64 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
planning for many organizations, this model is inherently valuable because 
of its ability to synthesize a great deal of planning literature, research, and 
experience in a single model. However, the design school model includes 
an implicit assumption that the environment will stay relatively stable and 
predictable. It promotes a process approach to planning, giving people the 
steps to “do” planning, but it does not place any emphasis on the inputs and 
outputs relevant to the strategy system. There is no clear link to the rest of the 
organization. In contrast, a clear connection to organizational inputs and out-
puts deﬁnes the performance-based scenario system presented in this book.
PLANNING AS A SYSTEM
Planning is a system. Thus, as a system within the organization—a sys-
tem within a system—it might be better approached from a more integra-
tive perspective than current practices promote. While this distinction may 
seem trite, its implications have a considerable inﬂuence on the nature of 
planning and strategy in organizations. In addition, viewing planning as 
a system allows strategists a greater amount of ﬂexibility in their efforts to 
obtain glimpses of the future.
The word system is used purposefully in this context. Planning has its 
own set of inputs, processes, and outputs and can therefore be labeled as a 
system itself. Conceptually, this system can be divided into two key compo-
nents, the ﬁrst concerning the exploration of options and the second com-
posed of making decisions and moving forward. However, this separation is 
conceptual only: these components are iteratively linked, and scenario plan-
ning as a particular approach to strategy in the end is an ongoing approach 
to strategy that is never complete. Viewing strategy as a system means that 
time is spent analyzing the inputs and outputs; and, therefore, each instance 
of strategy is a customized, tailor-made effort. 
THE SCENARIO SYSTEM: SCENARIO BUILDING  
AND SCENARIO DEPLOYMENT
The rationale for approaching planning as a system leads to a description of 
scenario planning as a system within the organization. The scenario system 
is divided into two parts:
• Scenario building
• Scenario deployment


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
65
These parts represent the two major components of engaging in scenario 
planning in organizations. This division is important, as building scenarios 
is not enough. Equally important is what is done with the scenarios once 
they are developed. 
Scenario Building
Scenario building is the content covered in existing scenario planning 
books. The focus deals explicitly with the conduct of data gathering, ana-
lyzing, synthesizing, and eventually the construction of scenarios. In other 
words, existing writing on scenario planning covers how to create scenarios. 
Few authors demonstrate what to do with scenarios after they have been 
developed. Each of the approaches to scenarios covered in Chapter 2 are 
different ways of creating scenarios—scenario building. Numerous sources 
detail procedures on how to build scenarios, but this is where most books 
on the topic end.
Scenario Deployment
The second part of the scenario system—scenario deployment—centers on 
how to use the scenarios in ways that work toward outcomes. This book 
offers several strategies that have been used effectively, in addition to de-
tailed descriptions and processes for using the scenarios to explore current 
organization issues, resources, strategies, and mental models. The key to 
making scenarios work is in using the scenarios to change the way decisions 
are made, shifting the thinking of managers, reframing decision-making 
processes, and examining numerous organizational issues in the context of 
each scenario. 
Figure 3.2 illustrates the distinction between scenario building and sce-
nario deployment Scenario building is represented by the ﬁrst cone, opening 
up toward the middle of the model. The scenario building process is like-
wise designed to “open up” the thinking inside the organization, to expand 
the frame and include a wider range of possibilities, and to “see” things 
differently (Lynham, Provo, & Ruona, 1998; Provo, Lynham, Ruona, & 
Miller, 1998; Swanson, Lynham, Ruona, & Provo, 1998). The second cone, 
tapering down toward the right of the ﬁgure, represents scenario deploy-
ment. Scenario deployment is the process by which decisions must be made 
in light of a deeper understanding of possibilities inherent in the environ-
ment, an expanded set of decision premises, and a wider range of options 


---PAGE BREAK---

66 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
that have been considered. The second cone is not intended to suggest that 
decision makers should move toward a single desired future state; rather, 
the most robust path, given an array of potential futures, should be sought. 
The ﬁrst component—option generation—can be characterized by di-
vergent and challenging thinking. Conversely, decision formulation is con-
cerned with convergent thinking and the fact that, ultimately, options must 
be reduced through decision making. The assumption in this model is that 
increasing the options that are considered in planning allows decision mak-
ers a better view of the potential future; thus, they are more prepared to 
make decisions under uncertain conditions. 
THE PERFORMANCE-BASED SCENARIO SYSTEM
In this book, the performance-based scenario system is described in ﬁve 
phases:
1. Project preparation
2. Scenario exploration
3. Scenario development
4. Scenario implementation
5. Project assessment
F I G U R E  3.2  Conceptual Model of the Scenario System
Source: Based on Swanson, Lynham, Ruona, & Provo, 1990.
Environment
Scenario Building
Scenario Deployment
Generating options and
opening up thinking
Making decisions and
creating focus


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
67
These ﬁve phases capture the main ideas required to conduct a scenario 
project and have been used extensively in practice. The ﬁrst three scenario 
system phases describe the process of scenario building. The last two phases 
describe what to do with the scenarios once they are developed—scenario 
deployment. The project preparation phase includes contracting with the 
client, identifying the purpose of the scenario project, clarifying and de-
veloping it, and creating an agenda and timeline for the project. The sce-
nario exploration phase moves into detailed research of the purpose and 
issue identiﬁed in Phase 1. Internal and external environmental analyses are 
conducted in this phase. Phase 3, scenario development, covers the work-
shops used in the creation of multiple scenarios, writing scenario details, 
and the selection of four challenging and fundamentally different scenarios 
(using four scenarios helps to avoid some common thinking traps, which are 
explained in detail in a later chapter). The scenario implementation phase 
involves the facilitation of conversations to consider the implications of the 
scenarios that have been developed. Risk management and contingency 
planning are elements evident in the implications phase. Strategic insights 
discovered in the scenario implementation phase also require reﬂection, and 
events that signal the potential unfolding of a given scenario are identiﬁed. 
The ﬁnal phase, project assessment, involves evaluating the scenario project. 
Scenario projects are difﬁcult to assess, and their assessment has generally 
been neglected in the scenario planning literature. This book offers a practi-
cal approach to scenario planning project assessment.
Figure 3.3 presents a visual overview of the whole scenario system. The 
system includes inputs, outputs, and the phases of scenario planning. Part 
Two of this book focuses on the details of the phases of the scenario system, 
with speciﬁc tools and workshops for accomplishing the key purpose of each 
phase. 
THE SCENARIO-BUILDING COMPONENT
Once the major inputs to the scenario system are considered, the scenario-
building activity begins. Scenario building includes the ﬁrst three phases—
project preparation, scenario exploration, and scenario construction (see 
Figure 3.4). 
These three phases build on ideas and use speciﬁc techniques to develop 
a set of four scenarios. The four scenarios are used to challenge the thinking 
in the organization and provide a common understanding of the dynamic 


---PAGE BREAK---

68 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
forces at play in the environment. At Shell, Pierre Wack often clariﬁed that 
the scenario-building activity is actually a method of separating issues into 
things he called predetermined elements and critical uncertainties—in 
other words, separating the consequences of events that have already occurred 
and been perceived from the things that are truly uncertain.
THE SCENARIO DEPLOYMENT COMPONENT
When scenarios have been developed, they are used to explore organiza-
tional strategies, capacity, key decisions, and other important items. This 
is often called “wind tunneling,” but scenarios can be used in a variety of 
ways to maximize their collective impact. The Scenario Implementation 
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others
F I G U R E  3.3 The Performance-Based Scenario System


---PAGE BREAK---

  
T H E  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
69
and Project Assessment phases are aimed at how scenarios can be used to 
provoke changes in organizations and help decision makers make sense of 
strategic insights (see Figure 3.5).
CONCLUSION
This chapter on the scenario system has discussed the nature of the external 
context facing organizations. This environment is highly turbulent, volatile, 
uncertain, complex, and ambiguous. Because of this context, traditional ap-
proaches to planning are not adequate because they assume the environ-
ment is relatively stable and predictable. 
F I G U R E  3.4  The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Building 
Component
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


---PAGE BREAK---

70 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
In this chapter, planning has been positioned as a system within the 
larger organizational system. In this repositioning, the scenario system has 
its own set of inputs, processes, outputs, and feedback loops. Furthermore, 
the scenario system has been presented with its ﬁve phases: 
1. Project preparation
2. Scenario exploration
3. Scenario development
4. Scenario implementation
5. Project assessment
F I G U R E  3.5  The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Deployment 
Component
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


---PAGE BREAK---

 71
Scenario Case Study
This chapter introduces a scenario case study based on events in a real sce-
nario project. Later chapters provide clear examples of the outputs for each 
phase of the scenario system. When all of the examples are put together, we 
will have a complete scenario case study.
Scenario projects are a purposeful approach to solving difﬁcult, am-
biguous, and complex dilemmas. These projects require a high degree of 
motivation and commitment to continuously learn in a context that does 
not reveal simple “right” answers. The skills required for facilitating sce-
nario projects are developed over time. While some organizations provide 
training workshops and seminars focused on scenario planning skills, there 
is no substitute for engaging in these complex problems ﬁrsthand. 
One approach is to seek an experienced scenario planning professional 
with whom to apprentice. The mentor-apprentice relationship is perhaps 
the most powerful way to learn the tools, skills, processes, and nuances that 
make for effective scenarios. Studying the details of the scenario system 
through this book combined with serious intellectual engagement with the 
Technology Corporation case and expert tutelage in actual scenario projects 
forms an ideal approach to building scenario project leadership expertise. 
The organization that serves as the core scenario case throughout this 
book is an actual research and development technology ﬁrm located in the 
northeastern United States. The company name used here will be “Technol-
ogy Corporation” to disguise the organization. The organization currently 
employs 185 people. Organizational leaders had never used a formal-
ized approach to their planning for the future. Their typical process 
was ad hoc and unstructured. On the surface, there appears to be no 
cohesive approach to developing strategy or thinking about the future at 
4


---PAGE BREAK---

72 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Technology Corporation. As with so many fast-growing technology ﬁrms, 
executives tend to describe planning as an essential part of daily activities 
while having no formal strategy process designed to focus on the external 
environment. 
COMPANY BACKGROUND
Technology Corporation was founded in 1971 and altered its focus to tech-
nology product research, design, and development in 1984, shortly after the 
U.S. government launched the Small Business Innovation Development 
Act. The act was designed to promote innovation through research and de-
velopment (R&D) that was seen as lacking in small business due to limited 
funding sources. Small businesses are encouraged to seek funding through 
the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Tech-
nology Transfer (STTR) programs managed by the U.S. Small Business 
Administration (SBA). These agencies develop technologies used by eleven 
federal departments (e.g., Department of Defense, Department of Energy, 
and National Science Foundation). Technology Corporation developed ex-
pertise in writing proposals for SBIR and STTR funding. For thirty-eight 
years, its primary revenue was generated by the SBIR/STTR funding, with 
limited success in the commercialization of new technology products. Its 
primary output was intellectual property intended for development into in-
novative technology products. The business model of the organization never 
fully realized the intended outcomes of the SBIR/STTR funding. Instead, 
the company used the writing of proposals and success in winning SBIR 
and STTR funding as its primary business model. The results were the 
development of numerous technology products that were never brought to 
market because they did not move beyond the testing phase.
In 2002, a new owner purchased the company. The new owner had a 
strong vision that included a more diverse set of funding sources and the 
ability to deliver new products to market. While the new owner acknowl-
edged the success of the organization’s ability to secure and process numer-
ous SBIR/STTR awards through Phase I (start-up) and Phase II (R&D), 
she felt the future of the organization would lie with the commercialization 
(Phase III) of the technology and diversiﬁcation into new markets through 
intercompany development, partnerships with larger corporations, or ven-
ture capital agreements. The owner and members of the leadership team are 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
S C E N A R I O  C A S E  S T U D Y 
73
experienced technology, innovation, and design managers, having worked 
most of their careers in large international technology, computing, and data 
distribution organizations. Their business acumen in the technology indus-
try combined with the intellectual power of the scientists, designers, and 
R&D staff, affords the organization the ability to expand and explore its 
potential in new technologies that did not exist prior to the acquisition.
STRUCTURE
Figure 4.1 presents a simpliﬁed version of Technology Corporation’s organi-
zational chart to focus on the major functional areas.
ORGANIZATION PERFORMANCE RECORDS
The purchase of Technology Corporation was welcomed by employees, as 
was the focus on pushing products through to commercialization. However, 
little had changed in the ﬁrst two years of the new leadership. Technology 
Corporation was still having success with SBIR and STTR funding. As long 
as its success was bringing in dollars, there was little motivation to change. 
Company performance was consistently high, as long as the proposals for 
government funding continued to be successful. However, the ongoing reli-
ance on a single source of funding can be a worry to any organization. An 
upcoming presidential election had implications for dollars available in the 
SBIR and STTR programs, and some were speculating that these funding 
streams could be shut down completely.
Perhaps a more relevant aspect of organization performance centers 
on the number of proposals funded and the number of design projects 
in progress at a given time. Consider Figures 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 and their 
implications. 
Casual conversations with three senior-level decision makers suggested 
themes about the organization culture. Most employees were described as 
hardworking, creative, and intelligent people. However, leaders describe the 
culture as independent. That is, collaboration is not a priority; and once 
proposals are funded and projects are initiated, people work on their in-
dividual parts with little interaction and connection to the other product 
components (e.g., design, development, engineering, and marketing). Deci-
sion makers expressed a desire for more collaboration and cross-functional 


---PAGE BREAK---

F I G U R E  4.1  Technology Corporation Organization Chart
Proposal
Witness
(29)
Marketing
Team
(15)
Sales
Team
(18)
Manager
Product
Development
(37)
Manager
Engineering
(43)
Manager
Design
(26)
Manager
Human Resources
(4)
VP
Finance
VP
Marketing
VP
Product
Engineering
VP
Product Design
VP
Human Resources
CEO


---PAGE BREAK---

  
S C E N A R I O  C A S E  S T U D Y 
75
interaction. They believe this would lead to additional creative insights and 
would leverage more collective intellectual capital inside the organization. 
Decision makers also commented that the organization is a classic 
case in which the creative designers often clash with the logical engineers. 
These thinking processes are not always compatible, but both are neces-
sary for Technology Corporation to develop into the organization that the 
new owner has in mind. In the past, the most rewarded group has been 
the proposal writers because they are seen as the revenue generators. Deci-
sion makers recognize that reward systems may need to change to support 
F I G U R E  4.2  Technology Corporation’s Small Business Innovation Research/
Small Business Technology Transfer Proposals Submitted 
2007–2008
40
30
20
10
0
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
F I G U R E  4.3  Technology Corporation’s Small Business Innovation Research/ 
Small Business Technology Transfer Proposals Funded 1984–2008
150
100
50
0
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08


---PAGE BREAK---

76 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
collaboration and also to wean the organization from its dependence on a 
single source of revenue. The radical variance in salaries has also been a fac-
tor in that it has dictated the perceived value of each functional area. 
A FEW RELEVANT INDUSTRIAL DYNAMICS
One of Technology Corporation’s major current initiatives is a new mobile 
communications device. Currently, iPhone and BlackBerry dominate the 
market, and Samsung, LG, and Palm are also players. Displacing these pop-
ular brands is a tall order. Device interface and network capabilities (e.g., 
4G, 5G, and beyond) are obvious topics of interest for decision makers. 
Another major current initiative is the technology for an organ trans-
port system (to replace the low-tech Igloo cooler). The device would moni-
tor temperature, pressure, and other factors inﬂuencing the length of time 
an organ can remain viable for transport. Prototype designs have been 
shown to support organ life twelve hours beyond the Igloo cooler.
These are just two examples of product development underway at Tech-
nology Corporation. Considering the charts depicted in the ﬁgures, we see 
F I G U R E  4.4  Technology Corporation’s Active Projects 1984–2008
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08


---PAGE BREAK---

  
S C E N A R I O  C A S E  S T U D Y 
77
that many other developments are in the pipeline, each carrying a different 
level of priority, resources, and commitment. Again, without a formal ap-
proach to strategy, no time is being dedicated to exploring the external en-
vironment relevant to any of these items. Past conversations about strategy 
have been ﬁnancially based annual events.
SCENARIO PROJECT INITIATION
Imagine you are approached by a member of the executive team to discuss 
the possibility of a scenario project at Technology Corporation. You were 
recommended by a previous scenario project participant. The major issue 
discussed was the lack of a structured approach to planning. Given the dy-
namics described in this case, decision makers have expressed a desire to use 
a systematic approach to strategy to understand the external environment. 
Simultaneously, they view a collaborative approach to strategy as an oppor-
tunity to get the functional areas more integrated. Another critical question 
increasingly troubling decision makers is how to prioritize projects to opti-
mize the ﬁt between resource investment and likelihood the product can be 
taken to market and sold. The organization has experienced high growth in 
terms of the number of projects it is working on at any given time. Decision 
makers realize this growth is not likely to continue; but if it does, they will 
become increasingly scattered across even more projects and industries.
CONCLUSION
Clearly, several strategic issues exist in Technology Corporation. The case 
incorporates some classic, common elements (e.g., lack of cross-functional 
communication, a history of ﬁnancial budgeting described as strategy, 
and internal conﬂict). Striking elements presented here are the continued 
growth and success with proposals and funding. It is easy to see why deci-
sion makers may be concerned. Yet, transitioning to other funding sources 
before reducing successful SBIR/STTR funding will be a tricky negotia-
tion. Fostering a more collaborative culture, overhauling reward systems, 
and managing a variety of projects in a variety of industries are complex 
activities that have important implications. While this case may seem sim-
ple at ﬁrst glance, complex issues will unfold in the following chapters as 
scenario planning tools are applied.


---PAGE BREAK---

This page intentionally left blank 


---PAGE BREAK---

 79
P
A
R
T
T
W
O
PHASES OF THE 
PERFORMANCE-BASED 
SCENARIO SYSTEM
C H A P TE RS
 
5  Phase 1—Project Preparation: Understanding Purpose 
and Building Support 
 
6  Phase 2—Scenario Exploration: Breathing In
 
7 Phase 3—Scenario Development: Digging Deeper 
 
8  Phase 4—Scenario Implementation: Putting Scenarios to Use
 
9 Phase 5—Project Assessment: Documenting Results
EFFORTS AT PLANNING without deﬁning objectives or expected outcomes 
are likely to fail. Furthermore, approaches to planning that focus on devel-
opment and leave off implementation will lose momentum once the plan is 
complete. Scenario planning has proven itself as an upgrade to traditional 
strategic planning, but scenario planning experts have not established a set 
of best practices, and every ﬁrm that offers scenario planning goes about 
it differently. Most approaches to scenario planning adhere to vague, ill- 
deﬁned outcomes, focus on scenario development, pay minimal attention to 
how to use the scenarios, and completely neglect the idea of project assessment. 
Part Two provides a comprehensive approach to scenario planning. 
These chapters show you how to work with your colleagues or other or-
ganizations to develop a proposal with deﬁned purposes and expectations 


---PAGE BREAK---

80 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
and to create a set of scenarios that are compelling, novel, and useful. These 
chapters show you how to use those scenarios in speciﬁc ways that increase 
the likelihood of generating strategic insights and how to assess whether the 
project has added value. 
Part Two consists of Chapters 5 through 9, and these chapters corre-
spond to the phases of the Scenario System:
• Phase 1—Project Preparation
• Phase 2—Scenario Exploration
• Phase 3—Scenario Development
• Phase 4—Scenario Implementation
• Phase 5—Project Assessment
Chapter 5, “Project Preparation,” is focused on how to develop the pur-
pose of the project, deﬁne the key issue or question that is the focus of the 
project, and build support. This phase also includes building the scenario 
team, the time line and scope of the project, and conversations about ex-
pected outcomes.
Chapter 6, “Scenario Exploration,” describes how to gather data rel-
evant to the purpose, issue, and question of the project. Various activities 
including SWOT analysis, forecasts, trend analysis, internal interviews, and 
others are described to help understand the dynamics of the internal and 
external environments. 
Chapter 7, “Scenario Development,” clearly shows how to use a variety 
of workshops and exercises to build a strategic conversation inside the orga-
nization and create scenarios. Methods for gauging the effectiveness of the 
scenarios are also provided with detailed application guidelines.
Chapter 8, “Scenario Implementation,” shows how to put the scenar-
ios to use. This chapter describes additional workshops designed to get the 
most of scenarios and increase the likelihood that they will shift the think-
ing inside the organization. 
Chapter 9, “Project Assessment,” outlines the necessary components of 
a comprehensive scenario project assessment. These activities include mea-
suring the outcomes relative to the expected outcomes deﬁned early on, 
looking at a cost/beneﬁt analysis of the project, and checking for knowledge 
and expertise increases among participants.
The activities described in Part Two come together to form the com-
plete scenario system, designed to be used in any organization. Using the 
phases described here will help you create a scenario project with impact.


---PAGE BREAK---

 81
Phase 1— 
Project Preparation: 
Understanding Purpose  
and Building Support
This chapter presents the ﬁrst phase of the scenario system—project prepa-
ration. The goal of this chapter is to describe and explain the important ele-
ments that should be deﬁned in the project preparation phase of a scenario 
system and that culminate in a project proposal (Figure 5.1). 
Project preparation requires careful attention to decision makers, lead-
ers, and sponsors of the project. Listening to people express what they are 
frustrated with and excited about helps to develop an initial understanding 
of the situation. Follow-up questions to these key people can reveal addi-
tional important information, including constraints, biases, misperceptions, 
and glimpses of expected outcomes. 
Scenario projects are initiated with a meeting (or series of meetings) to 
discuss the organizational issue, problem, or need for scenarios. This initial 
meeting (or meetings) provides valuable insight for understanding the in-
puts to the scenario effort. Project inputs are clariﬁed as more information 
is shared among all participants through the activities of the early phases in 
the scenario system.
Whether the project is being led by internal or external professionals, 
there should be a formal proposal to the organizational decision makers and 
sponsors laying out the key elements of the project. The importance of es-
tablishing a clear purpose is critical. It will become the basis for everything 
else that follows, including, eventually, assessment of the project. The more 
clarity in the purpose at the onset, the more direct and elegant the ﬂow of 
the project and assessment can become. 
5


---PAGE BREAK---

82 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
CONSTRUCTING A SCENARIO  
PROJECT PROPOSAL
The process of constructing a project proposal involves building agreement 
among the project leader and organizational decision makers on ﬁve critical 
items. These ﬁve items should be documented in the scenario project proposal:
• The purpose and question of the scenario project
• The estimated scope and time line of the scenario project
• The scenario team and deﬁned roles for each team member
• The general expected outcomes of the scenario project
• Measures to assess the achievement/success of the expected outcomes
F I G U R E  5.1  The Performance-Based Scenario System—Project Preparation 
Phase
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
83
ARTICULATING THE PURPOSE OF  
THE SCENARIO PROJECT
Most organizational interventions begin with the identiﬁcation of a prob-
lem. Effective interventions are based on plans for tackling these problems 
and gaining approval to work toward solutions. Problems are usually related 
to continuously trying to optimize ﬁt with the environment, or they can be 
classiﬁed into one of a few general categories. No matter what the problem 
is, the ﬁrst phase in the scenario system is focused on listening to key 
people talk about the situations they are facing. The project leader also 
becomes oriented to the problem and begins gathering general perceptions 
of the problem and the project that is designed to address it. Remember, 
the term problem in this context means to put forth for conversation, and 
the purpose of the project drives subsequent activities (Burt & van der Hei-
jden, 2003).
Increasingly, decision makers are overwhelmed by volatility, complex-
ity, and uncertainty. Many are frustrated with current planning processes, 
stating that the methods they are using don’t work. Many express a desire 
to make sense of a complex set of forces and variables in the external envi-
ronment that seem to have no structure or pattern of behavior that might 
suggest how things will play out in the future. A key overarching purpose 
of scenario planning is to develop a variety of alternatives so that decision 
makers will be more prepared for anything that might come to pass.
SCENARIO PLANNING CATEGORIES OF PURPOSE
Four distinct purposes for engaging in scenario planning logically ﬂow from 
the interactions between content and process on one continuum, and be-
tween thinking and action on another (van der Heijden, 2004). Content 
and process form the horizontal axis, while thinking and action form the 
vertical axis, creating four cells. These four cells delineating distinct pur-
poses of scenario planning are as follows:
• Making sense
• Optimal strategy
• Anticipation
• Adaptive learning
A scenario planning project can focus on one or more of these purposes. 


---PAGE BREAK---

84 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
Making Sense
The content-thinking combination—or making sense—is aimed at un-
derstanding the external environment. Scenario projects framed from this 
purpose result in contextual scenarios, or what Wack called “learning sce-
narios.” Making-sense scenarios do not often provide major strategic in-
sights for practicing managers because they do not provide a framework for 
decision making. These projects are useful for deﬁning uncertain elements 
or exploring the external environment in general. Success in making-sense 
projects depends on deﬁning appropriate questions for analysis. However, 
the intent of this purpose is to gain a new understanding of things in the 
environment that are unclear and need deﬁnition, exploration, and analysis.
Optimal Strategy
Developing the content and action—or the purpose of optimal strategy—
is aimed at using scenarios speciﬁcally to test a strategy already in place. 
Projects based on this purpose often feature an organization “trying out” 
scenarios as a one-time effort. Few success stories are documented using the 
optimal strategy purpose in that stand-alone scenario efforts do not often 
lead to strategic learning or insights. Reasons for the lack of success include 
difﬁculties in shifting away from predictive thinking, inability to truly en-
tertain multiple possible futures, variations on proven scenario planning 
processes, and a lack of time and commitment to the project.
Anticipation
Thinking-process projects—those with the purpose of anticipation—are 
new projects initiated within in a continual, ongoing scenario planning 
cycle. Think of these scenario projects as continuous quality improvement 
for planning in organizations. Combining thinking and process into antici-
pation, these projects are focused on developing and continuing what van 
der Heijden (2004) calls “the strategic conversation” in organizations. Such 
an ongoing conversation builds shared mental models of the external en-
vironment and of the organization itself. Organizations that are successful 
with this purpose are able to prevent groupthink by continuously generating 
new ideas in the scenario planning project, and they also prevent fragmen-
tation by building an organizational community and generating collective 
understanding.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
85
Adaptive Learning
The action-process combination—adaptive learning—is the scenario pur-
pose in which an organization is continually using scenarios to understand 
the environment, holding internal strategic conversations, and taking action 
to leverage strategic opportunities. Adaptive organizational learning is the 
ultimate aim of scenario work because it signals an organization that learns 
and changes from its own experience to navigate the turbulent business en-
vironment. Furthermore, these organizations are simultaneously developing 
a better understanding and awareness of uncertain elements in the environ-
ment and improving the quality of the internal strategic conversation.
Learning-Decision Scenarios
Beyond these four purposes of scenario projects, scenario planning literature 
and many of the documented processes clearly state that scenarios are also 
effectively used to consider a speciﬁc decision, project, or issue. For example, 
leaders at Royal Dutch/Shell often faced key speciﬁc decisions that required 
the kind of analysis presented in scenario planning, such as the possibility 
of constructing a new oil-drilling rig in a new location. Scenarios were built 
around the possibilities of how such an investment might turn out. 
In the early years at Royal Dutch/Shell, Wack repeatedly had a response 
of “So what?” from managers after they would participate in his scenario 
presentations. The ﬁrst-generation scenarios were always learning scenarios; 
their purpose was not to impel action but to gain understanding and insight 
(Wack, 1985a). Wack therefore called the ﬁrst-generation scenarios “learn-
ing scenarios.” Initial scenarios rarely have an impact on managers’ mental 
models because they often do not provide a basis on which managers could 
exercise their judgment.
The World Economic Forum has developed and published scenarios for 
a variety of regions throughout the world. These scenarios are clearly learn-
ing scenarios, and they explore several different economic contexts, setting 
the stage to tell the stories that speculate on their implications. A variety of 
reports and scenario projects are free to download directly from the World 
Economic Forum at www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/Scenarios/index.htm.
Eventually, a high degree of utility was realized in a second round of 
scenario development. Second-generation scenarios became the “decision 
scenarios.” Wack’s insights developed when he realized that to affect the 


---PAGE BREAK---

86 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
managers’ core thinking, he needed to target the scenarios to the deepest 
concerns of the decision maker; and to accomplish that, he needed to tailor-
ﬁt the scenarios to challenge the mental models of the managers who would 
use them. Moreover, the scenarios also had to be targeted at a key issue or 
decision the managers were facing.
“Decision scenarios explore for facts out there, but they aim at percep-
tions inside the head of critical decision makers. Their purpose is to gather 
and transform information of potential strategic signiﬁcance into fresh per-
ceptions that then lead to strategic insights that were previously beyond the 
mind’s reach—those that would not even have been considered” (Wack, 
1985a, p. 88).
The two-tiered approach to scenario planning was effective at Shell. 
To summarize, the ﬁrst round of scenarios were context-setting scenarios—
learning scenarios—that explored the external environment. The second 
round of scenarios were tailor-ﬁt to the mental models of the managers—
decision scenarios. This tiered approach is reﬂected in Wack’s (1985a) use of 
a cherry tree as a metaphor (see Figure 5.2):
Scenarios are like cherry trees: cherries grow neither on the trunk, nor 
on the large boughs; they grow on the small branches of the tree. None-
theless, a tree needs a trunk and large branches in order to grow small 
branches. The global, macro-scenarios are the trunk; the large branches 
are the country scenarios developed by Shell operating companies, in 
which factors individual to their own countries—predetermined and 
uncertain—are taken into account and added. But the real fruits of the 
scenarios are picked at the small branches, the focused scenarios which 
are custom tailored around a strategic issue or a speciﬁc market or in-
vestment project. (p. 83)
To apply scenarios in this tiered way, decision makers would have to 
entertain several rounds of scenario construction. This is why most single 
instances of scenario planning fail. For example, ﬁrst the global/macro sce-
narios should be constructed. These simply set the context for the appropri-
ate industry. These are likely to be scenarios that capture external factors 
only. Once complete, and depending on the size of the organization, deci-
sion makers can move into more speciﬁc scenarios focused on a region (in 
the case of a truly global organization with numerous regional ofﬁces) or 
a speciﬁc strategic issue. When scenario planning is adopted as a way of 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
87
thinking in organizations, the ways in which scenarios can be used expands 
drastically. 
To do speciﬁc analyses of parts of the business, one develops “focused 
scenarios” custom-tailored around a strategic issue, or a speciﬁc market 
or investment project. But you cannot start with such focused scenarios 
because you will almost certainly miss key things, or cast the focused 
scenarios in the wrong way. You must wide-angle ﬁrst, to get the big 
picture, and them zoom in on your business speciﬁcs. (Wack, 1985a, 
p. 92)
Some scenario planning experts favor a highly speciﬁc approach from 
the start. For example, Louis van der Merwe tells stories about scenario 
projects he has observed in which the facilitator spent two full days deﬁn-
ing the initial strategic question. Asking the right question is important; 
and the more speciﬁc the purpose, the easier it is to assess upon project 
completion. However, the context, situation, decision maker conversations, 
and other information will determine the level of focus required. There are 
no hard rules here, but the context will usually indicate when enough detail 
is reached. Gaining people’s understanding and readiness to move forward 
is both hard to miss and a key indicator to proceed.
F I G U R E  5.2  Scenarios Are Like Cherry Trees
Local “Learning” Scenarios
Global/Macro Scenarios
Focused/Tailored
“Decision” Scenarios


---PAGE BREAK---

88 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
ASKING THE QUESTION
The question that is posed directs the purpose of the scenario project. The 
ﬁrst priority is to develop a clear question that will set the tone of the proj-
ect. Time should be spent reﬁning the question. The goal of the project is to 
examine the range of possible environments in which strategic choices can 
play out, and all of these have signiﬁcant implications for how the initial 
question can be answered. It is important to remember that when dealing 
with complex, strategic puzzles, there is no perfect answer. Therefore, ask-
ing the question is not meant to ﬁnd a single correct answer. Rather, it is to 
explore a variety of answers and the implications that each carries with it. 
Scenario thinking “isn’t a magic 8-ball, a process where all you need to ask 
is ‘should we do x?’ (and getting ‘ask again later’ as a result is neither use-
ful nor surprising)” (Cascio, 2009, p. 1). The original question of purpose 
should be revisited as the project progresses. Examining the question repeat-
edly suggests a willingness to continuously check progress and make sure 
the project is on track, which in turn may lead to a better question. The rest 
of this book is aimed at how to go about providing a variety of answers to 
the initial question, considering their implications, and assessing the range 
of answers that can be developed.
A few sample questions to consider are as follows:
• How can we retain our current value proposition in a high-change 
environment?
• Should we introduce a completely new product or service?
• How can we more effectively integrate our strengths to enhance the 
value we provide to our customers and increase our efﬁciency?
• What are the major technological advances on the horizon that we 
have not thought about?
Once the purpose of the project has been clariﬁed, it can be docu-
mented in the project proposal. The next step is to move on to estimating 
the scope of the project and a general time frame. 
TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION’S PURPOSE AND QUESTION
The case study of Technology Corporation started with an initial meeting and 
conversation with corporate leaders, including the CEO, the vice president 
of ﬁnance, the vice president of human resources, and the vice president of 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
89
product design. It was decided that the purpose for using scenarios was part 
anticipation and part organizational learning. The priority of the project 
was to anticipate major potential changes in Small Business Innovation 
Research (SBIR) funding policy, as well as major developments in the 
technology industry. In part, the project was also aimed at making sense 
of the external environment, and organization leaders were clear that 
they wanted to spend time exploring the things they didn’t know they 
didn’t know. While it would be the ﬁrst scenario project inside Technology 
Corporation, two of the leaders had prior exposure to scenario planning. 
Both expressed interest in the learning orientation that scenario planning 
demands, adding that learning something unexpected about their industry 
would be of high value. Leaders settled on the following question to frame 
the scenario project:
How can we balance the number of projects we initiate, with a ﬁrmer 
commitment to producing marketable products and generating rev-
enue, and wean ourselves from relying on a single source of funding?
DEFINING THE ESTIMATED  
SCOPE AND TIME FRAME
The next task is to develop a sense of the scope of the project. This is largely 
dependent on the deﬁned purpose of the project. Key items to consider are 
the amount of time and resources the organization is willing to invest in 
the project, deadlines that may be relevant, and how far into the future the 
scenarios will reach.
Before attempting to estimate details about the time frame, it is useful 
to know what is generally involved in scenario projects. Although each proj-
ect is different, most can be expected to involve interviews and initial data 
gathering, two to three full-day workshops (spaced out over a few weeks) 
to build the scenarios, and two to three full-day workshops (spaced out 
over a few weeks) to consider the implications of the scenarios. The space 
between workshops is important for allowing participants to reﬂect on and 
absorb ideas and information. Given these general guidelines, projects can 
be expected to require ﬁve to nine weeks of commitment at a minimum. 
Small projects with a clear focus may be able to move faster, and, of course, 
large projects involving multiple organizational units over varying locations 


---PAGE BREAK---

90 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
can take longer. The purpose of this part of the scenario project proposal is 
simply to estimate how long the project will take, clarifying any deadlines 
or other critical dates that may pose barriers to the project.
The time line can be represented graphically, in a list, or in a particular 
software program. The point is to have a general estimation of the proj-
ect. Will it be ﬁve weeks or nine? Are there other critical deadlines that 
may draw attention and participation away from the project that must be 
considered?
The time line should also include general agreement on the estimated 
number of workshops that will be aimed at scenario development and the num-
ber that will be used for scenario consideration. In other words, the proposal 
should include a framework for the approximate time investment on the 
part of the decision makers and key stakeholders in the organization. 
HOW FAR INTO THE FUTURE?
This part of the scenario proposal must also consider how far into the future 
the scenarios will reach. Will they explore ﬁve years or twenty-ﬁve? This 
span is commonly referred to as the time horizon in scenario literature. “If it 
takes three years to set up the widget factory, a ﬁve year target for the future 
exercise would be useful to think through initial operating environment, 
while a 12 year exercise will help to think about what things will be like over 
time” (Cascio, 2009, p. 1). Cascio (2009) also recommends using political 
cycles for considering how far the scenarios should explore. For example, in 
the United States, scenarios that extend at least eight years into the future 
are assured a change in the presidency, which will have pros and cons associ-
ated with the party in power. Another strategy is to consider key forces that 
one is already familiar with and play them out beyond what is known (e.g., 
what does the 5G wireless network look like?) (Cascio, 2009). 
A recent project I facilitated involved cell-phone technology. Given the 
pace of current technological development, the scenarios we created reached 
just ﬁve years into the future. The organization was looking at a few speciﬁc 
decisions driven by competition and emerging, cutting-edge technology. As 
a team, we looked at forces in the more immediate future to inform the spe-
ciﬁc decisions in question. Certainly, it would have been a useful exercise to 
look further into the future beyond, say, the 5G cell-phone network. How-
ever, we chose a time frame that ﬁt the purpose of the project as the decision 
makers had deﬁned it.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
91
The time horizon should also be included in the project proposal, but it 
may be adjusted as the project progresses. Incoming information, reshaped 
perceptions, and new understandings of the internal and external environ-
ments can reshape how far the scenarios should explore. 
TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION’S SCOPE AND TIME FRAME 
Leaders in Technology Corporation were excited about using scenarios to 
explore the question they had deﬁned and were ready to commit substan-
tial time to the project. Leaders agreed to three half- to full-day workshops 
focused on developing scenarios, and three half- to full-day workshops fo-
cused on using scenarios, with additional time as needed by team members 
to prepare for the workshops and conduct further research. We expected 
the project to be completed in approximately three months (see Figure 5.3).
Leaders further agreed that scenarios reaching ﬁfteen years into the fu-
ture would be useful in provoking strategic insights about the organization, 
its market, and how it might evolve.
BUILDING THE SCENARIO TEAM  
AND DETERMINING ROLES
Getting the right people involved in the scenario project is absolutely criti-
cal. To be effective, projects must involve the people who will use the sce-
narios, as well as a representative from each level of the company. During 
the project preparation phase, important stakeholder groups should be iden-
tiﬁed, individuals with a high degree of organization knowledge should be 
recruited, internal leaders at all levels of the organization should be identi-
ﬁed, and the scenario team can be assembled. The scenario team manages 
the project. Some suggested roles are described next.
PROJECT LEADER
The project leader is obviously responsible for directing the scenario project. 
This person is often an external consultant with expertise in the scenario 
planning system, and he or she should have signiﬁcant experience in a va-
riety of business processes and change interventions. It is a good practice 
to partner an internal expert to colead the project if an external consultant 
is the main facilitator. Such a partnership allows the internal leader (and 


---PAGE BREAK---

F I G U R E  5.3  Technology Corporation’s Time Line and Scope
Initial Meeting
and
Project Initiation
Interviews with
7–10 people (all
senior managers
and a cross section)
3 Workshops for
Scenario
Development
Scenario
Presentation
3 Workshops for
Scenario
Implementation
Follow-up
Evaluative
Interviews
Survey Research
Data Collection
(Pretest)
Survey Research
Data Collection
(Posttest)
2 hours
1 hour per interview
4 hours each = 12 hours
2 hours
4 hours each = 12 hours
1 hour per interview
September
September/October
October
End October
November
Late November/
December


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
93
therefore the organization) to gain scenario planning expertise, and it can 
help navigate the project inside the organization.
TEAM MEMBERS
Team members will participate in all of the workshops, generally be respon-
sible for developing the detailed scenario story lines, and will accomplish 
much of their work through subteams. For example, a subteam is often as-
signed to work on each scenario, provide further details, and write the sce-
nario narrative. The team should include someone from each level of the 
organization, so that the team is ultimately cross-level and cross-functional.
COORDINATOR
One individual should be responsible for convening the group, managing 
schedules, reserving spaces and locations for scenario work, creating internal 
mechanisms for the scenario team to communicate, and performing other 
administrative functions. 
REMARKABLE PEOPLE
Because scenario planning is a system designed to stretch the thinking in-
side the organization, it should involve people with diverse backgrounds 
and expertise. Perhaps Pierre Wack’s greatest contribution to modern sce-
nario planning is the inclusion of what he called “remarkable people.” By 
this, he simply meant people with a completely different outlook or mental 
model than those inside the organization working on the issue and who 
were known for their ability to think unconventionally. Global Business 
Network has continued this tradition by frequently using musicians, art-
ists, bench scientists, and other people from a wide range of backgrounds to 
provide alternate perspectives in scenario projects. 
In one of my own early projects, I did not consider the importance of 
building a solid scenario planning team. I neglected spending time deﬁning 
roles and responsibilities, and with a team loosely formed within the orga-
nization, the project suffered because no one was responsible for basic func-
tions of the project. For example, workshops and meetings were ill attended 
because no one was coordinating the project activities. With few partici-
pants attending the workshops, one can imagine that there was little learn-
ing, ownership, buy-in, and implementation of the project outcomes. In the 
end, the scenarios were never communicated throughout the organization 


---PAGE BREAK---

94 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
because they did not involve enough of the managers’ thinking. In this case, 
my own failure to see the importance of establishing clear roles and respon-
sibilities led to an ineffective project. However, it was a valuable learning 
experience that I will not forget. Once the scenario team members and roles 
have been identiﬁed, important conversations about outcomes can begin.
TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION’S SCENARIO TEAM AND ROLES
Technology Corporation’s scenario team and roles were deﬁned after some 
conversation and clariﬁcation. Names have been omitted, but the roles were 
as follows:
• Project leader
• Team members. The team was composed of the CEO, the vice 
president of ﬁnance, the vice president of human resources, the vice 
president of product design, three managers, and two line workers.
• Coordinators. Two coordinators were involved in this project, the 
CEO’s Executive assistant and another manager.
• Remarkable people. Three remarkable people participated in the 
project, at various times. One was invited by the CEO, and two were 
recruited by the project leader.
• Others. Other participants from Technology Corporation helped at 
speciﬁc times, but they were not attached to the project as intimately 
as team members. It is common for additional members to move in 
and out of the project, with a base of consistent team members.
ARTICULATING THE GENERAL  
EXPECTED OUTCOMES
It is important to know at the outset if a ﬁnancial analysis, a recommenda-
tion regarding a speciﬁc decision, ongoing organizational learning, or some-
thing else is sought as a result of the project. Time spent on clarifying the 
initial purpose of the project provides a general idea of what is expected, 
but additional conversations should consider any speciﬁc expectations. The 
bulk of the scenario literature has ignored any process for assessing scenario 
planning efforts. In contrast, this book assumes that scenario planning can 
and should be assessed. Speciﬁc strategies for assessing scenario projects are 
covered in Phase 5—Project Assessment, but it is wise to decide how the 
project will be assessed from the beginning. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
95
Precisely how to measure the effects of scenario projects can be tricky. 
Assessing the costs associated with a major industry shift that did not hap-
pen because it was anticipated through the scenario planning system is a 
challenging activity. However, estimates can be made. Estimates of savings 
due to anticipating major business discontinuities, or proﬁts gained through 
strategic insights, or both, can and should be part of the scenario project. 
Chapter 10 provides further details and examples for estimating the 
ﬁnancial beneﬁts of a scenario planning project, but in the project prep-
aration phase, it is useful to consider a basic ﬁnancial assessment model. 
Swanson’s (2004) cost/beneﬁt model is a simple tool for thinking about the 
ﬁnancial beneﬁts of any scenario planning project:
Performance Value – Cost = Beneﬁt
In the context of scenario planning, the costs of a project are relatively easy 
to estimate. The performance value is the tricky part. It can be helpful to simply 
ask decision makers, “What is the value that you place on a single novel strate-
gic insight?” (van der Merwe, 2005), and the ensuing conversation will further 
clarify expected outcomes and intended goals of the project. An additional use-
ful question to pose is “If this project exceeded your expectations, what would 
be true?” It is not a requirement that scenario planning projects carry a ﬁnan-
cial assessment component, but if they do, they are more likely to garner 
support from executives and project stakeholders. It is also important for 
those interested in furthering the discipline of scenario planning to think 
about the value of the contributions that are made through the scenario 
planning system. The more evidence that is built in to show the beneﬁts of 
scenario planning, the more conﬁdently its beneﬁts can be promoted.
Outside of ﬁnancial data, many other tools can be used to assess in-
dividual learning, mental models, decision making, and other important 
outcomes of scenario planning. These tools tend to be more academic in 
nature and may not be appropriate in some situations. However, when used, 
they can make a very compelling case. These tools can provide valuable in-
formation about learning, perceptions, decision making, and other critical 
outcomes of scenario planning. Projects using these tools may look like re-
search projects—but why wouldn’t they? The purpose of these projects is to 
discover new knowledge about some organizational element as it may relate 
to the scenario project. For the purposes of project preparation, it is useful 
to know if decision makers are interested in assessing particular items. 


---PAGE BREAK---

96 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
The literature suggests that scenario planning can beneﬁt organizations 
in several ways. Outcomes commonly associated with scenario planning in-
clude the following:
• Individual and organizational learning
• Improved decision making
• Stronger communication systems 
• Shared mental models of the internal and external environments
• Heightened organizational performance
• Greater organizational agility
• Stronger ability to ﬁt with the environment
• Deeper anticipatory capacity
• Increased strategic insights
These are all domains that have related measures that can be assessed at the 
start and again at the end of a scenario planning project. Measures that are 
important to stakeholders and that are related to the purpose of the proj-
ect should be agreed on as part of the purpose and documented in the 
project proposal.
TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION’S GENERAL EXPECTED OUTCOMES
Leaders in Technology Corporation expressed interest in knowing whether 
employees viewed the organization as a place that emphasized learning, 
whether decision making could become a more team-oriented activity, and 
whether better communication could be facilitated through the scenario 
project. Leaders also placed a high value on the potential to know what 
things to pay attention to. In other words, if certain events were indicators 
that other events were about to happen, there was great value in indentify-
ing these “indicators.” Finally, although leaders and executives in Technol-
ogy Corporation did not expect a tangible return on investment, they were 
interested in considering how the project could add ﬁnancial value.
TAKING MEASURES RELATIVE TO  
THE EXPECTED OUTCOMES
Once the expected outcomes of the scenario planning project have been 
decided, any measures relevant to those expected outcomes can be taken. 
Think of this as any measure that can be taken at the start of the project 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
97
and then compared to a second measure of the same item at the conclusion 
of the project—a simple pretest/posttest assessment strategy. The general 
plan for what will be measured, where, how, and for what purpose should be 
included in the scenario project proposal.
RELATED MEASURES AT TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION
The measures taken at Technology Corporation mapped directly to the ex-
pected outcomes that were identiﬁed. We chose instruments that had a his-
tory of validity and utility to measure the expected outcomes. The selection 
was a collaborative process based on conversations that clariﬁed what proj-
ect sponsors were hoping to achieve and other desirable changes that might 
logically ﬂow from a scenario planning project.
Learning Orientation —>  Watkins and Marsick’s Dimensions of 
Learning Organization Questionnaire 
(DLOQ)
Team Decision Making —>  Scott and Bruce’s General Decision-
Making Style Survey (GDMS)
Communication 
—>  Van der Merwe’s Conversation Quality 
and Engagement Checklist
Indicators 
—>  A list of indicators or “signposts”
Value-Added 
—>  Swanson’s Cost/Beneﬁt Analysis
CONCLUSION
The components presented in this chapter represent the critical ﬁrst steps of 
any scenario project. Deﬁning these components at the start of the project 
will create anchors for other parts of the project later on. The scenario proj-
ect proposal, the major output of the project preparation phase, is designed 
to clarify assumptions, expectations, and get the project moving. Done well, 
the project’s purpose, scenario team, time frame, estimated measures, out-
comes, and beneﬁts have been articulated and provide a starting point. In 
the event that disagreements ensue about the content of the improvement pro-
posal, expectations can be clariﬁed and changed before moving ahead. The 
scenario project proposal provides a general outline for the project and serves 
as a contract for moving forward with the scenario planning effort. What 
follows is a sample that illustrates the components discussed in this chapter.


---PAGE BREAK---

98 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
SAMPLE SCENARIO PROJECT PROPOSAL
DATE: 
Month / Day / Year
TO: 
Organization Contact / CEO / Relevant Decision Maker [title]
FROM: 
T. Chermack
RE: 
Scenario Project Proposal
The purpose of this document is to establish the general, agreed-on objectives for a scenario 
project in Technology Corporation. This document describes the purpose of the project, the 
estimated scope and time frame, the composition of the scenario team, the general expected 
outcomes, and the measurements to be taken prior to the start of the project. Also included is a 
general ﬁnancial beneﬁt estimate.
Purpose
The purpose of a scenario project at Technology Corporation is to help make sense of a rapidly 
changing technology industry and environment, and to help Technology Corporation anticipate 
possible major shifts in the industry. More speciﬁcally, Technology Corporation is struggling 
with the ineffectiveness of outdated planning models and intends to develop a learning-focused 
approach to strategy. Rather than hike proﬁt expectations, Technology Corporation desires to 
shift its culture toward one that supports continuous learning and development, improved 
communication across silos, and shared, collaborative decision making. Speciﬁc issues include 
questions about the amount of resources invested in each R&D project. Based on learning 
scenarios generated for the technology/R&D industry, Technology Corporation also intends to 
understand how to better distribute its resources across more viable projects expected to 
eventually lead to marketable technology products. 
Estimated Scope and Time Frame
The project will begin with an initial organizing meeting starting on [mm/dd/yy]. Technology 
Corporation estimates that six subsequent full-day workshops will be used over approximately 
eight weeks to develop scenarios and use them in examining potential futures. Technology 
Corporation also agrees to allow [internal or external consultant name] access to interview 
participants from multiple levels of the organization, access to internal organizational records, 
and other items relevant to the project. The scenarios will have a horizon year of [ﬁfteen years 
out], which extends the scenarios into the creative future of the technology industry.
Scenario Team and Roles
The scenario team will include Pierre Wack as the project leader. Deepak Chopra, Katherine 
Eisenhardt, Sansai Hosokawa, Candace Pert, Joe Dispenza, Bikram Choudhury, and Sen no 
Rikyu will be team members. Pema Chodron will be the on-site project coordinator, and will 
serve as the general administrative contact for the project. Pierre Wack will recruit additional 
people with diverse backgrounds as he sees ﬁt throughout the project workshops and meetings  
to introduce alternative thinking.
General Expected Outcomes
Technology Corporation expects several outcomes from the scenario project. These are 
assessments of (1) perceptions of organizational learning characteristics, (2) team decision 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
99
making, (3) communication and conversation skills, (4) clear indicators or “signals” of events 
about to unfold, and (5) a cost/beneﬁt analysis. Additional outcomes that are standard in scenario 
planning are strategic insights about products and services in the technology industry, four unique 
and detailed scenarios of the industry, and time devoted to dialogue about strategic issues. 
Measurements
Given the expected outcomes of this project, measurements will include ﬁnancial beneﬁt 
estimates of the scenario projects and assessments of participant learning, decision making, and 
conversation quality. The following measurements will be taken from project participants before 
the project begins and at the end of the scenario project so as to determine changes:
 
1. Dimensions of Learning Organization Characteristics
 
2. General Decision-Making Style Survey
 
3. Conversation Quality and Engagement Checklist
 
4. Indicators or “signals”
 
5. Cost/Beneﬁt Analysis
The cost/beneﬁt estimate is provided here. We deﬁned the performance value as the value of the 
scenario project with the assumption that it will provoke a strategic insight. We then estimate 
the value of such an insight in the case that it provides a competitive edge or prepares us to react 
faster. From this value, we subtract the costs of the project to derive the beneﬁt:
 
Performance value 
$250,000  
(details of estimate below)
        –         Cost 
$100,000  
(total breakdown of costs below)
  
Beneﬁt 
$150,000
Performance Value Estimate
The performance value estimate follows. Assumption: The organization is able to generate a 
signiﬁcant, innovative idea as a result of the scenario project that leads to a new technology 
product/service. Let’s assume the product is a technology communication device. In 2009, RIM 
reported shipping ﬁfty million BlackBerry smart phones, generating $11 billion in revenue. 
Technology Corporation is much smaller, but based on a similarly priced device, assume that 
Technology Corporation is able to develop, patent, market, and sell ﬁve million devices, 
generating (conservatively) $8 million. Start-up, R&D, marketing, patenting, prototyping, and 
other development costs can be estimated at approximately $5 million, which leaves $3 million. 
Again, being highly conservative, we reduce the performance value to $250,000 based on other 
potential development costs.
Cost Estimate
Costs related to facilitating the scenario project are as follows:
 
Consulting Fees  =  $40,000   (6 days of facilitation at $5,000 per day = $30,000 + 
$10,000 for other meetings and time spent on the 
project)
 
Materials  
=  $5,000   (includes printing, transcription, software, participant 
materials, preparation of all reports and scenario 
packages, and all other project materials)


---PAGE BREAK---

100 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
  
Travel  
=  $5,000   (6 air tickets from Denver, CO, to [location] at $300 
each = $1,800 + 15 nights’ lodging [location] at $150/
night = $2,250 + $950 miscellaneous or extra travel)
  
Meals  
=  $6,300   (6 workshop days × 3 meals per day × 7 participants 
[assume $50 per person, per meal] = $6,300)
 
Time away from
 
regular work  
=  $47,000   (This ﬁgure assumes approximately 27 participants at 
any given time and estimates that each participant may 
cost approximately $2,000 in time away from his or her 
normally assigned functions)
 
Total Project 
 
Cost Estimate  
=  $100,000


---PAGE BREAK---

 101
Phase 2— 
Scenario Exploration: 
Breathing In
The scenario exploration phase of the scenario system focuses on analyzing 
the external and internal environments of the organization. During these 
analyses, the initial issue or purpose of the project from the project prepara-
tion phase must be kept in mind as information is gathered. This chapter 
describes a variety of methods and tools that can be used to assess the exter-
nal and internal situation, context, and problem (see Figure 6.1).
Scenario exploration is divided into two general parts, external analysis 
and internal analysis. These two parts establish the boundaries of the proj-
ect in preparation for the next phase, scenario development. Several tools for 
gathering information about the external environment and two workshops 
for the internal analysis are detailed. The workshops are intended to stimu-
late strategic thinking, familiarize participants with key issues, and prepare 
participants for constructing scenarios as described in Chapter 7.
EXTERNAL ANALYSIS
Information gathering is the foundation of the analysis of the external en-
vironment. The scenario exploration phase involves data gathering both on 
a general level and about the speciﬁc issue under consideration. The goal of 
information gathering is to learn and to expand the project team’s familiar-
ity with the industry and relevant economic and social factors. A secondary 
goal is to gather information relevant to the speciﬁc issue or decision articu-
lated in the project proposal. “Being a scenario planner, therefore, means 
6


---PAGE BREAK---

102 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
becoming aware of one’s ﬁlter and continually readjusting it to let in more 
data about the world, but without becoming overwhelmed” (Schwartz, 
1991, p. 61). Everyone has biases, and they show up in scenario planning. 
A key skill is the ability to be aware of biases and head off conﬁnement in 
thinking. Thus, another purpose of the scenario exploration is to expand 
the assumptions, beliefs, and possibilities evident in the industry or environ-
ment being studied, thereby expanding one’s ﬁlter.
There are many ways to approach the data-gathering stage. Three tools 
for helping to structure information about the external environment include 
STEEP forces, De Bono’s (1990) thinking hats, and a SWOT analysis (fo-
cusing on the opportunities and the threats). 
F I G U R E  6.1  The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Exploration 
Phase
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
103
While each of these approaches is reviewed in further detail, the best 
solution is to develop a method that works for a particular situation. In other 
words, there are many tools and processes for exploring the external environ-
ment, and good scenario planners use tools that ﬁt the organization and the 
purpose for engaging in a scenario project. The ultimate goal of this phase 
is to develop a rich understanding of the context in which the organiza-
tion is operating. Data gathering, analysis, and synthesis are a complicated 
function to perform in today’s complex organizations, and there are no hard 
and fast rules. “Don’t worry about your ﬁles; worry about your perceptions” 
(Schwartz, 1991, p. 62). Stated another way, in this phase, you have to de-
velop awareness of and expand your perceptions of the external environment.
The start of a scenario project requires getting up to speed with the 
general industry. It is helpful to visit and revisit several aspects of a given in-
dustry looking for trends, key factors, and other forces that have an obvious 
inﬂuence on the industry. At this point in a scenario project, it is important 
to create time for rigorous investigation of the industry and reﬂection on the 
dynamic and relevant forces at play. Pierre Wack referred to this as “breath-
ing in,” and he was known to go to great lengths to put himself into new 
unrelated physical environments to think about his projects. For example, 
he spent signiﬁcant amounts of time in Japan, India, and the Saudi desert 
thinking about scenario projects he was working on. The primary purpose 
is to learn as much as possible about the industry—its composition and 
complexity—and to see it all from a new perspective.
SOCIAL, TECHNOLOGICAL, ECONOMIC, ENVIRONMENTAL,  
AND POLITICAL (STEEP) FORCES 
A tool for structuring thinking and key categories to make sure you do not 
overlook any is the well-known STEEP analysis. The STEEP analysis is a 
logical and effective way to begin. In reality, these are simply general catego-
ries to include in any exploration of the external environment (Burt & van 
der Heijden, 2002). This section offers examples of each force that might be 
considered in the general and global context. 
Social Forces
Population trends are clear social forces. Usually, population is also clas-
siﬁed as a predetermined element—something that can be estimated with 
a high degree of certainty. This means that at any given point in time, we 


---PAGE BREAK---

104 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
have access to data that will indicate population numbers. Estimates with 
high accuracy can be made of what the population growth will look like 
over any speciﬁed number of years. Cultural diversity is another social force 
that will be a signiﬁcant driver over the next half century. Literacy, popula-
tion migration, and emerging societies can also be considered social forces.
Technological Forces
It is difﬁcult to conceive of all the possible technological drivers of our time. 
Advances such as multimedia, the Internet, various mobile technologies, 
alternate fuel sources, and music format are just a few. Technology may be 
the greatest single category of change drivers that we will cope with over 
the next millennium. Web 2.0 technologies such as Second Life, Facebook, 
Twitter, and others are popular though their true contributions to organi-
zational efﬁciency are yet to be determined. Key questions about technol-
ogy continue to relate to how technology’s role in increasing efﬁciency and 
supporting collaboration over great distances can be leveraged, and whether 
they can increase ﬁrm performance or are simply social distractions.
Economic Forces
As I write this, the global economy is without doubt, the headlining issue. 
Fluctuating markets are the high-priority questions on everyone’s minds. 
The economies of China and India are likely to continue to inﬂuence other 
economies around the globe. The growth of these countries in terms of the 
economic development will affect the social forces not only in each of these 
countries, but throughout the rest of the world as well. Other economic 
forces include ﬂuctuating currency exchange rates, changing interest rates, 
taxes, fees, and costs of doing business, to name a few.
Environmental Forces
Limited oil reserves are driving nations to consider alternate fuel sources. Global 
climate change, storm activity in various parts of the world, and the limits of 
physical and geographic space in some countries are all examples of environ-
mental forces that will have an impact on business and society in the future.
Political Forces
In today’s global economy, political forces have the potential to shape in-
dustries like never before. Governmental transitions in countries like China 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
105
and India have led to outsourcing trends that have altered and will continue to 
alter the global economy. Policies and plans of national leaders also shape global 
perceptions. There is no denying the power of political forces in our world.
These categories should be kept in mind when reading newspapers and 
magazines, watching the news, surﬁng the Web, and doing any other ac-
tivities. The best advice in exploring these forces is to read widely and fre-
quently. Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feeds can help to stay connected 
to a user-deﬁned set of news feeds from an endless variety of sources and 
are a very effective way to efﬁciently scan headlines from around the world. 
FORECASTS
Scenarios generally ask what happens if forecasts are wrong, and a STEEP 
analysis will undoubtedly turn up forecasts. During this phase, it is useful 
to understand what the forecasts are saying; and in the next phase, the proj-
ect turns toward asking what if they are wrong. These forces and forecasts 
should be treated with skepticism, but they clearly contain information 
about the industry. Forecasts are “someone else’s understanding and judg-
ment crystallized in a ﬁgure which then becomes a substitute for thinking 
for the person who uses it” (Wack, 1985b, p. 89). The forces and forecasts 
contained in a STEEP analysis may provide useful information. However, 
the goal of scenario planning is to think deeply about the future, to learn 
about it, and to develop one’s own understanding and judgment about how 
to navigate uncertainty. 
DE BONO’S THINKING HATS
Thinking hats (De Bono, 1990) are a technique for thinking about complex 
issues. The approach is based on an assumption that when people think 
about complex issues, they are overcrowded with emotions, logic, data, 
hopefulness, and creativity. These factors are simply too much to make 
sense of at once. People need help breaking apart their thinking by dealing 
with each of these particular factors independently before combining them. 
The thinking hats represent six critical views for thinking about any com-
plex issue. Each is represented by a different color:
• The White Hat—Neutral and objective, this hat is concerned with 
data and an analytical view. Most of us are stuck here.
• The Red Hat—This hat represents the emotional view.


---PAGE BREAK---

106 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
• The Black Hat—The “devil’s advocate” hat, this is the cautious view.
• The Yellow Hat—This hat represents the completely positive, 
optimistic view.
• The Green Hat—The creative hat, this hat is for new ideas and 
perspectives.
• The Blue Hat—The blue hat is an organizing, synthesizing hat, 
representing overviews, summaries and conclusions.
The six thinking hats can be used in a variety of ways, and not only for 
external thinking. These hats can be used at any time during the scenario 
project, but they are sometimes most helpful when soliciting and capturing 
initial reactions and comments about the initial issue. Two different strate-
gies for using the hats are (1) single use and (2) sequential use (De Bono, 
1990).
In the course of a conversation, it may be useful to inject a different kind 
of thinking, in which case any of the hats can be called upon. The different 
hats can be used to explore a subject and introduce alternate perspectives.
Sequential use of the hats is also a ﬂexible approach and can be done in 
a variety of ways. A facilitator can choose one hat and ask the group to think 
from that perspective. Then another hat is chosen, and so on. Another ap-
proach is to assign a hat to each individual and ask that individual to think 
about the issue from that perspective. 
Two critical factors are important in using the thinking hats: discipline 
and timing. When individuals are asked to think according to a speciﬁc 
hat, they must stay with the hat’s perspective and represent that viewpoint 
for the sake of the group and the intent of the hats. If people are allowed to 
abandon their assigned hat, the danger is that they revert to their original, 
comfortable perspective, and the project gets more of the same. The other 
issue is timing. Because thinking in different ways can be uncomfortable 
for some people, using a short amount of deﬁned time for thinking in these 
alternate perspectives is effective because people will concentrate and focus 
on what they are being asked to do.
In Technology Corporation, we used the thinking hats with great ef-
fect. From the start, buy-in was high, thanks to an engaged CEO. This 
set the tone for experimenting with different modes of thinking, and par-
ticipants began to enjoy playing the various roles. The activity certainly got 
them consciously out of their default thinking patterns.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
107
Again, the thinking hats can be used in a variety of ways. They can be 
used in a group workshop to stimulate diverse thinking on the initial sce-
nario project purpose, to frame obvious issues in the external environment, 
and as a consulting tool to see the project in different ways, among many 
others. They can also be aimed at the external or internal environments. 
SWOT ANALYSIS
SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) analysis is prob-
ably the most common tool used in strategic thinking and planning. Al-
though the O and T especially are externally focused, SWOT analysis is 
described in detail in the next main section on internal analysis. 
SUMMARY
News media can often be more of a representation of what people are think-
ing than a reﬂection of the facts, so perusing numerous samples from vary-
ing “ﬁlters” is important when conducting an external analysis. For example, 
“[r]outinely pick up a dozen magazines from a newsstand and scan them. 
Include magazines you would not otherwise read” (Schwartz, 1991, p. 81).
While each scenario project will have particular investigative require-
ments, the following are subjects worth paying continual attention to 
(Schwartz, 1991):
• Science and technology 
• Perception-shaping events
• Music
• Fringes
Online sources are also valuable in expanding your personal ﬁlter. Rec-
ommended newsfeeds include Strategy+Business, Fast Company, BBC News, 
the New York Times, Wired, the New York Times Editorials, the Wall Street 
Journal, the World Economic Forum, Earth Trends, and the United Nations 
Development Programme.
INTERNAL ANALYSIS
The internal analysis is focused on understanding forces within the organiza-
tion. The most important tool for accomplishing this is interviews with key 
stakeholders of the organization. Additional tools include questionnaires, 


---PAGE BREAK---

108 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
observations, and existing organizational data. Other tools for internal anal-
ysis include the SWOT analysis, the theory of the business (Drucker, 1994), 
van der Heijden’s (1997, 2005a) business idea, Rummler and Brache’s (1991) 
levels of performance, and Swanson’s (1994, 2007) performance diagnosis 
matrix. Expert scenario planners use any tools that can help them understand 
an organization’s internal dynamics efﬁciently and effectively.
SWOT ANALYSIS
Readers may be surprised to see the recommended use of a SWOT analysis 
here because some people consider it an outdated strategic tool. A SWOT 
analysis is still a useful way to stimulate strategic thinking and get people 
into the mind-set to think about their organization. Odds are, most have 
used this approach before, and so it is a comfortable way to begin engaging. 
Using a tool that decision makers are familiar with is a helpful bridge into 
scenario planning.
Research warns that the biggest problem with SWOT analyses is 
that the outcomes are never used in any meaningful way (Chermack & 
Kasshanna, 2007). In a scenario project, the insights from a SWOT analysis 
are highly useful in understanding the organization and its internal poli-
tics, and they can increase the relevance of scenarios when inserted into the 
scenario stories developed later on. For example, if information from inter-
views with managers is used in the second round of scenario construction, it 
is likely that the scenarios will be more relevant and provide a better frame-
work for decision making. The key to a successful SWOT analysis is to 
use the information, even if it is as simple as feeding the results back to the 
participating group. Another common oversight with using SWOT is that 
the strengths and weaknesses relate to the internal environment, and the 
opportunities and threats relate to the external environment. The SWOT 
analysis is misused when the internal/external distinction is not made.
SWOT analysis is useful as long as it is not the sole means of internal 
environmental analysis. It contributes useful information and can be used 
in two distinct ways: (1) as a tool to structure data once collected and (2) 
as a tool to provoke further insights and areas in which to conduct further 
research. Figure 6.2 depicts the structure of a typical SWOT analysis.
At its essence, a SWOT analysis is a brainstorming exercise. Using a 
SWOT analysis at this stage of the planning system is beneﬁcial in that 
it explores the perceptions of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
109
threats. However, it is important to keep in mind that the analysis usually 
contains only the perceptions of managers and executives inside the organi-
zation. A useful SWOT analysis follows up with considerable investigation 
and conﬁrmation. 
It is also important to recognize that an item that falls under the 
strengths category can often be argued as a weakness as well. Thus, the 
danger of a SWOT analysis is in its forced dichotomies. Something is forced 
to be either a strength or a weakness when in reality it could be both, de-
pending on the contextual circumstances. This dilemma provides an ap-
propriate opportunity to use De Bono’s thinking hats to consider alternate 
perspectives.
SWOT Analysis Workshop
A SWOT analysis can be conducted in about a half day, with some prepa-
ration, depending on the number of people involved, and should be struc-
tured according to the model in Figure 6.2. Begin by communicating the 
objective to participants, explaining the process, and answering any ques-
tions. Next, simply ask individuals to list their perceptions of the organiza-
tion’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. These perceptions 
can be combined on a wall chart, computer-projected document, or other 
format. Dialogue is the natural outcome, as there will be varying perspec-
tives, ideas, and disagreement on the category to which a given force may 
belong. Keep in mind two critical points at this stage: (1) participants are 
F I G U R E  6.2  The Basic Process of a SWOT Analysis
1. Define the
 
objective of
the SWOT
analysis.
2. Explain the
 
SWOT
procedure.
6. Develop
actions for
 
moving
forward.
3. Individual
listing of
strengths,
weaknesses,
opportunities,
and threats.
4. Combine
individual
responses.
5. Engage group
in authentic
dialogue.


---PAGE BREAK---

110 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
verbalizing their perceptions, and (2) the outcomes of the conversation must 
be fed back to the participants. The strategic conversation has begun.
Corporate leaders in Technology Corporation decided to begin with 
a SWOT analysis because most of them were familiar with the process. It 
would be a comfortable way to get started. A conversation with leaders sug-
gested a few important factors for the SWOT analysis, including speciﬁc 
objectives and actions. Figure 6.3 shows the basic process of a SWOT analy-
sis for Technology Corporation. 
Combined and Distilled SWOT Data. Figure 6.4 shows the com-
bined and synthesized SWOT analysis for Technology Corporation. With 
redundancies eliminated, and after clariﬁcation and dialogue, the strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats are relatively simpliﬁed. The real util-
ity was in the conversation about items that are perceived to be strengths, 
which can often be argued as weaknesses. The sharing of perspective is how 
participants learn and begin working toward a shared mental model.
Several individuals had noticeable insights that came simply from tak-
ing the time to talk about strategic issues. It was clear that little to no time 
had been previously dedicated to having conversations about important is-
sues, and having them now was like a breath of fresh air. Once these conver-
sations began, participants enjoyed the ability to reﬂect, and thinking out 
loud became contagious.
F I G U R E  6.3  Technology Corporation’s Basic Process for SWOT Analysis
1. Objective of
the SWOT:
Prepare for
Scenario
Planning—
Launch the
process,
get an
overview of
perceptions.
2. Procedure:
List response,
combine
response,
dialogue.
6. Actions:
Use relevant
information
in scenario
planning—
focus where
perceptions
are most
different.
3. Individual
listing of
strengths,
weaknesses,
opportunities,
and threats.
4. Combine
individual
responses.
5. Dialogue.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
111
INTERVIEWS
Interviewing individuals or groups of people in an organization is a time-
consuming and detailed process that requires commitment and skill. Inter-
views can be considered as much an art as a science, and the only way to 
develop interviewing skills is through experience.
In scenario planning, the foundation of internal analysis is the content 
of interviews. They are a highly critical piece of the scenario planning sys-
tem as the interviews will reveal opinions, facts, experiences, beliefs, organi-
zational symbols, history, and more. Most important, interviews reveal what 
managers and executives are concerned about. Evoking, addressing, and 
highlighting these concerns is a requirement for scenarios to be effective. 
Interviews can be (1) structured, (2) unstructured, or (3) a combination 
of structured and unstructured. Structured interviews follow a predeter-
mined list of questions and can be scripted so that each interviewee is asked 
Strengths
Intellectual capital
Agile
Hardworking
Innovative
Proposal writing expertise
Ability to focus
Leaders at each level
Weaknesses
Reliant on funding strategy
Small—limited capacity
Tendency for ego-driven projects
Lack of teamwork/communication
Marketing strategy needs 
improvement
Internal functional silos
Opportunities
Leveraging skills to move projects 
to Phases II and III
Fewer projects and more focus
Collaborative effort
Leveraging 
brainpower—communication
Opportunities in manufacturing 
our own products (phase 
III–dependent)
Threats
Political removal/changes in SBIR  
funding
Inability to collaborate more 
effectively
Economic impact on funding 
sources
Competition—emerging 
companies doing what we  
do . . . better?
F I G U R E  6.4 Technology Corporation’s SWOT Analysis


---PAGE BREAK---

112 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
exactly the same questions. This approach limits responses to the content 
covered by the questions. Unstructured interviews usually follow a much 
more casual track and take the shape of a conversation. In this type of inter-
viewing, the content can extend to cover a much wider range of subjects and 
questions, and each interviewee can be asked a completely different set of 
questions. Combination-type interviews contain structured questions and 
also allow for follow-up and spontaneous questions. 
Group and telephone interviews and focus groups are other types of 
interviews, but they are not necessarily recommended for use in scenario 
planning. People are less likely to share their true opinions if interviewed in 
a group setting. Workshops tend to take care of group conversation and in-
teraction, and they can even function as team-building exercises. Telephone 
interviews do not allow for the face-to-face interaction that is important in 
scenario planning. Body language, mannerisms and other nonverbal com-
munication are valuable, as is the establishment of rapport and a relation-
ship with project participants. In addition, it is unlikely that an individual 
would share his or her true concerns with a stranger over the phone. 
Interviews in scenario planning projects should follow the combina-
tion-type approach. That is, speciﬁc questions should be asked of each par-
ticipant, but room for other issues and conversation should be allowed. The 
“seven questions” have gained popularity in scenario planning because they 
can surface the strategic agenda of decision makers. While there are a few 
varying interpretations of these seven questions, they generally fall into the 
following categories:
1. Clairvoyant
2. Good Scenario
3. Bad Scenario
4. Inheritances from the Past
5. Important Decisions Ahead and Priorities
6. Constraints in the System and Changes That Need to Be Made
7. Epitaph
Speciﬁc sample questions that pertain to each of these seven categories are 
as follows:
1. If you could speak with an [industry] oracle from [year], what three 
things would you like to know about the [organization]?


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
113
2. If the [organization, industry] were to collapse by [year] (a “bad” 
scenario), what might have caused the collapse and why?
3. If the [organization, industry] were thriving, growing, and moving 
in a genuinely positive direction (a “good” scenario) by the year 
[year], what would be true of it?
4. (a) What has surprised you (pleasantly or unpleasantly, speciﬁcally 
or generally) about the [organization, industry] in recent years? 
(b) What have been the memorable “turns” and why?
5. (a) What are the major challenges to be faced by [organization, in-
dustry, etc.] professionals in the next ﬁve years? (b) What are the 
obstacles to be overcome that keep you awake at night?
6. (a) What would hinder the ﬁeld from moving past these obstacles? 
(b) What forces could constrain the [e.g., organization and industry]? 
7. Imagine that your program is in danger of being completely cut. 
What is your argument for keeping it? 
Two common additional questions:
1. What would be some signs that the [organization, industry] is mov-
ing in a positive direction?
2. Any other uncertainties in the environment that might impact the 
future [organization, industry]?
The purpose of the interview stage is to become familiar with the men-
tal models (values, beliefs, assumptions, experiences, hopes, and dreams) 
of a cross section of the organization. The seven questions are the standard 
tool for accomplishing this, but in order for these questions to be effective, 
the establishment of a good relationship with each interviewee is critical. 
Interviewees should be allowed to add anything else they feel is relevant to 
the project, and they may want to know more about the scenario planning 
project as well.
OTHER DATA COLLECTION METHODS
Three other data collection methods can be useful in understanding the 
internal dynamics of an organization: questionnaires, observations, and ex-
isting data. Though these are not often featured or highlighted in published 
scenario cases or in existing scenario planning texts, they deserve mention 
because there may be times when their use is appropriate.


---PAGE BREAK---

114 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
Questionnaires
Questionnaires allow the collection of data from a large number of people, 
across locations, in a relatively efﬁcient manner. They are useful in getting 
a snapshot of current perceptions in the organization. For example, cul-
ture questionnaires might be used before starting the scenario construction 
workshops if culture comes up in several interviews as a barrier to engage-
ment in the scenario project. Change-readiness questionnaires can be use-
ful if there has been a lot of recent consulting activity in the organization, 
mergers, leadership changes, or reorganizations. Custom questionnaires 
can also be developed to access targeted information, but they can take 
some time.
Observations
Observations are useful in understanding abstract behaviors such as think-
ing, planning, and estimating (Swanson, 2007). Some think these behaviors 
are unaccountable, but observing people perform their work functions on 
the job can yield a great deal of qualitative and quantitative data. Observa-
tion requires a high level of skill, patience, and the ability to be unobtrusive 
and avoid changing how the individual being observed performs his or her 
work. However, if these assets are used expertly, great insights can be gener-
ated about the nature of knowledge-based work and how masters of speciﬁc 
content knowledge perform. 
Existing Data
Existing data should be used to the extent possible. Use of this data col-
lection method usually happens informally as one becomes oriented to the 
organization and its personalities, issues, industry, and culture. Particu-
larly relevant in scenario planning are previous uses of scenario planning 
and the outcomes, other planning tools that have been used, and other 
recent change initiatives. Financial and performance data, employee sur-
vey data, and customer data are all other useful data pools to examine. It 
is useful to know previous successes and failures with planning, and to 
know what was gained through such processes and where they may have 
collapsed. It is also useful to review reports from other external consul-
tants who may have been working with the organization to get a general 
feel for other recent change activity. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
115
THEORY OF THE BUSINESS/BUSINESS IDEA
In 1994, Drucker published “The Theory of the Business,” which was an 
attempt at understanding the primary growth loop of any organization. 
Drucker wrote:
These are the assumptions that shape any organization’s behavior, dic-
tate its decisions about what to do and what not to do, and deﬁne what 
the organization considers meaningful results. These assumptions are 
about markets. They are about identifying customers and competitors, 
their values and behavior. These are about technology and its dynamics, 
about a company’s strengths and weaknesses. These assumptions are 
about what a company gets paid for. They are what I call a company’s 
theory of the business. (p. 96)
Four critical aspects form the theory of the business:
• The assumptions about the environment, mission, and core 
competencies must ﬁt reality.
• The assumptions in these three areas must ﬁt each other.
• The theory of the business must be known and understood throughout 
the organization.
• The theory of the business must be tested constantly.
From a diagnostic perspective, it is helpful to know the status of each of 
these speciﬁcations. Scenario planning will address all of these points, but it 
is important to know at the start if, for example, the business idea is known, 
understood, and articulated throughout the organization. 
Related to the theory of the business is the business idea developed by 
van der Heijden (1997, 2005b). The business idea is based on system theory 
and system dynamics concepts. The business idea is simply a visual display 
of the primary growth loop—it is the business model. The business idea 
shows how the organization has understood a social need, created a novel 
idea about how to address that need, developed expertise in addressing that 
need, and created a viable business based on the perceived value of that need. 
THEORY OF THE BUSINESS WORKSHOP
It is very useful to conduct a workshop based on understanding the the-
ory of the business/business idea. This workshop can be completed in a 


---PAGE BREAK---

116 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
few hours and can alone initiate strategic insights, but it also will generate 
thinking directly relevant to the work that takes place in the scenario con-
struction phase (see Chapter 7). Gather the relevant participants in a setting 
conducive to creative thinking (e.g., a meeting room with large whiteboards 
or newsprint on the walls so that participants can think and draw out loud). 
Ask each participant to use a single sheet of paper and brieﬂy describe
• whether the assumptions about the environment, mission, and core 
competencies ﬁt reality;
• whether the assumptions in these three areas ﬁt each other;
• the extent to which the theory of the business is known and 
understood throughout the organization; and
• the extent to which the theory of the business is tested.
Next, ask each participant to draw or write out the business idea on 
another sheet of paper. When all participants have completed the exercise, 
ask them to individually report their responses to the four speciﬁcations of 
the theory of the business, and then ask them to share their business ideas. 
The variety in responses to both of these activities indicates how uniﬁed 
or scattered the thinking is about the core purpose of the organization and 
how well it is understood. A useful goal is to create one unifying business 
idea. Participants can present their models and work together to build a 
business idea and set of assumptions that capture the essence of what the 
organization is trying to accomplish. This is a simple exercise in eliciting 
individual mental models and working toward a shared one. As the strategic 
conversation was started in the SWOT analysis workshop, it continues here 
as participants share ideas, perspectives, and insights.
In my own experiences, if I ask twelve participants to draw or write out 
the business idea, they will draw or write out twelve different things. I have 
found a tremendous amount of utility in then asking participants to create 
a single business idea out of what they have individually generated. This 
simple activity has frequently produced “aha” moments in participants I 
have worked with, and the resulting theory of the business is a critical item 
later on in the scenario project.
Technology Corporation’s Theory of the Business/Business Idea
Technology Corporation’s scenario team met for a half day with a general 
purpose of understanding and sharing perceptions of the organization’s 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
117
business model. Before presenting the organization’s theory of the business 
and business idea, some background information on perceived core compe-
tencies, vision, and other internal thinking will be useful to set the context. 
Core competencies: Developing innovative products in the chemical, 
contracting, manufacturing industries, developing human capital (ex-
pertise and innovation), and listening to customer needs
Activities: Technology Corporation researches and develops intellectual 
property to license and sell technologies related to innovations in en-
ergy, chemicals, and technology.
Vision: Technology Corporation develops ideas and products that meet 
the energy, chemical, and technological challenges of the future.
Model: Three concentric circles for the business model illustrating 
short-term, midterm, and long-term strategies (Figure 6.5): 
1. Short-term: Current funding sources including Small Business In-
novation Research.
F I G U R E  6.5  Technology Corporation’s Innovation-Development of Intellectual 
Property
Short-Term Strategy
Brain Power and
Contract R&D
Long-Term Strategy
Solve Tomorrow’s Challenges
and Invest in the Most
Promising Technology
Midterm Strategy
Build Cross-Functional Teams
and Contract R&D
Structure


---PAGE BREAK---

118 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
2. Midterm: Lessen dependence of SBIR.
Contract R&D. Delays in time horizons.
This midterm strategy is an opportunity to lay the foundation for fu-
ture success (develop cross-functional teams, build the infrastructure 
for R&D, and listen to customers to build trust). Midterm activities 
build Technology Corporation’s reputation.
Cross-functional teams allow everyone to be involved in the project 
at all times. If an issue comes up, decisions can be made quickly. 
Teams are involved early to understand the big picture and help re-
duce time to market.
3. Long-term: Innovation—development of intellectual property
Key questions for Technology Corporation: 
• When does Technology Corporation stop pouring resources into 
technologies that have achieved their purpose? In other words, 
what will Technology Corporation stop doing?
• Will Technology Corporation consider partnering with other 
companies to develop technologies?
• Will Technology Corporation offer incentives to cross-functional 
teams to innovate?
• Will Technology Corporation look to outside resources to ﬁll 
gaps in core competencies needed to execute the innovation?
Technology Corporation’s Theory of the Business 
1. Do the assumptions about the environment, mission, and core 
competencies ﬁt reality?
Yes. Decision makers in Technology Corporation realize it is risky 
to be committed to a single funding source, but the purpose of the 
organization meets a signiﬁcant need in society. The key will be in 
moving beyond simply idea-based projects and into design and man-
ufacturing processes to see their products built to suit speciﬁc actual 
needs. The mismatch is in any assumption that the current stream of 
SBIR funding will be consistent. Most members of the organization 
agree that this is the only assumption that may not ﬁt reality.
2. Do the assumptions in these three areas ﬁt each other?
Yes. Again, the only potential problem here is if change strategies fail 
and decision makers fall back into relying on the same sources they 
have relied on over the past several years.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
119
3. Is the theory of the business known and understood throughout 
the organization?
It is unclear how well the theory of the business has been communi-
cated and understood. An additional purpose of the scenario project 
is to communicate the current theory of the business and create a 
shared understanding of how and why it needs to change.
4. Has the theory of the business been tested?
No. One other key purpose of the scenario project will be to docu-
ment the current theory of the business, show where it is weak, de-
velop an alternative, and test it in each scenario.
Technology Corporation Business Idea
The business idea in Figure 6.6 is a simple model that captures the essence 
of Technology Corporation’s current overall strategy. The organization has 
key expertise in writing proposals that garner funding. Funded proposals 
account for the majority of Technology Corporation’s operating budget, and 
currently, few if any products are produced. Under the current model, the 
corporation uses funding to work on good ideas and enhance its intellectual 
property. The result of this is increasing brainpower—Technology Corpora-
tion continues to provide intellectual challenges for its scientists and devel-
opers, but these ideas are never brought to fruition or taken to market.
F I G U R E  6.6  Technology Corporation’s Business Idea
SBIR Phase I
Intellectual Property
Brainpower
Useful Technologies
for Consumers and
Other Corporations


---PAGE BREAK---

120 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
The workshop for creating the business idea involved thirteen people 
from Technology Corporation. Each participant drew a similar model, but 
signiﬁcant insights were not achieved until each one was able to see what 
his or her colleagues were drawing. Combining and simplifying these mod-
els was extremely useful, and all thirteen participants agreed that signiﬁ-
cant changes would need to be made. First, the reliance on a single funding 
source was clariﬁed to a couple of individuals who were not totally aware 
of it, and the implications discussed. Second, all thirteen people saw that 
signiﬁcant cultural changes would result from changing the business model 
to include additional funding sources, and moving into Phases II and III of 
existing funding protocols.
SYNTHESIS TOOLS
Two additional analysis/synthesis tools can be used to summarize the infor-
mation that is collected in the scenario exploration phase. These are Rumm - 
ler and Brache’s nine performance variables and Swanson’s performance di-
agnosis matrix. Not all scenario planning projects will use a depth of analy-
sis that makes these tools relevant, but where appropriate, these tools have 
the capability to structure and summarize a great deal of information in a 
relatively simple format. 
RUMMLER AND BRACHE’S NINE PERFORMANCE VARIABLES
The individual, process, and organizational levels are the critical divisions 
of the organization (Rummler & Brache, 1995). The greatest opportunity 
for performance improvement is in understanding and leveraging the pro-
cess level. The key strategic perspective is based on ﬁt among the levels of 
the organization (Rummler & Brache, 1995). The nine performance vari-
ables are shown in Figure 6.7.
Job/performer goals must support process goals, which must in turn 
support organization goals. If the organization goals change (as a result of a 
planning process), then logically, the process goals and job/performer goals 
should change. Likewise, job design must support process design, which 
must support organization design (Rummler & Brache, 1995). The utility 
of the nine performance variables are in achieving ﬁt or alignment among 
these nine key variables. For example, simply describing the cells of the 
matrix will yield useful insights. Asking questions about alignment is the 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
121
logical next step and can reveal where there may be signiﬁcant breakdowns 
in alignment of goals, design, and management. The team/group level has 
become a common addition to the nine performance variables.
SWANSON’S PERFORMANCE DIAGNOSIS MATRIX
Swanson’s performance diagnosis matrix (2007; see Figure 6.8) is another 
high-utility synthesis tool. The matrix provides a means of synthesizing the 
vast amount of information that has been collected about the internal func-
tion of the organization. More speciﬁcally, the matrix includes a number of 
critical variables to consider in the context of performance problems. While 
some of these might not be immediately relevant to the scenario exercise, 
the overall utility of the matrix is in its use as a snapshot of organizational 
performance. The critical variables in Swanson’s matrix are mission/goal, 
system design, capacity, motivation, and expertise. These variables can be 
assessed at the levels of the organization proposed by Rummler and Brache 
(job/performer, process, and organization). Swanson’s matrix is also fre-
quently updated to include team/group levels just like the performance im-
provement matrix by Rummler and Brache.
A properly used matrix will reveal many issues inside any organization. 
It is not realistic to assume all of these issues can be solved. The critical is-
sues must be worked on, particularly those related to the strategic agenda of 
the organization, if scenario planning is to be used. 
These two synthesis tools were developed as tools for general organi-
zational analysis. Their use in scenario planning is not required and, in 
some cases, may not even be recommended. However, their utility is in 
F I G U R E  6.7  Rummler and Brache’s (1995) Nine Performance Variables 
The Three Performance Needs
Goals
Design
Management
The Three  
Levels of 
Performance
Organization 
Level
Organization 
Goals
Organization 
Design
Organization 
Management
Process 
Level
Process  
Goals
Process 
Design
Process 
Management
Job/Performer 
Level
Job  
Goals
Job  
Design
Job 
Management


---PAGE BREAK---

122 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
synthesizing information about the internal state of the organization. These 
synthesis tools are particularly helpful in cases with a history of ongoing sce-
nario planning or other change initiatives. In these instances, problems may 
be hiding in places not often investigated in the commonly used scenario 
planning tools. Moreover, these tools are intended to assess overall organi-
zational viability, which ﬁts well with scenario projects aimed at organiza-
tional learning, or the continuous quality improvement of anticipatory and 
strategic thinking inside the organization.
Technology Corporation’s Performance Diagnosis Matrix
Figure 6.9 shows a snapshot of Swanson’s (2007) performance diagnosis 
matrix applied to Technology Corporation. The matrix shows where there 
are issues and indicates leverage points for starting to work on them. 
F I G U R E  6.8  Swanson’s (2007) Performance Diagnosis Matrix
Performance Levels
Performance 
Variables
Organizational Level
Process Level
Individual Level
Mission/Goal
Does the organiza- 
tional mission/goal fit 
the reality of the 
economic, political, 
and cultural forces?
Do the process goals 
enable the organiza- 
tion to meet organi- 
zational and individual 
missions/goals?
Are the professional 
and personal missions/ 
goals of individuals 
congruent with the 
organization’s?
Systems 
Design
Does the organiza- 
tional system provide 
structure and policies 
supporting the desired 
performance?
Are processes 
designed in such a 
way as to work as a 
system?
Does the individual 
design support 
performance?
Capacity
Does the organization 
have the leadership, 
capital, and infra- 
structure to achieve its 
missions/goals?
Does the process  
have the capacity to 
perform (quantity, 
quality, and 
timelines)?
Does the individual 
have the mental, 
physical, and emo- 
tional capacity to 
perform?
Motivation
Do the policies, 
culture, and reward 
systems support the 
desired performance?
Does the process 
provide the informa- 
tion and human 
factors required to 
maintain it?
Does the individual 
want to perform no 
matter what?
Expertise
Does the organization 
establish and maintain 
selection and training 
policies and 
resources?
Does the process of 
developing expertise 
meet the changing 
demands of changing 
processes?
Does the individual 
have the knowledge, 
skills, and experience 
to perform?


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
123
F I G U R E  6.9 Technology Corporation’s Performance Diagnosis Matrix
Performance  
Variables
Performance Levels
Organizational  
Level
Process Level
Team Level
Individual Level
Mission/ 
goal
Does the organi- 
zation mission/
goal fit the reality 
of the economic, 
political, and 
cultural forces?
No, problems 
here—changing 
environment, 
need to reeval- 
uate goals.
Do the process 
goals enable the 
organization-, 
team-, and 
individual-level 
goals to be met?
Not sure—if 
organization 
goals change, 
these will 
change, too.
Do the team goals 
enable the organi- 
zation-, process-, 
and individual-
level goals to be 
met?
If organization 
goals change, 
these will change, 
too,
Are individual goals 
(job descriptions) 
supporting team, 
process, and 
organizational 
goals?
If organization 
goals change, 
these will change, 
too,
Systems  
design
Does the organi- 
zation system 
provide structure 
and policies sup- 
porting the desired 
performance?
Yes—but could 
be altered to 
reward team 
performance 
more completely.
Are the processes 
designed in a 
logical, efficient, 
and systematic 
way?
Yes—but they 
may need to 
change.
Are the teams 
assembled in a 
logical, efficient 
way that also takes 
advantage of indi- 
vidual strengths?
No—collabora- 
tion is a problem. 
Possible leverage 
here to get people 
working together 
more.
Does the job design 
enable the individ- 
ual to perform in 
the team as required 
by the process?
Yes
Capacity
Does the organi- 
zation have the 
leadership, capital, 
and infrastructure 
to achieve its 
mission/goals?
Yes
Does the process 
have the capacity 
to meet the 
quantity, quality, 
and time line 
requirements?
Yes
Do teams demon- 
strate the capacity 
to meet the 
quantity, quality, 
and time line 
requirements?
No—more 
collaboration and 
teamwork  
is needed.
Do individuals 
have the mental, 
physical, and emo- 
tional capacity to 
perform as required 
by the team and 
the process?
Yes—absolutely
(continued)


---PAGE BREAK---

124 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
CONCLUSION
This chapter has described the scenario exploration phase, covering 
general tools in assessing the external and internal environments. The pur-
pose of this phase is to learn about the industry and external environment, 
as well as the internal dynamics of the organization. Simultaneously, partic-
ipant viewpoints, ideas, and perspectives can be gathered. Two workshops 
were recommended (on SWOT analysis and theory of the business/business 
idea) to stimulate strategic thinking and prepare participants for the sce-
nario construction that is to follow.
F I G U R E  6.9  Technology Corporation’s Performance Diagnosis Matrix (continued)
Performance  
Variables
Performance Levels
Organizational  
Level
Process Level
Team Level
Individual Level
Motivation
Do the policies, 
culture, and 
reward systems 
support the desired 
performance?
Generally, yes, 
but not in the 
case of team 
performance
Does the process 
provide the required 
information? Is 
the process moti- 
vating for the 
workforce?
Yes
Is the reward sys- 
tem structured to 
enable maximum 
performance from 
each team 
member?
Yes, but needs 
adjustment to 
reward 
collaboration
Are individuals mo- 
tivated to perform 
as required by team 
and process goals?
Possibly inter- 
nally, but they are 
not formally 
rewarded for 
doing so.
Expertise
Do the selection 
and training 
policies and 
resources enable 
the desired 
performance?
Yes
Is the expertise 
required by the 
process contin- 
uously determined 
and developed?
Yes
Are teams devel- 
oping collective 
expertise, or are 
teams continually 
reconfigured to 
share expertise?
Opportunity 
here—teams  
are not perform- 
ing well, but 
individuals are.
Do individuals 
have the knowl- 
edge, skills, and 
expertise required 
by the team and 
process?
Yes


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
125
The core outcomes of this phase are summaries of the state of the in-
ternal and external environments. Items that should be included are the 
following:
• A listing of STEEP forces, with major issues in each category 
• A report of the SWOT analysis
• An executive summary of the internal interviews
• A summary of information gained through use of other data collection 
methods
• A summary report of the theory of the business/business idea 
workshop
Optional but useful synthesis tools include these:
• A completed table summarizing Rummler and Brache’s nine 
performance variables
• A completed version of Swanson’s performance diagnosis matrix
This chapter includes examples of these elements as applied in the scenario 
case. These reports do not need to be lengthy. In fact, they should be short, 
providing the core, relevant information for the project. The goal is to pres-
ent an understanding of the basic internal and external dynamics, recogniz-
ing that the next phase, scenario construction, delves more deeply into the 
external environment.


---PAGE BREAK---

This page intentionally left blank 


---PAGE BREAK---

 127
Phase 3—Scenario 
Development:  
Digging Deeper
The scenario development phase consists of workshops used to build sce-
narios. Most scenario planning books cover the materials presented in this 
chapter. These activities are the signature of scenario planning. The prior 
phase on scenario exploration included several tools for assessing the exter-
nal and internal environments. This follow-up phase digs deeper into both of 
these environments. The key outcome of scenario development is two to four 
scenarios that are relevant, plausible, and challenging. During the creation 
of scenarios, participants challenge each other’s viewpoints and set the foun-
dation for a shared mental model of the organization and its environment.
KEY TERMS AND APPROACHES
Before getting into the details of scenario development, it is important to 
review some key scenario terms and cover some philosophical approaches 
to scenario development. 
PREDETERMINED ELEMENTS
Predetermined elements are predictable elements that do not depend on a 
particular chain of events (Schwartz, 1991). Predictable elements are divided 
into four categories: slow-changing phenomena, constrained situations, in 
the pipeline, and inevitable conclusions. The most obvious example of a pre-
determined element is demographics. Populations are predictable. Popula-
tions are also an example of elements in the pipeline. Much has been written 
7


---PAGE BREAK---

128 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
about the baby boom generation, because the aging of that generation can 
be predicted with precision. Likewise, we will know how many teenagers 
there will be in 2010–2020 because they have already been born. The U.S. 
dependence on foreign oil is a constrained situation, meaning that it is likely 
that the dependence will continue until alternate fuel sources are developed. 
However, given the technological and infrastructural implications of the 
United States (or almost any other nation), switching to a non-petroleum-
based fuel is unlikely in the near term. “In the pipeline” refers to things 
that have happened, but the consequences have yet to unfold. For example, 
Apple’s dominance of online media is unexpected to some, and how far that 
company will take it is not yet certain, but its presence is undeniable. The 
U.S. deﬁcit is an example of an inevitable conclusion, meaning that the 
debt has a direct inﬂuence on other obvious decisions such as raising taxes 
(Schwartz, 1991). If an element seems certain, no matter what scenario 
comes to pass, then it is probably a predetermined element.
CRITICAL UNCERTAINTIES
“Critical uncertainties are intimately related to pre-determined elements. 
You ﬁnd them by questioning your assumptions about pre-determined ele-
ments” (Schwartz, 1991, p. 115). Thus, what might happen to change the 
U.S. dependence on foreign oil? While the U.S. deﬁcit is often a predeter-
mined element, what are the forces that could change the U.S. debt. Ulti-
mately, decision makers will identify the critical uncertainties in a workshop 
designed for a group to identify forces with the highest potential impact on 
the organization and that are the most uncertain. What is uncertain, how-
ever, is intimately related to what is predetermined. So, playing with these 
forces in different conﬁgurations is where insight can be found. 
Great care is needed in sorting out the predetermined elements (Burt, 
2006). This is because “a poorly observed fact is more treacherous than a 
faulty train of reasoning” (Wack, 1985a, p. 18). Many of the errors in judg-
ment observed at Shell were cases in which predetermined elements and 
critical uncertainties became mixed up. Thus, a hallmark of scenario plan-
ning is in separating what is predictable (predetermined) from what is truly 
open to change (uncertain). 
Understanding these forces is the basis of the scenario development phase 
and will shape the structure of the entire scenario planning project. Ini-
tial scenario construction occurs through a series of workshops in which 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
129
participants dialogue about important issues affecting the organization. 
The task is to separate out the forces that have both the highest relative po-
tential impact on the organization and the highest relative uncertainty. This 
is a subjective task, accomplished by intense dialogue and debate. Exchang-
ing ideas allows participants to understand each other’s perspectives, open 
up their mental models, and create the basis for a shared mental model of 
the organization and the situations it may face. 
INDUCTIVE VERSUS DEDUCTIVE SCENARIO CONSTRUCTION
Induction is usually described as moving from speciﬁc ideas or factors to 
general laws, whereas deduction begins with general overarching concepts 
and clariﬁes toward the speciﬁc. Arguments based on personal experiences 
are best expressed inductively, while arguments based on laws or widely ac-
cepted principles are best expressed deductively. Either approach can be ap-
plied to scenario projects, and both have beneﬁts and drawbacks. It is always 
wise to adopt the technique best suited to the culture of the organization. 
For example, engineers and academics will probably be more comfortable 
with the deductive method, while designers will love the freedom of the 
inductive method (Wright, Cairns, & Goodwin, 2009).
The simplest approach to scenario planning is through inductive sce-
nario construction. This method has two different strategies: (1) a simple 
brainstorming approach and (2) using the “ofﬁcial future.” 
The ﬁrst method is to brainstorm a variety of different scenarios. Effec-
tively using this method requires that users be highly “tuned in” to their in-
dustry and organization. Few rules apply in this method, and the only goal 
is to develop different stories that are based on major events or innovations 
that have dramatic implications. For example, how can cell-phone compa-
nies think beyond Apple’s iPhone, instead of simply copying it? What could 
be the next surprising evolution in mobile information technology?
The second method within the inductive approach is to consider the 
ofﬁcial future, which is usually a forecast, and then ask, “Where might our 
forecast be wrong?” The ofﬁcial future is a surprise-free, status quo, growth-
as-usual scenario. It carries its own set of driving forces, and if they can be 
understood, varying them will introduce some thought-provoking alterna-
tives. The elements of the ofﬁcial future are usually found in the interviews. 
Therefore, the interviews are the critical method of information gathering 
in the inductive approach to scenario development.


---PAGE BREAK---

130 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
The unstructured nature of the inductive scenario approach lends itself 
to small organizations or situations in which participants have considerable 
prior experience with scenarios. Early scenario work was inductive, and the 
use of the ofﬁcial future was a “bridge” into the world of scenario thinking 
for managers who were initially resistant. The inductive approach may not 
be suitable for cultures unfamiliar with scenario planning or those lacking 
patience and comfort with debate (Ogilvy & Schwartz, 1998). Because the 
inductive approach is informal and unstructured, it does not necessarily re-
quire the clearly deﬁned question, scenario project proposal, or external and 
internal analyses that have been presented thus far. The inductive approach 
is best suited to experienced users of scenarios and organizations in which 
scenario thinking has become “a way of planning.” The inductive method is 
most useful in situations in which speciﬁc people are dedicated to thinking 
about strategy as their core function for the organization. 
Inductive scenario construction is also the result of resident geniuses, 
or great men and women who parlayed their thinking skills and established 
track records of helping companies avoid major discontinuities. Thinking in 
alternative futures is a natural human ability, but most have lost those skills. 
We need to be reminded, and the ﬁrst step is a structured way to think 
about the future. This book provides that structure, which begins with the 
deductive approach. Working through the scenario system presented in this 
book is a reminder of how we naturally approach dilemmas—we think in 
alternatives.
The deductive approach to scenario planning is structured; thus, it is 
common. The deductive approach typically features the workshops, rank-
ing exercises, and a 2 × 2 matrix that have become a hallmark of scenario 
planning. The workshops in the deductive approach create time and space 
for participants to think and talk about strategic issues. Bringing a cross 
section of organizational decision makers together to work on strategic is-
sues is believed to draw on the collective thinking within the organization 
to tackle difﬁcult problems and dilemmas. The fact is, few organizations 
create ways for colleagues to jointly reﬂect on strategic issues. Using the de-
ductive approach, by its nature requiring involvement, contributes to com-
munity building in the organization. The deductive approach is a modern 
version of sharing stories and having conversations about difﬁcult issues 
around a campﬁre.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
131
EIGHT COMPONENTS OF SCENARIO 
DEVELOPMENT
Having established these important terms and approaches to scenario devel-
opment, we can now turn to the details of the scenario development phase. 
There are eight important and well-known pieces of scenario development:
1. Brainstorming the issues the organization is facing
2. Ranking those issues according to their relative impact on the 
organization
3. Ranking those issues according to their relative uncertainty
4. Developing the scenario logics by selecting issues “high” on both 
rankings to build a scenario matrix
5. Constructing the research agenda
6. Deﬁning the scenario plots and titles 
7. Writing the detailed scenario stories
8. Creating the scenario communication strategy
These pieces are the focus of this chapter, with the goal of understand-
ing the forces that drive the organizational system and its environment. The 
ﬁrst four of these pieces are best done as workshops. These workshops are 
described, one for each of the pieces of the scenario development phase (Fig-
ure 7.1). The ﬁrst three workshops are all aimed at identifying and sepa-
rating the predetermined elements and critical uncertainties. The fourth 
workshop describes how to hone the critical uncertainties to build scenarios. 
Tips are provided for deriving the scenarios and writing the scenario sto-
ries. Finally, methods for presenting the scenarios to the organization are 
covered. 
OVERVIEW OF THE SCENARIO  
CONSTRUCTION WORKSHOPS
Once the initial issue is deﬁned, the purpose of the project has been set, and 
a general understanding of internal and external dynamics is developed, a 
series of workshops must be designed to build scenarios. The number and 
length of these workshops will vary according to the number of people in-
volved, the size of the organization, and the complexity of the issue. This 


---PAGE BREAK---

132 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
chapter presents a series of workshops for constructing scenarios. In some 
cases these can be combined, particularly if the project is small. The ﬁrst 
task is brainstorming the issues and concerns of the group, and beginning a 
general group dialogue. 
Dialogue is a key component of the scenario-building process. Dialogue 
is the mechanism for uncovering individual mental models and working 
toward a shared group mental model of the issue, the organization, and its 
external environment. Workshops following the brainstorming activity are 
more speciﬁc and are aimed at separating major forces into predetermined 
elements and critical uncertainties. The workshops are a way to leverage the 
collective capital inside the organization, build a collective mental model of 
the issue, and cull out what is truly uncertain. However, these workshops 
are not a substitute for deep research and reﬂective, critical thinking on the 
F I G U R E  7.1  The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Development 
Phase
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
133
driving forces of a given industry. The project leader and the scenario plan-
ning team must continue to identify areas that require further research as 
the project proceeds.
BRAINSTORMING THE MAJOR FORCES—WORKSHOP 1
The brainstorming workshop is simple in concept. The purpose is to cap-
ture what participants perceive are the major forces the organization is fac-
ing that relate to the problem or issue deﬁned. This workshop usually takes 
a half-day to a full day. It is important to get input from all participants 
and allow enough time to capture everything that is said. An effective way 
to structure this workshop is in a meeting room with empty wall space, 
whiteboards, or newsprint taped to the walls. Give each participant a pad of 
sticky notes (or hexagons), and ask them to write a single issue on each note 
and stick it to the wall (see Figure 7.2). Because this is a true brainstorming 
session, everything is included, and order does not matter, nor does the loca-
tion in which sticky notes are placed. When dominating personalities are 
present, it can be helpful to establish ground rules, such as no talking dur-
ing a portion of the activity until the placement of sticky notes is complete. 
Once participants have exhausted their ideas, it is useful to have an open 
dialogue. Speciﬁc brainstorming methods can be used, such as the nominal 
group technique (Delbecq & Van de Ven, 1971), to ensure participation 
from each member, and to rein in dominant personalities. 
F I G U R E  7.2  Brainstorming Key Forces


---PAGE BREAK---

134 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
An important point of the brainstorming exercise is to strive for granu-
larity. That is, each force should be written such that they are all relatively 
equally big or small forces. It is also important that the forces are written 
ambiguously so that normative judgment can be added later on. For ex-
ample, use “technology skills,” not “technology is here to stay.” 
Brainstorming is usually a lot of fun. The goal is to get the ideas ﬂow-
ing freely and include everything—no matter how far-fetched things may 
initially seem. The workshops for Technology Corporation were a lot of fun 
because the participants were engaged. This could be attributed to leaders 
who were committed to the project and created an atmosphere in which 
people felt comfortable contributing their ideas. While a few individuals 
felt intimidated by the hierarchy, for the most part, participants were set at 
ease, and the exercises became engaging, fun exchanges among colleagues. 
A simpliﬁed version of Technology Corporation’s initial brainstorm session 
is in Figure 7.3.
Brainstormed items should be grouped when there is overlap. Dupli-
cations should be combined so that a cleaner, more efﬁcient scattering of 
major forces is built. Once completed, these are the forces perceived to be 
driving the environmental system in which the organization is operating.
The categories used in the scan of the external environment should be 
kept in mind while brainstorming and distilling these issues. The major fac-
tors affecting any business are usually found in examining the social, tech-
nological, environmental, economic, and political environments. These are 
usually macro issues. For example, many current scenario projects would 
include the volatility of the U.S. economy and its time line to recovery as 
major issues in the external environment.
Before moving on to the ranking workshops, sometimes it is helpful to 
look at the list of brainstormed forces and simply ask:
• Which of these are predetermined? (Which are outcomes of things 
that have already taken place or are currently underway?)
• Which of these are truly uncertain? (Which forces carry truly 
uncertain outcomes?)
RANKING THE FORCES BY RELATIVE IMPACT ON THE 
ORGANIZATION—WORKSHOP 2
The next step in understanding the major forces is ranking the issues ac-
cording to their potential impact on the organization’s strategic agenda. 


---PAGE BREAK---

F I G U R E  7.3  Technology Corporation’s Brainstorm Activity
Consistency of
management
practices
Employee
benefits
Risks
associated
with new
technologies
Local natural
disaster
3 start-ups
with
management
groups of 3
Developing
markets
Focus on 2 or
3 technologies
or markets
Partnerships
with big
companies
Looming
recession or
depression
Global energy
market
Collapse of
credit markets
Shift in
organizational
culture
Selling
technology
Returning to
old projects
Intellectual
property
development
and
management
SBIR funding
is decreased
or out
Current
R&D—
developing it
and keeping
it up
Loss of the
president of
the company
Organizational
role and
definition
Breakthrough
innovation
Internal talent
management
Government
regulations
(e.g., mining,
water
treatments)
Finding the
right niche
industry
New company
formation
Time required
for building
business
relationships
Long
organization
time cycles


---PAGE BREAK---

136 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
This ranking occurs horizontally across the working space—preferably a 
long empty wall in an open meeting room with newsprint taped to it—sim-
ply ranging from “Low” to “High” (Figure 7.4). The goal is to separate the 
truly critical factors from the other. This is not to say that the other factors 
are not important. Rather, the high-impact items are those that have the 
power to fundamentally reshape the business. If these factors are perceived 
differently, they can provoke signiﬁcant strategic insights. Figure 7.5 shows 
the brainstorming activity from Technology Corporation with forces sim-
pliﬁed, and then ranked horizontally according to impact.
This ranking exercise can take several hours to a full day, depending on 
the number of participants involved. Viewpoints will differ, and conversa-
tions that develop around understanding the varying viewpoints are how 
mental models continue to be shared. This face-to-face dialogue is critical 
to scenario planning. The knowledge friction (meaning the resolution of 
multiple viewpoints into a more complete understanding) is what allows 
many participants to experience a signiﬁcant shift in insight (Rochlin, 
1998). This has been referred to as an “aha” moment, and it happens when 
participants are able see the situation with new eyes. 
F I G U R E  7.4  Ranking Forces by Relative Impact on the Strategic Agenda
Low 
High


---PAGE BREAK---

F I G U R E  7.5  Technology Corporation’s Brainstormed Forces, Simplified and Ranked by Relative Impact on the Strategic Agenda
Internal talent
management
Long
organization
time cycles
Finding the
right niche
industry ....
Consistency of
management
practices
Developing
markets
Focus
on 2 or 3
technologies
or markets
Intellectual
property
development
and
management
Organizational
role and
definition
Breakthrough
innovation
Government
regulations
(e.g., mining,
water
treatments)
Employee
benefits
Looming
recession
or
depression
Global
energy
market
Collapse
of credit
markets
Loss of the
president of
the company
Shift in
organizational
culture
3 start-ups
with
management
groups of 3
Current
R&D—
developing it
and keeping
     it up
SBIR funding
is decreased
or out
Selling
technology
New company
formation
Partnerships
with big
companies
Low
High
Relative Impact on Technology Corporation’s Strategic Agenda


---PAGE BREAK---

138 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
RANKING THE FORCES BY RELATIVE UNCERTAINTY— 
WORKSHOP 3
The next exercise is focused on ranking the issues by uncertainty. This 
ranking is done vertically, again according to “Low” and “High” uncer-
tainty (see Figure 7.6). 
Again, signiﬁcant disagreement will arise. Conversation, debate, and 
dialogue are intended to support the extension of participant perceptions. 
By listening to a variety of perspectives and describing their own, partici-
pants build their own mental scaffolding. Once the scaffolding is in place, 
the group can work toward a shared mental model. Figure 7.7 shows the 
uncertainty/impact matrix for Technology Corporation. 
BUILDING THE SCENARIO LOGICS—WORKSHOP 4
The next workshop is aimed at creating the scenario logics. The scenario log-
ics are the general frameworks—or the plots of the scenarios. These are also 
known as proto-scenarios (van der Merwe, 2008). Once the participants have 
ranked the issues by impact on the strategic agenda and by uncertainty, the 
ranking space is divided roughly into quadrants (see Figure 7.8). Figure 7.9 
F I G U R E  7.6 Ranking Forces by Relative Uncertainty
High
Uncertainty
Impact
Low 
High


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
139
F I G U R E  7.7 Uncertainty/Impact Matrix for Technology Corporation
Low
High
Relative Impact on Technology Corporation’s Strategic Agenda
Low
High
Relative Uncertainty
Local natural
disaster
Looming
recession or
depression
Collapse of
credit markets
Global energy
market
Shift in
organizational
culture
Loss of the
president of
the company
Consistency of
management
practices
Organizational
role and
definition
Employee
benefits
Finding the
right niche
industry
Developing
markets
Internal talent
management
Long
organization
time cycles
3 start-ups
with
management
groups of 3
Focus on 2 or
3 technologies
or markets
Intellectual
property
development
and
management
Breakthrough
innovation
Government
regulations
(e.g., mining,
water
treatments)
Partnerships
with big
companies
Selling
technology
SBIR funding
is decreased
or out
New company
formation
Current
R&D—
developing it
and keeping
it up
F I G U R E  7.8  Quadrants of the Ranking Space
High
Low 
High


---PAGE BREAK---

140 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
shows the ranking space divided into quadrants for the Technology Cor-
poration case. 
The Quadrants of the Ranking Space
By dividing the ranking space, the issues can be grouped into general areas 
as follows:
• High impact–Low uncertainty
• Low impact–Low uncertainty
• Low impact–High uncertainty
• High impact–High uncertainty
Issues that are ranked high impact–low uncertainty are major issues 
but are also relatively stable. Major industry shifts that are already under-
way, such as new government regulations, would characterize this category. 
Issues that are low impact–low uncertainty are issues that can be readily 
dealt with. These issues generally do not require a signiﬁcant investment 
F I G U R E  7.9 Technology Corporation’s Quadrants
Low
High
Relative Impact on Technology Corporation’s Strategic Agenda
Low
High
Relative Uncertainty
Local natural
disaster
Looming
recession or
depression
Collapse of
credit markets
Global energy
market
Shift in
organizational
culture
Loss of the
president of
the company
Consistency of
management
practices
Organizational
role and
definition
Employee
benefits
Finding the
right niche
industry
Developing
markets
Internal talent
management
Long
organization
time cycles
3 start-ups
with
management
groups of 3
Focus on 2 or
3 technologies
or markets
Intellectual
property
development
and
management
Breakthrough
innovation
Government
regulations
(e.g., mining,
water
treatments)
Partnerships
with big
companies
Selling
technology
SBIR funding
is decreased
or out
New company
formation
Current
R&D—
developing it
and keeping
it up


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
141
of analysis to better understand. Items in these two categories are also, by 
deﬁnition, predetermined elements. It is worthwhile going over each of 
these again to make sure they really belong in this category. Things that 
are misread and grouped as predetermined elements, but are actually quite 
uncertain, can lead to signiﬁcant errors in judgment (Wack, 1985a, 1985b).
Issues ranked low impact–high uncertainty require further research be-
cause of the high uncertainty ranking. High uncertainty rankings simply 
mean that the eventual outcomes of these issues are unknown. Even though 
the group has agreed that their impact is low, it is worth conducting some 
extra research because of the potential volatility of these issues.
Finally, issues ranked high impact–high uncertainty are called the criti-
cal uncertainties (Figure 7.10). These are the issues that have the potential 
to fundamentally shift the assumptions under the strategic agenda and is-
sues whose outcomes are highly uncertain. These critical uncertainties are 
used to construct the scenario logics. 
The 2 × 2 Scenario Matrix
Scenario logics are built by choosing two critical uncertainties and plotting 
them in a 2 × 2 matrix (see Figure 7.11). Remember that the critical uncer-
tainties are the items ranked high on their potential impact and high on un-
certainty. The two critical uncertainties chosen for the scenario matrix must 
F I G U R E  7.10  The Critical Uncertainties
High
Low 
High


---PAGE BREAK---

142 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
be independent variables. Facilitators should steer the group toward “useful” 
variables, not “right” variables. By combining two critical uncertainties, the 
themes of the four scenarios become apparent. Normative judgment is now 
applied to each critical uncertainty, generally adding a high and low value 
to each. 
A variety of methods can be used to choose the two critical uncertain-
ties, such as value voting, poker chips, and the nominal group technique 
(Delbecq & Van de Ven, 1971). All are variations on the same process. For 
example, in value voting, each participant is given twenty one-dollar bills 
(real or not) and asked to allot their dollars among the critical uncertainties. 
As each participant “spends” his or her money, the critical uncertainties are 
prioritized, and the top two can be chosen for use in the 2 × 2 matrix. It is 
worth the time to experiment with a few different 2 × 2 matrices to get a 
sense of the different scenario logics that can surface from this part of the 
workshop. The goal of this workshop is to develop four scenario logics.
In Technology Corporation, the scenario team worked through the ini-
tial brainstorming exercise, the two ranking exercises, and prioritized the 
F I G U R E  7.11  Developing the Scenario Matrix
Low 
High
High
Low


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
143
critical uncertainties. After several hours of debate and dialogue, the team 
settled on two critical uncertainties: funding sources and talent management. 
These items were placed on the X and Y axes of the matrix in Figure 7.12. 
These scenario logics must be plausible, challenging, and relevant. 
Strategies for assessing scenarios are presented in detail in Chapter 9. At this 
point in the project, the scenario logics must meet three criteria as a face 
validity check. The scenarios must be plausible in that they can potentially 
draw from data and facts, and present an acceptable view of the future. 
They must be challenging in that they can assemble events and facts in a 
way that challenges the current mental models. They must be relevant in 
that they relate to the key issues that have been expressed during the project 
and draw on real concerns of managers in the organization.
If some of the scenarios resulting from the 2 × 2 matrix do not meet 
these criteria, two more critical uncertainties can be mapped on another 
matrix until four useful scenarios come together (see Figure 7.13). The is-
sue with using another set of two critical uncertainties becomes keeping 
F I G U R E  7.12  Technology Corporation’s Scenario Matrix
Primarily R&D 
Contract Based
Primarily  
SBIR Based
Cohesive, Cross-functional, 
Collaboratively Innovative
Neglected, Siloed, 
Individually Innovative
Talent Management
Concorde
Airbus
Titanic
Horse and Buggy
Funding Sources


---PAGE BREAK---

144 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
a coherent “set” of scenarios with a common theme. However, it is a mis-
take to sacriﬁce the validity of the scenarios (based on their being plausible, 
challenging, and relevant) to maintain the common theme. The priority is 
developing scenarios that are plausible, can challenge current thinking, and 
are relevant to managers’ deepest concerns.
The Number of Scenarios to Use—Why Four? 
There is debate about the number of scenarios that should be developed. 
One approach is never more than four, and some have suggested the opti-
mal number is one status quo scenario, plus two genuine alternatives (Wack, 
1984). The status quo scenario is used to get decision makers to take the 
bait. Then two genuine alternatives can be presented that deliver compel-
ling stories of fundamentally different futures.
When two scenarios are used, there is a tendency among novice scenar-
ists to have a “good” scenario and a “bad” scenario. When using three sce-
narios, the tendency is to fall into “best case,” “worst case,” and “status quo” 
thinking. Five scenarios are too many for decision makers to entertain. For 
years, Royal Dutch/Shell has used two scenarios. The key is to make sure 
the scenarios are distinctive and memorable. 
In my experience, I have often found that four scenarios seem to be the 
optimal number and can help in avoiding some common thinking traps. 
This number is also a natural outcome of the 2 × 2 matrix approach. There 
F I G U R E  7.13  Developing the Scenario Matrix Using Additional Critical 
Uncertainties
4 relevant, plausible, and 
challenging scenarios
or
Low 
High
High
Low
1
3
2
4
Low 
High
High
Low
1
2
Low 
High
High
Low
3
4


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
145
is no clear rule here, and many successful documented projects have used 
two or three scenarios. No matter how many scenarios are used, attention 
must be paid to make sure these common mistakes are avoided. The best 
way to do this is to make sure that the scenarios do more than simply pres-
ent different quantiﬁcations of obvious variables. They have to present a 
story line, laying out the “characters” and data to support their actions in 
the scenarios in a surprising or interesting way.
Using the “Official Future” 
It can be useful to include a surprise-free status quo scenario, called the “of-
ﬁcial future” or the “consensus forecast.” This scenario is an extension of 
the past into the future, and it holds little that is challenging or useful for 
decision making. The ofﬁcial future is a common feature of ﬁrst attempts at 
scenario planning when executives are unable to leave behind their training 
to seek “the answer” and a reliance on forecasts and predictive approaches to 
strategy. The ofﬁcial future is a safe option and can be included when man-
agers are presumed to have a difﬁcult time adjusting to scenario thinking. 
This way, managers can see their forecasted scenario in the set of scenarios, 
and entertaining the other options is not quite as uncomfortable. The ofﬁ-
cial future can be a bridge into the future and into the discipline of scenario 
thinking for those unfamiliar with it (Wack, 1984). 
Technology Corporation Scenario Logics
The Technology Corporation scenarios are based on the deductive approach 
and feature four scenarios. Technology Corporation is based on a real sce-
nario project (with some changes to conceal the identity of the organiza-
tion). The scenario team reviewed all of the critical uncertainties, focusing 
on two that were particularly relevant. As noted, the team settled on using 
“talent management” and “funding sources” as their critical uncertainties 
for building the scenario matrix (see Figure 7.12, earlier).
An interesting unexpected outcome for Technology Corporation was 
the emerging awareness of extent to which the organization relied on its 
CEO. With no clear succession plans, the scenario team had discussed 
what would happen if the CEO suddenly became ill. Technology Corpo-
ration’s CEO was in his second career after retirement and was getting to 
an age at which health problems are somewhat common. The point is that 
the scenario project provoked conversations that the organization did not 


---PAGE BREAK---

146 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
previously have the capacity to have. Although the issue of the aging CEO 
was not selected as one of the items for building the scenario matrix, it is an 
example of a “character” that could appear in any of the scenarios, adding 
an interesting twist to the story. Figure 7.14 presents each of the four sce-
narios, capturing its essence with a photo and short description. 
F I G U R E  7.14  Technology Corporation’s Scenario Matrix
CONCORDE
Neglect of talent with significant wins 
in contract R&D
We’re getting there, but success depends on 
the work of a few . . .
AIRBUS
Sincere collaboration and cross-
disciplinary cohesion with significant 
wins in contract R&D
We’re getting there and everybody is going 
with us!
 HORSE AND BUGGY
Sincere collaboration, but continued 
reliance on SBIR funding exclusively
 
 
An archaic approach to progress
TITANIC
Individual success, silos, and continued 
reliance on SBIR funding exclusively
We’re slowly heading precisely where we 
don’t want to go . . .


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
147
THE SCENARIO RESEARCH AGENDA
Before outlining and writing the scenario stories, further research must be 
conducted for each scenario logic. A practical way to accomplish this is to 
assign a member from the team to gather more information on the driv-
ing forces in each scenario. Or, if the team is large, it is effective to have 
subgroups work on each scenario. The goal is to share the workload and 
stimulate further inquiry into each set of variables that come together in 
the scenario. In a few meetings, the scenario planning team can talk about 
the features of each scenario logic and determine where further research is 
required. Then, individuals or subgroups can tackle each scenario, gather 
research on the driving forces, and begin thinking about plots. Groups 
should develop detailed responses to the following questions for each sce-
nario (Schwartz, 1991):
• What are the driving forces?
• What do you feel is uncertain?
• What is inevitable?
The scenario team can be reconvened to discuss answers to these ques-
tions. Conversations get going and ideas start ﬂowing. When the ideas are 
ﬂowing naturally, it is good to take a break and let individuals reﬂect. After 
an overnight break, team members often return with excitement and sce-
nario plots almost completely conceptualized (Schwartz, 1991).
PLOTS
Each scenario must have a plot. The general plot is outlined and deﬁned 
before the story line is written. It is helpful to use subgroups of the scenario 
planning team to brainstorm plots and exchange ideas. Three common 
plots include “winners and losers,” “challenge and response,” and “evolu-
tion” (Schwartz, 1991).
• The “winners and losers” plot is based on the familiar story of a pro- 
tagonist against an antagonist. The story involves a struggle, and only 
one character can “win.” Therefore, the other character must “lose.” 
• In the “challenge and response” plot, a situation is presented in which 
the actions of a group and related consequences become the basis for 


---PAGE BREAK---

148 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
the story—for example, the current economic crisis and how 
companies can manage through times of layoffs, low growth, and 
declining stock value. A ﬂu pandemic is another example of a 
challenge and response plot.
• “Evolution” plots involve slowly changing phenomena. Technology  
is the most common example of this kind of plot. Technological 
innovations start small with early adopters, and at some point, they 
explode and become mainstream. Being ahead of or behind the 
explosion can carry dramatic implications.
Here are ﬁve other plots that can be main plots or subplots within the three 
just described:
• Revolution—an unpredictable, dramatic change (e.g., natural disasters 
and political revolutions)
• Cycles—Economies often move in cycles of growth and decline. 
Investors who believe in economic cycles would suggest that the 
current economic crisis provides tremendous opportunity for those 
who can see them. Cities can behave similarly. Real estate investors 
base their careers on being able to anticipate high-growth sections  
of cities. 
• Inﬁnite possibility—This story line is based on a perception that a given 
force will continue to grow and expand, inﬁnitely. Some stories about 
technology ﬁt this plot—that technology will continue to improve the 
quality of our lives by making things easier. However, there is usually 
a counterplot or a dark side to stories based on inﬁnite possibility.
• Lone ranger—The lone ranger plot features a hero confronting a 
corrupt system. The “underdog” and “David and Goliath” stories are 
other names for this plot. Apple Inc. is an example of the lone ranger 
plot—a small business gaining victories against the IBM corporate 
conglomerate (Schwartz, 1991).
• My generation—Some plots can effectively feature major social shifts 
that show up in the form of signiﬁcant generational differences. For 
example, the generation known as the “Millennials” has a comfort 
with technology the world has never seen. In many scenarios, the 
values of this generation can provide an interesting twist, using 
technology as the driving force.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
149
A quick online search of standard movie plots suggests many others that 
could be considered for scenario plots. Here is a sampling:
• Friendships (friendship, followed by separation, followed by 
reconciliation)
• Epic (a group or individual travels from A to B having adventures 
along the way)
• Heist (something must be stolen from an inaccessible place—the 
“impossible”)
• Coming of age (a critical time of life, with some tragedy reshaping 
personalities)
• Do the right thing (the main character facing an ethical dilemma)
DON’T FORGET THE WORK ALREADY DONE
Plots should involve key factors and trends from the interviews, brainstorm-
ing, and ranking exercises. If managers can see their thinking and concerns 
from previous exercises in the stories, they are more likely to entertain the 
idea of the scenario. Certainly, there were more than two critical uncer-
tainties than the two chosen for Technology Corporation’s scenario matrix. 
Other forces in the high impact–high uncertainty category should appear in 
the scenarios that can provide interesting twists. The challenge is develop-
ing plot lines that integrate dynamics, present them in an interesting way, 
and summarize the information effectively. Using standard movie plots, 
classic stories, and time-tested literary hooks are helpful ways of building a 
compelling set of scenarios.
You can begin by considering the newspaper headlines that might ap-
pear in each scenario (Flowers, 2003). Using newspaper headlines, the team 
can create a simple time line with three major events occurring every ﬁve 
years for each scenario. The template provided in Figure 7.15 is designed 
to help ﬂesh out the major events in each scenario simply by using bullet 
points for each ﬁve-year block. 
TITLES
The scenario titles are critical. Recent brain research suggests that peo-
ple remember things more easily if there is an associated image so that 
the idea can somehow be related to a past experience (Dispenza, 2007). 


---PAGE BREAK---

150 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
Quick—what are the four scenario outlines for Technology Corporation? 
You probably remember the images of airplanes, the Titanic, and a horse 
and buggy—these are memory cues for the titles and content of each sce-
nario. Another example is a set of scenarios using the titles of Beatles songs: 
“A Hard Day’s Night,” “Help,” “Magical Mystery Tour,” and “Imagine” 
(Ogilvy & Schwartz, 1998). One can easily see how these titles represent 
four different perspectives (even stories), having read nothing but the titles. 
One set of scenarios I worked on recently used board games to represent 
each scenario (Monopoly, Slip N’ Slide, Scrabble, and Go Fish). Be creative 
and use intuition in generating titles that are recognizable and convey the 
essence of each scenario. 
Naming scenarios also has to do with branding and providing names 
that conjure up the gestalt of the scenarios will make them memorable. The 
name provides a sort of mental Velcro for the members of the organization. 
The chosen names provide an easy way to talk about the different worlds 
that may confront the organization and its decision makers. It is therefore 
appropriate to have the images drawn from a family of images.
WRITING THE SCENARIO STORIES
Once the scenario logics have been constructed and the basic plots of four 
scenarios have been deﬁned, each subgroup should ask an individual to 
F I G U R E  7.15  Template for Scenario Plot Construction
5-Year 
Block
Event
Event
Event
Event
Event
Event
5-Year 
Block


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
151
write the detailed scenario story. Again, it is extremely important to use 
the key factors and trends identiﬁed in the previous workshops. Using these 
forces and trends gives the set of scenarios relevance and ensures that they 
address the things that are on the minds of managers. 
Whereas brainstorming the general events of each scenario and plot de-
velopment is best done in groups, writing the scenario details is best done as 
an individual activity. Some general strategies for scenario writing include 
the following:
• Assign each scenario to an individual.
• Assign each scenario to a pair of authors—one as the writer, and one 
as a veteran of the organization.
• Assign each scenario to an individual with access to an experienced 
scenario writer/editor.
• Assign all scenario writing to one individual (usually a talented writer) 
(Ogilvy & Schwartz, 1998).
All four are useful strategies, but the one chosen will depend on the situation, 
how many people are involved, and the knowledge capital within the group.
As the time line emerges, the major events that correspond to each sce-
nario become clear, and further details can be ﬁlled in. Creative writing 
skills are an asset in this part of scenario planning, and many organizations 
seek writing expertise at this stage. I have found it useful to write two ver-
sions of the story for each scenario. The ﬁrst is in the third person, laying 
out the facts of the scenario. This version helps to get the facts straight and 
reveals any holes or weaknesses in the plot. The second is a narrative, in 
the ﬁrst person, and describes the scenario from its horizon year, looking 
back over what has happened throughout the scenario. Inevitably, the ﬁrst-
person narrative is more memorable, drawing on the reader’s empathy more 
immediately. 
Here are ﬁve more tips for writing scenarios:
• Give each story a beginning, middle, and end.
• Some elements should remain constant—not everything changes.
• Use characters in the scenarios. Inﬂation levels may be the villain,  
and policy options may be the hero. Build tension between the 
characters as the story unfolds. Present dilemmas, solve dilemmas, or 
provide twists.
• Include dramas and conﬂicts in the stories.


---PAGE BREAK---

152 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
• Use present verb tenses—no “might haves” or “could haves” (Wilson 
& Ralston, 2006).
Decision makers must be involved in the scenario-writing process. 
Their involvement indicates the sense of ownership they will have for the 
scenarios. In other words, if decision makers don’t participate in the sce-
nario writing, they may be detached from the scenarios that are produced. 
Scenario planning is a participative process in which the decision makers 
create scenarios that challenge internal thinking. Thus, making the scenar-
ios relevant is directly related to involving the people who will use them in 
their development. 
TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION’S SCENARIOS
The following sections describe more fully the four scenarios introduced 
earlier (see Figure 7.14). 
Concorde Scenario
World oil supplies remain sufﬁcient, but prices ﬂuctuate, making sustained 
investments in alternative solutions risky. During a new U.S. presidential 
administration, 50 percent of Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) 
funding was redirected to national laboratories. Technology Corporation 
research had successfully won a few grants, all related to energy research.
Except for its Technology Corporation Water afﬁliate, Technology 
Corporation has experienced only sporadic and limited success with com-
mercializing its own intellectual property. However, bolstered by several re-
cent successful energy-related pilot plant rollouts through its other afﬁliate, 
Continental Technologies, Technology Corporation successfully recruits 
two world-renowned energy research scientists to join the organization. 
World oil prices begin to stabilize at a relatively high level, sparking 
renewed pressure for alternative energy research. Technology Corporation’s 
reputation in energy research has grown as its two world-renowned energy 
research scientists have enabled research partnerships with a national labo-
ratory and a major research university. These partnerships are lucrative but 
create an emphasis on research to the detriment of development; as a result, 
Technology Corporation hires more energy-related scientists while engi-
neering and other areas suffer due to a lack of funding and little interest by 
the prestigious scientists.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
153
Technology Corporation’s water patents expire, and although it retains 
a substantial market penetration, proﬁt margins substantially decline due to 
competition from reverse-engineered products; it is soon sold. Because of 
the lucrative energy research partnerships, pressure to sustain that portion 
of the enterprise increases, and Technology Corporation’s energy research 
emphasis dramatically increases, too. However, its engineering/develop-
ment capacity has been severely hampered due to the lack of collaboration 
from the scientists.
Unable to turn Technology Corporation into the entrepreneurial enter-
prise originally envisioned, its owner decides to sell; a group of senior sci-
entists buys. A funneling effect over the past twenty years has transformed 
Technology Corporation into a contracted, narrowly focused, world-class, 
energy research laboratory working with national laboratories, universities, 
and industry. However, the owning coalition of brilliant but egotistical sci-
entists makes for a dysfunctional siloed organization, with each division 
operating as functionally separate enterprises. Eventually, the discord leads 
to a “brain drain” as scientists leave or are recruited to more stable environ-
ments. Ultimately, an entrepreneurial applied scientist and a like-minded 
engineer buy Technology Corporation with the intention of reintroducing, 
and capitalizing on, the “D” side of R&D.
Airbus Scenario
Technology Corporation continues working in its SBIR-focused model, but 
it increases R&D contract funding as the economy recovers from a reces-
sion. The contracts draw revenue from large and small companies. A focus 
on green technology emerges from a new presidential administration in-
ﬂuencing a positive reception from market prospects and new clients. For 
example, a fundamental shift in the transportation ﬁeld sparks new business 
contracts. Technology Corporation secures an R&D contract with a major 
U.S. automotive manufacturer to develop alternative transportation tech-
nology. Technology Corporation gains a strong reputation in the high-tech 
research and development industry. A large proprietary foundation takes 
interest in a partnership with Technology Corporation due to new high-
proﬁle contracts. 
The president is reelected, and funding increases for energy innova-
tion. The organizational vision and goals are aligned to take advantage of 
the opportunity. Technology Corporation is able to recruit top talent and 


---PAGE BREAK---

154 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
maintain its innovative employees at a 98 percent retention rate. Technol-
ogy Corporation’s success has enabled the company to expand the Human 
Resources and Development (HRD) department to effectively manage 
their talent pool. The HRD department builds a comprehensive program 
to support a collaborative and innovative culture. The plan includes men-
toring, offering incentives for innovation, and promoting cross-functional 
teamwork. Technology Corporation invests in new laboratory equipment 
and an electronic knowledge management system. The organization is able 
to reduce its ﬁfteen-year turnaround for innovations to ten years from con-
ception to market. Because of the looming 2016 election, Technology Cor-
poration guards against threats of SBIR funding cuts by securing primarily 
R&D contracts.
Technology Corporation has shifted its business model to be primarily 
weighted on R&D contracts. The shift is successful although SBIR funding 
has been maintained. Technology Corporation steers away from the com-
petition with revenue from new R&D contracts and bringing intellectual 
property to market. The company hires a mix of engineers, scientists, and 
business development employees and executives. The retention rate contin-
ues to hold stable.
The demand for clean coal and other green technologies improves, 
which stimulates new R&D contracts with automotive companies and 
ﬁrms in two new markets. The diversiﬁcation in new markets pays off.
The proprietary foundation continues to fund Technology Corpora-
tion, which impacts the organization twofold: Technology Corporation 
gains recognition and success, and other R&D contracts spark from the 
publicity and reputation. 
The HRD change is integrated into the culture, and the innovation turn-
around is reduced to ﬁve years from conception to market. Top industry com-
petitors were not prepared for the cut of SBIR funding and fold or merge. 
Technology Corporation expands with a signiﬁcant increase in new hires. 
The Technology Corporation culture embraces a collaborative and innova-
tive philosophy and practice reﬂecting HRD success. There is continual de-
mand for clean coal and other green technologies, sparking continual new 
and returning business. Technology Corporation Water becomes a market 
leader in water technologies. The company accomplishes a two-year innova-
tion turnaround. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
155
Horse-and-Buggy Scenario
It was a turbulent year, with a signiﬁcant stock market falter in October 
followed closely by the demise of numerous ﬁnancial institutions and the 
uncertainties of a newly elected Democratic administration. The current 
administration scrambles to address eight years of initiatives ranging from 
public school reform to the ongoing wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, all while 
negotiating a $700 billion bail-out package for the spiraling ﬁnancial in-
dustry. Throughout national uncertainty, Technology Corporation remains 
focused on developing and promoting numerous technologies funded pri-
marily through the SBIR program, which is renewed by the 111th Congress. 
Not only is the SBIR program renewed, but as part of the president’s job 
stimulus package, the funding is increased 25 percent over the current rate 
in an effort to promote new technologies that will aid in the research and 
development of alternative transportation fuels. 
The increase spurs a fresh level of interest among the current SBIR com-
panies and attracts the attention of new entrants into the market. With over 
twenty-ﬁve years of experience working within the SBIR community, Tech-
nology Corporation is well positioned to take advantage of the opportuni-
ties as long as it can maintain the balance between the more risky contract 
R&D and manufacturing businesses it has developed. Because Technology 
Corporation’s product is essentially intellectual property, the ﬁrm’s success 
lies in the development of its human resources, knowledge management, 
and the alignment of its talent with the appropriate technological demand. 
By 2013, Technology Corporation has become known as the best R&D 
organization by developing a network of highly intellectual individuals who 
operate as a collaborative, cohesive team. It is able to recruit the best talent 
due to its reputation as the “Google” or “Apple” of high-tech research and 
development. Technology Corporation’s research and development facilities 
are outﬁtted with the latest equipment, allowing research scientists and en-
gineers to take a technology from conception to prototype with amazing ac-
curacy, speed, and ability to replicate experiments and conﬁrm hypotheses 
through a network of highly skilled individuals. One of the secrets behind 
the success lies within the company’s talent management systems known as 
“E-Knows,” which comprises not only in-house personnel but also contract 
agreements with other scientists around the country who have been “cata-
logued” using its extensive proﬁling systems. Prior to or during a project, 


---PAGE BREAK---

156 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
E-Knows can help determine resources that may be able to contribute a 
solution and be contacted immediately via secure communication. The 
success of E-Knows lies not only in the extensive knowledge database but 
also in a culture that knows what it does not know. The ability to manage 
knowledge while promoting creativity, innovation, entrepreneurialism, and 
ﬂexibility have become the “Technology Corporation Way.”
Over the next ﬁve years, the Technology Corporation Way is incul-
cated throughout the organization, and the ﬁrm’s ability to execute to the 
highest of standards has become intuitive. The past eight years have been a 
roller coaster ride for the country as the economic slump followed by slow 
recovery and an overuse of bail-outs has resulted in numerous bankrupt 
companies with little to show for the promises of “reorganization” or control 
through regulation. The national debt has eclipsed $17 trillion, and the 
pressure to cut government spending is strong. The average American has 
lowered his or her debt by 30 percent over the past ten years, and savings are 
on the rise. The general perception among the public is that the government 
should listen to its own advice: “Quit spending what you don’t have.”
With most of the baby boomers in retirement, the strain on health 
care has become the “hot button” for certain generations, while the $6 gal-
lon of gasoline has remained the “pulse check” for the working class. The 
Middle East continues to require attention and resources but is more stable 
than during the past two decades. Technology Corporation has numerous 
technologies ready for Phase III with potential clients interested in partner-
ships. It is managing over two thousand projects funded by SBIR and a few 
contract R&D projects. The staff of 175 scientists and engineers, with an 
average tenure of ten years, is proud of its accomplishments but also realizes 
that change is in the air. The success rates of receiving SBIR funding have 
continued to drop from 50 percent to 15 percent over the past year, and the 
chatter regarding new avenues for technologies seems to be less.
While the funding for any new SBIR projects was removed in late 2016 
from the federal government’s budget, the awarded contracts are still being 
funded. Anticipating this change, Technology Corporation was able to con-
tact many of the SBIR companies and acquire their research awards, which re-
sulted in enough R&D to not only support its 175 scientists and engineers but 
increased its resources through short-term contract agreements as well. The 
addition of these new resources grew their E-Knows database 150 percent.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
157
The world of research and development has ﬁnally learned how to cross 
the “valley of death” by enhancing the ability to manage knowledge while 
promoting creativity, innovation, and entrepreneurialism through continu-
ous improvement and collaboration. 
Titanic Scenario
SBIR continues to be the bread and butter of the company. As a result of 
the recession, SBIR funding continues to decline, and contract R&D has 
a limited duration for speciﬁc projects. Although Technology Corporation 
prefers long-term, multiple-year contracts, companies are wary of commit-
ment. Few incentives are offered for cross-functional teams’ performance. 
Consequently, there is a lack of idea sharing and collaboration. 
The current administration makes changes in public policy and decides 
to fund a particular type of research. However, Technology Corporation 
has been misaligned and spread thin with so many other projects; therefore, 
it is not prepared to act. Technology Corporation continues to invest in 
clean coal.
In an attempt to steer away from relying on venture capitalism and due 
to the inability to identify a select group of business partners, SBIR remains 
the major funding source. For fear that SBIR might not be reauthorized and 
that Technology Corporation might not be able to compete for the limited 
funding, some scientists leave the company. The remaining “brainpower” is 
content with the knowledge they have. Only one-third of the employees are 
willing to participate in job rotations and, consequently, do not learn about 
research strategies for other areas of the ﬁrm.
Furthermore, the remaining Technology Corporation employees are 
not prepared to ﬁll the research void from the scientists who left due to the 
organizational silos and a limited focus on succession planning. As a result, 
Technology Corporation’s R&D contracts continue to decrease.
News ﬂash! The EPA standards on clean coal are not as stringent as in 
the last ﬁve years. There is increased interest in funding R&D related to 
clean coal technology. Technology Corporation has an opportunity to part-
ner with another company. In the past, the “old” Technology Corporation 
did some partnering and licensed technology but got burned by it, so the 
ﬁrm is cautious. This partner has been successful in getting venture capital. 
Unfortunately, the partner has an existing lawsuit that has not been settled, 


---PAGE BREAK---

158 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
so this challenge delays the contract. The venture capitalist pulls out. The 
competition capitalizes on clean coal technology.
Meanwhile, a ﬁrm in Turkey that specializes in a water treatment tech-
nology wants to relocate its production facilities to the northeastern United 
States. Technology Corporation has the equipment, and the company buys 
Technology Corporation Water. There are increased regulatory require-
ments, and the electrowinner—one of Technology Corporation’s top proj-
ects—is a potential source of income, if it is marketed, but the technology 
is sold prematurely.
The economy is in slow recovery. SBIR is reinstated; however, there is 
a decrease in the amount of funding. One measure to alleviate fears about 
the limited funding is to freeze hiring for a while. There is an increased 
urgency to ﬁnd funding sources, but the cross-functional teams, once cre-
ated to help anticipate the needs of the market, are weak. Unfortunately, 
employee morale is low; the employees work alone and rarely collaborate. 
Technology Corporation’s reputation is that it has feelers in too many areas 
to be effective. 
Technology Corporation has developed two new technologies that help 
solve pressing environmental issues. However, due to the lack of business 
development expertise and market timing, Technology Corporation sells 
the technologies too soon. It loses most nonfederal contracts that helped 
fund the bottom line and increased its expertise. 
A market-minded employee, who previously left Technology Corpora-
tion, misses living in the western United States. The former employee has 
a proven track record in partnering with large ﬁrms. The president of the 
company wants to rehire this employee, hoping to ignite some entrepreneur-
ial spirit. There is talk of bonuses for teams that innovate. The president 
tries to sell the idea, but Technology Corporation’s staff loudly protests the 
hire and threatens to leave. The president concedes. 
Biotechnology R&Ds are being funded. Previous partners with Tech-
nology Corporation, which were hurt by the recession, are now obtaining 
venture capital related to biotechnology. They want Technology Corpora-
tion to contract with them since it has had a great reputation, but there is 
not time for Technology Corporation to hire needed expertise. Employees 
take a signiﬁcant pay decrease in order to help Technology Corporation’s 
cash ﬂow. The president retires and another ﬁrm hires a majority of the re-
maining scientists and engineers of Technology Corporation. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
159
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSING THE UTILITY  
OF THE SCENARIOS
As mentioned earlier, scenarios must be relevant, challenging, and plausible 
in order to be useful tools for managers (Kahane, 2004; Ringland, 2002; 
Schwartz, 1991; van der Heijden, 1997, 2005a; van der Merwe, 2007). 
• Relevant—Scenarios must be relevant to the managers who use them. 
Three clear strategies for creating relevance are to include interview 
data in the scenarios, include a variety of forces from the brain- 
storming and ranking exercises, and involve mangers in the scenario 
writing process.
• Challenging—Scenarios must stretch the thinking inside the orga-
nization (Wack, 1985b). This means they must organize and present 
variables in surprising ways. Scenarios must challenge the assumptions 
inside the minds of managers. Challenging scenarios come from well-
executed external and internal analyses, and a thorough understanding 
of the forces at play.
• Plausible—Plausible scenarios are scenarios that might actually happen. 
If scenarios are too challenging or not well researched, they are in 
danger of being dismissed on the basis of being implausible. On the 
other hand, one of the true crafts of scenario planning is to bring things 
that seem implausible into the realm of the plausible (N. Collyns, 
personal communication, November 20, 2009). The term plausibility 
sometimes carries a link to probability, which is the certain death of 
any scenario project. Using this criterion requires attention to ensuring 
that the term is interpreted more as “possible,” rather than “probable.” 
These three criteria are a result of the scenario experiments over approx-
imately thirty years at Shell and the scenario planning pioneers who spent 
time there. It is important to ask the scenario planning team to consider the 
extent to which each of the scenarios satisﬁes these criteria before moving 
ahead. If the situation is conducive, it can also be beneﬁcial to pilot-test the 
scenarios with a group of managers. Satisfying these three criteria creates a 
kind of face validity for the scenarios and increases the likelihood they will 
be useful in provoking managers’ insights.
The three criteria are highly interdependent. For example, the more 
plausible or realistic a scenario is, the more relevant it will usually be for 


---PAGE BREAK---

160 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
managers. Likewise, the more challenging a scenario is, the more it runs the 
risk of losing plausibility. The key is to strike a balance among these criteria 
so that they can be used as a quick estimate of the scenario’s potential utility.
Wack (1985a) wrote that scenarios require a component of rigorous re-
search that is frequently missed. It is not enough to simply think creatively 
and produce a fun set of scenarios. Many scenario exercises fail to gather the 
necessary data to support the options and events they present. Signiﬁcant 
detailed research is a key characteristic of effective scenarios.
A MORE COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT
Six critical skills for the next decade of knowledge workers are described in 
Daniel Pink’s (2006) book A Whole New Mind: 
• Design 
• Story
• Symphony 
• Empathy
• Play
• Meaning 
Referred to as “senses,” these skills can be part of a unique approach to as-
sessing scenarios. 
Design
Developed countries are experiencing an age of material abundance. This 
means that consumers in developed countries are not limited in their 
choices. Now, more than ever, people can choose goods based on their pref-
erences. People are attracted to things that are aesthetically pleasing. 
The design of a set of scenarios is critical. Scenarios must incorporate 
themes such as songs by the Beatles (Ogilvy & Schwartz, 1998), catchy 
phrases that are easy to recall, and colorful images to make the set of sce-
narios visually pleasing. People need to want to read the scenarios, and the 
document itself is often the ﬁrst contact some will have with the ideas that 
they carry.
Increasingly, how scenarios are distributed also matters. Technology (be 
it video, podcasting, narrated slides with photos, interactive websites, etc.) 
allows for great creativity in design and should be leveraged when ﬁnishing 
up a set of scenarios.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
161
Story
People can remember information more easily if it is presented in the form 
of a story (Manning, 2002). From the studies at Xerox concerning the ex-
change of expertise through repair stories in small “knowledge manage-
ment” teams to the shifting of organizational strategy at 3M from bulleted, 
logic-based lists of action items to stories (Shaw, Brown, & Bromiley, 1998), 
it is clear that some organizations are harnessing the natural tendency of the 
human brain to think in story format. 
Most primitive, preindustrial cultures featured stories as a means for 
transferring history and critical knowledge. Native American tribes and 
South African Ubuntu tribes are but two examples. Storytelling is also a 
growing component of big business. From scriptwriters in Hollywood to 
descriptions of homes for sale in real estate ads and vineyard lore on wine 
bottles, story elements are now being used to do what they do best: in-
ﬂuence and strike an emotional chord. Cutting-edge research at Columbia 
University Medical School called the “narrative medicine movement” sug-
gests that the ability to understand patient stories plays an important role 
in diagnosis, treatment, and a whole-minded approach to healing (Charon, 
2001). Thus, the contexts in which stories are effective seem almost endless. 
Obviously, scenarios tell stories. Stories are the foundation of scenarios 
and scenario planning. Each scenario must contain an interesting plot that 
captures reader attention and contains tension that is ultimately resolved. 
The story criterion is the logical location of the three criteria discussed ear-
lier: relevant, challenging, and plausible. 
Symphony
Symphony is simply another word for systems thinking. To illustrate how 
symphonic thinking will be important for knowledge workers in the future, 
consider the need for people who can straddle cultures. For example, as 
more jobs are sent to India, there is an increasing demand for “people who 
can manage the relationships between the coders in the East and the clients 
in the West. These whole-minded professionals must be literate in two cul-
tures, comfortable in the hard science of computing and the soft science of 
sales and marketing” (Pink, 2006, pp. 135–136). 
Using the symphony criterion means checking that each scenario con-
tains a “system” of interacting events, characters, and interactions. Each 


---PAGE BREAK---

162 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
scenario must form a logical whole in which the various elements and their 
relationships can be seen. Using systems diagrams as part of the scenario 
construction process is one way to enhance the symphony criterion (Ward 
& Scheifer, 1998). Scenarios must also integrate numerous variables in their 
stories and present them in a novel way. Systems thinking is considered a 
cornerstone of scenario planning. The ability to see interrelated forces and 
integrate patterns that drive events can lead to compelling presentations in 
the scenario stories.
Empathy
Empathy is the ability to put yourself in someone else’s shoes. As a result, 
high-value work will be unique, heartfelt, and based in communicating 
things that are difﬁcult to describe with a removed sense of logic. 
The ability to provoke empathy is one key to effective scenario plan-
ning. When scenario planning participants suspend disbelief and seriously 
consider the options presented in the scenarios, they begin to develop em-
pathy for each other and for the complexity of the system in which they 
are operating. Facilitators must also be able to empathize with participants 
in order to make the scenarios compelling. The ability to empathize with 
managers and incorporate elements of concern from their initial interviews 
is one key to making the scenarios useful. 
Play
Play is an increasingly fundamental part of important work in all kinds of 
organizations. A playful attitude is often an indicator of a creative personal-
ity (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996). The role of a playful attitude has been sug-
gested as a business skill, leading to high emotional intelligence with many 
favorable side effects in the coming conceptual age. 
The set of scenarios, and each scenario individually, must create a world 
in which managers can “play.” One particularly effective strategy I have 
used is to create physical spaces or rooms that feature the qualities of each 
scenario. By putting decision makers into a physical space, the natural in-
clination to play can be enhanced. Drawing on experiential and construc-
tionist learning theory, using physical spaces that reﬂect each story makes it 
easier for managers to suspend disbelief. Awakening the imagination can be 
a time-consuming process; and while the business world continues to move 
faster and faster, innovative ideas are often found by slowing down, stepping 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
163
away, changing the location, and allowing time to reﬂect (Csikszentmih-
alyi, 1998). 
Meaning
People in developed countries are searching for more satisfying, meaningful 
work and lives. Pink (2006) cited dissatisfaction with current global politics 
(Koenig, 2001), research in current corporate environments in which spiri-
tuality is growing (Karlgaard, 2004), and the rising popularity of activities 
like meditation as evidence that people seek meaningful, fulﬁlling occupa-
tions and lives. 
Scenarios provide a forum for awakening creativity and innovative 
thinking in the individuals who use them. Cases from companies that have 
used scenarios (Ringland, 2002) suggest that scenarios, and the scenario 
planning process itself, encourage organization members to take ownership 
of ideas and processes. In some ways, creating a feeling of ownership signals 
a sense of increased meaning (Csikszentmihalyi, 1998). More speciﬁcally, 
each individual scenario portrays the future in a fundamentally different 
way, allowing users to interpret the meaning of a given set of variables or 
issues, and how they play out in the future in a variety of different ways. 
Scenarios provide a scaffolding for making meaning out of a complex set of 
forces and how they interact to form a unique future (Chermack & van der 
Merwe, 2003). 
THE SCENARIO QUALITY ASSESSMENT CHECKLIST
Using the senses as criteria for assessing scenarios results in a framework 
that is easy to apply. Figure 7.16 presents the Scenario Quality Assessment 
Checklist and illustrates the use of the senses as scenario assessment criteria. 
Useful questions intended to prompt the judgment of the scenario team for 
each criterion are provided. 
Figure 7.17 is an example of using the Scenario Quality Assessment 
Checklist for the Technology Corporation scenarios. The six senses are ap-
plied as snapshot indicators of criteria for compelling scenarios. 
COMMUNICATING THE SCENARIOS
When the scenario planning team has settled on a set of scenarios believed 
to be high in quality and utility, they must be communicated throughout 


---PAGE BREAK---

164 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
Scenario  
A
Scenario  
B
Scenario  
C
Scenario  
D
Design
Are the scenario titles clever and easy 
to remember? Is the presentation of the 
scenario workbook attractive and 
aesthetically pleasing?
Story
Is each scenario story relevant, 
challenging, and plausible to the 
intended audience? Is the story 
presented in each scenario compelling 
and interesting?
Symphony
Does each scenario present a consistent 
world in which the various elements 
relate? Does each scenario describe 
integrated events that can be presented 
as a whole?
Empathy
Do the scenarios evoke empathy? Are 
the characters and events in each 
scenario easy for managers to relate to, 
and do they draw on real issues?
Play
Does each scenario provide the back- 
ground for managers to experiment 
with varying ideas? Does each scenario 
lend itself to creativity in answering 
the “what if” questions?
Meaning
Does each scenario provide a forum  
in which a management team can 
derive and create meaning? Do the 
scenarios incorporate events that are 
meaningful?
F I G U R E  7.16 The Scenario Quality Assessment Checklist


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
165
Airbus
Concorde
Horse  
and Buggy
Titanic
Design
Are the scenario titles clever 
and easy to remember? Is the  
presentation of the scenario 
workbook attractive and 
aesthetically pleasing?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Story
Is each scenario story relevant, 
challenging, and plausible to the 
intended audience? Is the story 
presented in each scenario 
compelling and interesting?
Yes
Yes— 
but  
story  
needs  
more  
work
Yes
Yes
Symphony
Does each scenario present a 
consistent world in which the 
various elements relate?  
Does each scenario describe 
integrated events that can be 
presented as a whole?
Yes
Yes
Needs more  
detail, fact,  
research— 
internal  
consistency  
is lacking
Yes
Empathy
Do the scenarios evoke 
empathy? Are the characters 
and events in each scenario 
easy for managers to relate to, 
and do they draw on real 
issues?
No— 
revisit
No—
revisit
Yes—good 
illustration 
of what 
happens 
when few 
people work 
hard and 
lead the 
organization
Yes
Play
Does each scenario provide the 
background for managers to  
experiment with varying ideas? 
Does each scenario lend itself 
to creativity in answering the 
“what if” questions?
Fairly pre- 
scriptive as 
written—not 
a lot of room 
for creativity 
and play; 
open this  
one up more
OK
OK
OK
Meaning
Does each scenario provide a 
forum in which a management 
team can derive and create mean- 
ing? Do the scenarios incorpor- 
ate events that are meaningful?
OK—could 
be improved
Good
OK
Good
F I G U R E  7.17  The Scenario Quality Assessment Checklist—Technology 
Corporation


---PAGE BREAK---

166 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
the organization. Usually, the set of scenarios is captured in a document, 
but a document is not enough. The work of the scenario planning team is 
really only beginning. The use of websites, videos, and other technologies 
to disseminate and communicate scenarios is becoming common. The most 
successful scenario planners use multiple methods to communicate their 
ideas. Short but compelling presentations followed by extensive dialogue 
sessions were the preferred tools used by early scenario planning pioneers. 
Common techniques for communicating scenarios include these:
• Videos
• Websites
• Documents (workbook)
• Role-playing activities
• Audiotapes/podcasts
• Presentations
• Workshops
Disseminating the scenarios has two key components. The ﬁrst is com-
municating the scenarios throughout the organization. The second is us-
ing the scenarios in a purposeful way to examine the initial issue, test the 
business idea, and explore other aspects of the organization in each of the 
alternative futures. The latter component is covered in detail in Chapter 
9—the scenario consideration phase. Before moving into the consideration 
phase, decision makers should consider advantages of communicating the 
scenarios more generally, throughout the organization. 
There are different strategies for accomplishing this, and some decision 
makers may have reason to avoid distributing the scenarios organization-
wide. For example, scenarios may be built for a strategic business unit and 
may not be relevant across the organization. Again, the context should be 
the guide for how widely to communicate the scenarios. At a minimum, 
decision makers should distribute the scenarios to the people who were in-
volved in their development, and follow up with an invitation to a forum in 
which they can ask questions and join the conversation.
A recent project I worked on featured a unique way of communicating 
the scenarios. The strategy generated excitement and buy-in. When the de-
cision makers had ﬁnalized a set of scenarios they deemed high utility, they 
invited particular individuals to a meeting. These individuals were known 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 3—S C E N A R I O  D E V E L O P M E N T  
167
for their positions as informal leaders and were well liked. They were also 
individuals known as key social information brokers throughout the orga-
nization. In the meeting, the scenarios were presented in concept and with 
just enough detail to whet their appetites. In the days and weeks after the 
meeting, these individuals could not help but tell their colleagues about 
the scenarios, and positive rumors spread quickly. Within a few weeks, an 
excitement and desire to know more about the scenarios had caught on like 
wildﬁre and spread rapidly throughout the organization. The decision mak-
ers created a mystique around the scenarios that compelled members of the 
organization to want to know more. The scenarios were then rolled out 
organization-wide in a series of meetings in various departments, locations, 
and branches. While perhaps somewhat manipulative, the effects of this 
strategy paid off, and the scenarios were well received, popular, embraced, 
and used.
However they are distributed, the scenarios must be used purposefully 
to explore the original question and beyond. If the project simply ends with 
the dissemination of the scenarios, the project will fail. Activities for us-
ing scenarios to explore the original question and purpose are presented in 
Chapter 9 on the scenario consideration phase. It is wise to dedicate sig-
niﬁcant resources in developing a strategy for implementing and using the 
scenarios. How scenarios are used is the crux of scenario planning. 
Constructing and presenting the scenarios should be fun. Most of us 
are taught to stop being creative around grade 3. It is amazing how fast 
creativity skills return, and participants should be encouraged to let their 
creative insights ﬂow. The point is, “If you’re not having fun, you’re not do-
ing it right” (Ogilvy & Schwartz, 1998, p. 19). 
CONCLUSION
This chapter has presented the activities and workshops used to construct 
scenarios. In addition, this chapter has suggested tools for writing scenarios 
including additional research, team structure, plots, time lines, titles, and 
others. A sample set of scenarios for Technology Corporation has also been 
provided. Finally, this chapter has described a comprehensive set of assess-
ment criteria for increasing the scenarios’ effectiveness and the likelihood 
they will shift the thinking inside the organization.


---PAGE BREAK---

168 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
This phase of the scenario system is lengthy and requires a great deal 
of work. The goal of this phase is to have developed four scenarios that are 
deemed high quality and high utility. The scenarios can then be dissemi-
nated as the context suggests and used for the speciﬁc purposes described in 
the next chapter.


---PAGE BREAK---

 169
Phase 4—Scenario 
Implementation:  
Putting Scenarios to Use
Chapter 7 presented the tools and processes for constructing scenarios. 
This chapter describes how to use the scenarios to accomplish the objectives 
of the project—the scenario implementation phase (Figure 8.1). In other 
words, this chapter describes how to use the scenarios once they have been 
developed. Common general objectives are to provoke strategic insights, ex-
pand the assumptions of decision makers, and develop the capacity to see 
major discontinuities before it’s too late. However, the speciﬁc objectives 
that were deﬁned in the project preparation phase drive the scenario imple-
mentation phase of the project. This chapter explains how to design a set of 
workshops for using the scenarios to assess the organization in a variety of 
alternative futures.
This phase involves returning to the original question or issue and us-
ing the scenarios to develop multiple ways of answering the question and 
addressing the issue. These strategies include using the scenarios to examine 
the initial question, test the current theory of the business/business idea, 
analyze current strategies, and develop strategic resilience and robustness. 
However, the toolbox for using scenarios can be quite extensive. Several 
methods are available for facilitating change and communicating the con-
tent of the scenario in participatory and creative ways. The discipline of 
organization development specializes in a variety of activities and change 
interventions that can be used in the presentation and consideration of sce-
narios. A short list of change models that may be useful in the scenario 
implementation phase is as follows:
8


---PAGE BREAK---

170 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
• Lewin’s force ﬁeld analysis
• Nominal group technique
• Team building
• Value voting
• Simulations
• Visioning
All of these approaches to change management can be useful in consider-
ing the implications of scenarios, and all of them can be incorporated into 
workshops using scenarios to leverage change in organizations. The critical 
tip for focusing scenario use, however, is that the initial issue must drive any 
method. This approach will keep the project from slipping onto other issues.
F I G U R E  8.1  Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Implementation 
Phase
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
171
Each scenario planning project is a customized learning project. There-
fore, there are few speciﬁc outcomes that will be common to all scenario 
projects. Returning to the original purpose, issue, or question, and looking 
at the business model in each scenario are critical requirements of nearly all 
scenario projects. The suggestions in this chapter are a framework aimed 
at getting the most out of scenarios. Experienced change consultants may 
want to add to and modify the workshops listed here and create other ways 
of using scenarios. The goal is to make sure the scenarios are used to think 
critically about various aspects of the organization. Scenario use is intended 
to shift the thinking inside the organization, so the fun and creativity that 
emerge in developing scenarios should be carried through into the scenario 
implementation phase. 
Scenarios must be presented to participants in ways that provoke learn-
ing that leads to strategic insight. Many participants will have insights and 
communication breakthroughs during some of the scenario construction 
workshops described in the previous chapter. Research shows that a great 
deal of learning happens throughout the scenario construction and imple-
mentation phases (Chermack, Lynham, & van der Merwe, 2006; Cher-
mack & van der Merwe, 2003). Thus, the likelihood of provoking strategic 
insights increases by involving people in the whole scenario planning sys-
tem. This is another argument for deductive scenario building.
USING SCENARIOS PURPOSEFULLY
Roger Penrose (2004), a professor of mathematics at Oxford, wrote that 
when two people successfully communicate, the words most often used are 
“Oh, I see!” A logical question is “What is it that is seen?” What is the 
substance of a strategic insight (frequently called an “aha” moment)? This 
ability to see anew or to develop joint understanding via conversation and 
dialogue is a key intention of most scenario projects.
The speciﬁc activities using scenarios to build toward achieving this 
sense of sight are the focus of this chapter. Revisiting the initial prob-
lem and question begins the process of developing insights and creates a 
basis for the strategic conversation described by van der Heijden (1997, 
2005a). The most critical strategic learning happens from the synthesis 
of using scenarios to examine strategic issues and various aspects of the 
organization. 


---PAGE BREAK---

172 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
WIND TUNNELING
The basic idea behind scenario implementation is the concept of wind tun-
neling. Wind tunneling ﬁrst appeared in aerodynamics research to test air-
planes and simulate the environment of free ﬂight. Eventually, wind tunnels 
were used to test buildings and automobiles and examine a variety of struc-
tural properties. The concept is the same with scenarios. Scenarios function 
as conceptual wind tunnels in which to measure a variety of organizational 
characteristics.
This book—and many others—have highlighted the high degree of 
change in the external environment, describing things as turbulent. Tur-
bulence occurs when there are sudden changes in the environment and the 
structural properties of objects begin to show their inadequacies. The ob-
jects can be airplane wings in aerodynamic wind tunnels, or organizations 
in conceptual wind tunnels. Either way, turbulence is an environmental 
characteristic that puts stress on the object in question, be it an airplane or 
an organization. Usually, pilots change altitude—they seek a different envi-
ronment. Because such an option is not readily available for organizational 
decision makers, they are forced to think about how to build an organiza-
tion that can withstand the stresses imposed on it. Scenarios are tools for 
building such a resilient organization.
Scenarios create a way to analyze the organization in a variety of con-
ditions. Remember that a basic premise of scenario planning is that the 
environment changes too rapidly for most strategic planning models to be 
useful. Scenario planning is built on the assumption that the environment 
changes constantly. By building uncertainty into the environment as a basic 
structural feature, scenarios vary the environment in which the organiza-
tion is operating. Learning scenarios are speciﬁcally used to present a range 
of possible external contextual conditions (Wack, 1984). With scenarios 
serving as varying contextual conditions, critical aspects of the organization 
are examined carefully. 
Scenarios represent the different future conditions within which the 
strategy, business model or other decisions must ﬁt. Wind tunneling 
is used to test decisions for robustness and for exposing opportunities 
and risks. An important additional beneﬁt of wind tunneling is that the 
leadership engaged in wind tunneling are continually adjusting their as-
sumptions as they enter the different worlds described in each scenario. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
173
As leaders check their decisions or business models in the various sce-
narios they are often required to adjust their thinking based on evidence 
of ﬂawed assumptions. This process is ﬁlled with critical learning op-
portunities in the scenario-based strategy framework, and draws highly 
on constructivist learning principles (for a detailed description of the 
cognitive processes at work in scenario planning and wind-tunneling, 
see Chermack & van der Merwe, 2003). (van der Merwe, 2008, p. 233)
Each of the suggested workshops in this chapter are variations on the 
wind tunneling implementation strategy. To clarify, the workshops de-
scribed here are all based on throwing ideas, strategies, plans, questions, and 
projects into the scenarios, asking questions, and ﬁnding out what more can 
be learned.
OVERVIEW OF THE SCENARIO 
IMPLEMENTATION WORKSHOPS
Like the scenario development phase, a series of workshops must be designed 
to use the scenarios and maximize their beneﬁt. This chapter presents ﬁve 
recommended workshops for using scenarios, with the following focuses:
• Examining the initial question
• Testing the theory of the business/business idea
• Analyzing current strategies
• Developing “signals” 
• Creating an experiential learning exercise
The ﬁrst two workshops should be required; the others are optional. Again, 
experienced consultants may want to integrate scenarios into other processes 
with which they are familiar. 
EXAMINING THE INITIAL QUESTION—WORKSHOP 1
The ﬁrst step in putting the scenarios to use is to return to the initial pur-
pose, problem, and question. After all, the priority of the project is to de-
velop a variety of different ways to explore the problem and answer the 
question. This workshop can be informal and needs only to bring the team 
and decision makers back together in a room suitable for brainstorming. 
Again, whiteboards or newsprint on the walls, room to move around, com-
fortable chairs, and plenty of paper, pencils, and markers will work nicely. 


---PAGE BREAK---

174 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
The scenario project leader can present all of the scenarios, or, if appro-
priate, individuals who wrote the speciﬁc scenarios can present them. The 
presentations should be short, involve the essence of the stories, and use 
colorful pictures or slides to describe each scenario. The project leader then 
facilitates a dialogue relating back to the initial question. The following 
questions may be useful in starting the conversation:
• What have we learned throughout the scenario development process 
that relates to our initial question?
• How would we answer the initial question in each scenario? Are the 
answers different in each scenario?
• What additional information would we want to know?
• What different ways of solving our strategic dilemma are suggested by 
entertaining these scenarios?
• What are the clear strategic opportunities that can be seen in each scenario?
• What general actions would we recommend around the initial 
problem, question, or issue, having considered each of these scenarios 
and their implications?
The goal of this workshop is to begin a genuine conversation about the 
potential issues decision makers may face and to provide a mechanism to 
wonder about the future. Research indicates that executives spend less than 
10 percent of their time on strategic issues (Nash, 2007). Providing a space 
to think and reﬂect on strategic issues on its own is a valuable contribution. 
Depending on the size of the organization and the reaction to once again 
thinking strategically, more than one scenario presentation around the ini-
tial issue may be necessary. 
Often, additional workshops to simply reﬂect on the project and explore 
insights that have come up are requested. I have found that almost anyone 
who participates in a scenario project develops a clear desire to reﬂect; and 
once given the time and space to think in this way, they seem to want more 
of it. This was certainly the case with Technology Corporation. Corporate 
leaders initially agreed to three half-day workshops to implement scenarios. 
Based on the participant interactions, and insightful dialogue that was com-
ing out of the ﬁrst two workshops, leaders asked to extend the conversation 
with two additional workshops beyond the initial three. They speciﬁcally 
asked that the additional time not be structured but, rather, left open to 
continue dialogue on deep issues that had arisen. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
175
Tips for Presentations
Presentations are an effective way to communicate scenarios. Wack’s pre-
sentations at Shell are legendary, and he traveled throughout the world 
delivering compelling sets of scenarios. By all accounts, he was a gifted com-
municator. Honing communications skills is an evolutionary process, and a 
few basic understandings will increase the effectiveness of any presentation. 
The surest way to void a presentation of meaning and put the audience 
to sleep is to read the presentation slides. This is an unacceptable practice, 
yet many presenters fall into this habit. A few tips to consider in sharing a 
presentation are as follows:
• Rehearse. Great presenters rehearse for each slide of their presentations. 
They plan the core message that goes along with each of the slides and 
create innovative ways to deliver that message.
• Use visuals. Slides should offer minimal text. Instead, incorporate 
images that are aesthetically pleasing. These make it impossible to read 
the slides, and they provide the viewer with something more interest- 
ing to look at than bulleted text.
• Be enthusiastic. If you don’t have passion for your topic, neither will 
your audience. Great speakers get excited about what they are talking 
about because they have to. Presentations given by Pierre Wack and 
Peter Schwartz are legendary for their passion and enthusiasm.
For more useful information about delivering effective presentations, con-
sider Garr Reynolds’s (2010) book Presentation Zen, or visit his website at 
www.garrreynolds.com. 
SCENARIO IMMERSION: A VARIATION ON EXAMINING THE 
INITIAL QUESTION—WORKSHOP 2
A similar approach to considering the scenarios is called “scenario immer-
sion” (Wilson & Ralston, 2006). Participants develop their thoughts about 
the opportunities and threats as well as possible actions and strategies for 
each scenario. The facilitator explains that the goal of the workshop is to 
develop as many ideas as possible about how the organization should pro-
ceed, and participants are encouraged to think broadly to capture a wide 
range of possible actions for decision makers to take. The process unfolds as 
each scenario is presented, and participants are asked to assume the role of 


---PAGE BREAK---

176 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
a decision maker. Each participant is asked to identify three to ﬁve oppor-
tunities and three to ﬁve threats. Each of these is recorded on a single note 
card. Participants are then asked to develop a strategy they believe could be 
effective in that scenario. 
Once these exercises are complete, the process moves into a voting 
round. Each participant is asked to nominate one threat and one opportu-
nity he or she believes to be critical in that scenario. The idea is to leverage 
the collective capital of the participants in the room to distill a core set of 
opportunities and threats. This part of the process is completed for each 
scenario.
When critical opportunities and threats have been identiﬁed, the pro-
cess turns to strategies. The group is asked to consider all of the strategies 
that have been brainstormed, and to look for the strategies that appear in 
more than one scenario. The goal is to identify two or three strategies that 
can be viable across all or multiple scenarios. This is perhaps the most useful 
outcome of any scenario project.
TESTING THE THEORY OF THE BUSINESS/BUSINESS IDEA—
WORKSHOP 3
Another effective exercise is to examine the theory of the business/business 
idea in each scenario. Using the same brainstorming space set up described 
in earlier chapters, the team can take the theory of the business and business 
idea developed in the scenario exploration phase (see Chapter 6) and wind-
tunnel them through each of the scenarios. 
The process of testing the theory of the business in the context provided 
by each scenario should take about a half day. The scenario team presents a 
scenario to decision makers, and a dialogue is initiated about how the the-
ory of the business may need to change in order to be viable in a given sce-
nario. Key questions for exploring the theory of the business include these:
• Do our assumptions about the environment, mission, and core com- 
petencies ﬁt or enable us to take action within the futures presented in 
each of the scenarios?
• Do our assumptions about the environment, mission, and core com- 
petencies ﬁt each other in each of the scenarios?
• Is our theory of the business known and understood throughout the 
organization?
• How can we continuously test our theory of the business?


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
177
These questions should be posed for each scenario. These conversations can 
become quite diverse and reach into unexpected areas. It is OK to continue 
to explore ideas during these conversations, but keep in mind the goal is to 
work toward how the theory of the business may need to change to suit a 
variety of potential futures.
A similar process can be used to explore the business idea. One work-
shop described in the scenario exploration phase is to ask decision makers 
to draw or write out a model of how they interpret the business idea. Then, 
facilitators attempt to synthesize the various models, capturing the variety 
in interpretation. The synthesized model can then be considered in each 
scenario. Here are key questions for the business idea:
• Are we continuing to serve a business need with our products/services 
in each scenario?
• Would our distinctive competencies still be distinctive in each of the 
scenarios?
• Would we lose our competitive advantage in any of the scenarios? 
How would it change?
Revised Theory of the Business/Business Idea for  
Technology Corporation
As a result of a workshop to test the theory of the business/business idea in 
Technology Corporation, the team decided their business idea needed to 
change if they were to move beyond their current single source of funding. 
The resulting revised business idea is captured in Figure 8.2.
Technology Corporation’s revised business idea clearly includes moving 
beyond the production of intellectual property and into the production of 
new, useful technology products. The new business idea includes increased 
contracting with R&D partners, the licensing and selling of new technol-
ogy, and cross-functional collaboration. These additions will be critical in 
moving Technology Corporation forward, beyond its current situation. 
The response to the revised business idea in Technology Corporation 
was overwhelming. Many expressed surprise that such a simple exercise 
could have such profound results. Managers expressed a greater under-
standing of what was going on in the minds of decision makers and leaders 
after conversations about the core purpose of the organization. Executives 
expressed a sense of unity in knowing and understanding what their col-
leagues thought and their rationale for taking certain stances.


---PAGE BREAK---

178 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
ANALYZING CURRENT STRATEGIES—WORKSHOP 4
Most decision makers operate under a set of strategic goals whether they 
have used scenario planning or not. These goals and strategies can be viewed 
through the “lens” of each scenario to see where they may or may not make 
sense. In this optional workshop, participants come together to consider the 
organization’s strategy, current strategic initiatives, risky potential projects, 
and other organizational goals in the context of each scenario. The purpose 
of this workshop is to assess current organizational goals and their viability 
in each scenario. Ultimately, a manageable set of strategies that contribute 
to the advancement of the organization is sought. Goals and strategies that 
are found to distract from the core purpose of the organization (the theory 
of the business/business idea) can be considered further and potentially re-
moved from the strategic agenda.
For example, a major corporation I worked with had a set of eleven 
strategic goals. We designed a workshop in which we asked participants to 
rank their eleven strategic goals in each of the scenarios. Participants saw 
that their priorities shifted in each scenario. After working through the ex-
ercise, decision makers saw that four of their strategic goals were generally 
irrelevant in all four scenarios. They saw that elements of the four strategic 
goals that were low in utility could be absorbed as components of other 
F I G U R E  8.2 Technology Corporation’s Revised Business Idea
Brainpower
SBIR
Phases
I & II
Intellectual
Property
New
Technology
Pure Science
Science + Business Development
Cross-
functional
Collaboration
Innovation
(Science
Manufacturing
Brainpower)
License and
sell new
technologies
External Forces
Contract
R&D
Services
with
Partners


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
179
goals. With some modiﬁcation, shifting, and rewriting, decision makers 
collectively decided to collapse their goals into a more efﬁcient list of seven 
strategic goals.
The point is not necessarily to have fewer strategies or goals. Instead, 
the goal is to learn to see redundancies or initiatives that are not useful in 
moving the organization forward, or to discover activities that do not con-
tribute to the long-term sustainability of the company. Activities that are 
not seen to contribute should be examined closely and abandoned if they 
don’t offer at least potential utility in sustaining the organization and con-
tributing to growth over the long term.
DEVELOPING “SIGNALS”—WORKSHOP 5
Signals are sometimes referred to as “leading indicators” or “signposts.” Sig-
nals are the events in a given scenario that may indicate its story is begin-
ning to unfold. In other words, they are things to pay attention to that 
could indicate the future is beginning to happen as it is described in one of 
the scenarios. Developing signals is a highly undervalued part of the sce-
nario planning system. It is worth spending time thinking about the things 
that will indicate major shifts in the external environment. Using the same 
workshop format as described earlier, the team should spend a few hours 
going over each scenario and identifying the events that can be viewed as 
triggers of larger change tendencies. 
In another recent scenario project I facilitated, these signals were 
the primary output sought by the CEO. She was very interested in these 
events that signaled major changes on the horizon. Therefore, we spent 
extra time on these elements and found it to be highly worthwhile. We 
designed a presentation that focused solely on the signals. The conversa-
tion that formed around the signals led to several other insights, and those 
insights served to bolster the decision makers’ “anticipatory capacity” in 
that they left that presentation knowing what to look for in the following 
eighteen months.
“Signals” for Technology Corporation
Figure 8.3 presents the signals for Technology Corporation’s scenarios. 
These signals are general indicators that a given scenario may be starting 
to unfold. As such, these are the items that should be on decision makers’ 
“radar screens.” 


---PAGE BREAK---

180 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
F I G U R E  8.3  Signals for Technology Corporation Scenarios
Primarily R&D Contract Based
Primarily SBIR Based
Cohesive, Cross-functional, Collaboratively Innovative
Neglected, Siloed, Individually Innovative
Talent Management
Concorde
Airbus
Titanic
Horse and Buggy
Funding Sources
• Technology Corporation successfully recruits 
world-renowned energy research scientists
• Technology Corporation’s reputation in energy 
research grows as its world-renowned energy 
research scientists enable research 
partnerships with national laboratories and 
major research universities
• Lucrative energy research partnerships create  
pressure to sustain that portion of the enter- 
prise to the detriment of development activities
• Lack of collaboration from the scientists create 
a dysfunctional siloed organization with each division 
operating as functionally separate enterprises
• A funnelling effect over the years transforms 
Technology Corporation into a contract, 
narrowly focused, energy research laboratory
• “Brain-Drain” as scientists and engineers leave 
or are recruited to more stable environments
• Unable to turn Technology Corporation into 
the entrepreneurial enterprise originally 
envisioned, its owner decides to sell
• Decrease in SBIR funding
• Siloed mind-set
• Increase in activities with cross-functional 
teams
• Growth in alternative energy government 
funding
• Stronger global protections on IP
• Long-term R&D partnerships
• Decrease in collaboration with outside partners
• Increased interest in water technologies
• Technologies do not advance beyond phase 2
• Inability to identify investors for technologies
• Technology development expenses outweigh 
the revenues generated from the technology 
over time
• Significant, sharp decline in R&D services and 
customer base
• Existing employees transition from old framework to new 
innovated/market-driven consciousness
• 2012 Obama reelected and funding increased for 
energy immovation—vision, goals aligned
• Proprietary Foundation interested in partnering with Tech- 
nology Corporation because of new success with partners
• 10-year turn-around for innovations from conception to market
• With a new election approaching in 2016, Technology 
Corporation has protected itself against threat of SBIR 
funding cut by securing primarily R&D contracts
• Two key innovations take off
• Demand for clean coal and other green technology 
increases—gain more R&D contracts
• Diversification in new market pays off
• Propietary Foundation provides continued funding for 
Technology Corporation—sparks interest from other 
organization for R&D contracts
• Top industry competitors were not prepared for the cut  
of SBIR funding and fold or merge
• Significant increase in employees
• 2-year turn-around for innovations from conception to 
market
• Congress will vote to reauthorize the SBIR program prior 
to March 20, 2009
• Monitor http://www.zyn.com/ for increased chatter 
regarding SBIR funding. Monitor number of SBIR training 
seminars for increased attendance. Monitor statistics 
regarding application and awards of SBIR projects
• Technology Corporation is successful at retrieving, 
retaining, and disseminating knowledge from not only its 
workforce, but the industry as well. Technology Corpora- 
tion Knows (TC-Knows) is an example of a “system” that 
conceptually explores the possibilities of harnessing the 
power of knowledge
• The request for “bailouts” and “loans” continue to cause friction
• Monitor national debt annual increases. Current estimates 
are $2–3 trillion per year
• Monitor national savings rate in U.S. provided by the 
Bureau of Economic Analyst (http://www.bea.gov/
briefrm/saving.htm)
• Monitor AARP research for indicators of current issues 
affecting the older generation. Monitor GDP for China and 
U.S.: IMF (http://www.imf.org/external/index.htm); 
World Bank (http://www.worldbank.org); CIA World 
Factbook (https://www.cia.gov/publications/the-
world-factbook/index.htm)
• Monitor congressional hearings  
related to SBIR funding


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
181
CREATING AN EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING EXERCISE— 
WORKSHOP 6
One of the most profound scenario planning experiences I have had was 
at a large international organization. Members of the scenario planning 
team suggested we build four rooms, each reﬂecting one of the scenarios. 
The rooms had walls that were plastered with artifacts, posters, banners, 
and newspaper articles that characterized the scenarios. To the extent pos-
sible, material artifacts (in this case, it was a computer company, so the 
team brought in early computer logic boards) for participants to “play” 
with will immediately capture participant attention. Executives were put 
into cross-organizational teams, and each team was assigned to a room. 
One of the members of the scenario planning team presented the sce-
nario and explained that the task for the group was to tell the story of 
how the scenario came to unfold. The “aha” moments and critical learn-
ing points were observable in participant behavior. For some, it was a 
highly emotional experience because the scenarios came alive in such 
profound ways.
Activities that attempt to bring the imagination into reality, like those 
in this suggested workshop, have been shown to increase learning (Man-
ning, 2002). The military has used simulations and virtual reality tech-
nologies for decades because of their learning beneﬁts. The idea is similar 
with experiential learning workshops. Anything that can be done to get the 
scenarios “off the page” and into the microcosms of the decision makers 
will increase their potential effects. Writers and ﬁlmmakers talk about the 
“suspension of disbelief,” and this is a central concept in scenario planning 
as well. Sometimes, scenarios will no doubt be met with disbelief, and it 
is in the presentation, communication, and consideration of scenarios that 
disbelief can be handled. Of course, scenarios must be well researched, so 
that their potentially unbelievable stories can be told with data establishing 
their legitimacy.
Experiential learning workshops require a great deal of time and effort 
to design, but their payoff can be high. Keep in mind, too, that some orga-
nizational cultures will be less open to this kind of exercise than others. For 
example, engineers are not likely to go for creative exercises like this one, 
but designers, sociologists, and industries or organizations with close work-
ing teams are likely to beneﬁt.


---PAGE BREAK---

182 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
OTHER WIND-TUNNELING STRATEGIES
Decision makers can use the scenarios to examine their strategy, goals, hu-
man resource capacity, speciﬁc decisions and outcomes, business model, and 
a variety of other items (see Figure 8.4).
Figure 8.4 is a basic structure for wind-tunneling various organizational 
elements through each scenario. At its most simple, this framework suggests 
some very basic questions that get to the heart of scenario planning. For ex-
ample, logical questions that fall out of this framework include the following:
• Do we have a viable strategy in each of the scenarios? In which 
scenarios does our strategy fall apart?
• Does our organization structure support the kind of organization we 
might be in each of the scenarios?
• Is our organizational culture an asset or liability in each scenario? 
Why? What implications does our current organizational culture carry 
for our strategic options in each scenario?
• Do we have the necessary human resource capabilities to maintain our 
business idea in each scenario? Do we have the leadership capacity to 
manage the challenges evident in each scenario?
WIND TUNNELING FOR TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION
A wind-tunneling workshop was done with Technology Corporation, and 
various organization elements were explored in each scenario. The results 
F I G U R E  8.4  Using Scenarios to Examine Organizational Elements (based on 
van der Merwe)
Scenarios
A
B
C
D
Organizational Elements
The Business 
Idea
Strategy
Structure
Culture
Capabilities


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
183
revealed a need for several critical internal changes so that the organiza-
tion could be better positioned to handle a variety of potential futures. The 
workshop results are summarized in Figure 8.5.
RESILIENCE AND ROBUSTNESS
Additional or substitute workshops can be designed around any one, all, 
or other organizational elements. The workshops need only to inform the 
initial purpose of the project. Beyond that, the scenarios should be used to 
explore. The more creatively they are used, the further the thinking inside 
the organization can potentially be shifted. 
Scenarios
Concorde
Airbus
Horse and 
Buggy
Titanic
Organization Elements
Theory  
of the 
business/
business idea
Requires 
changes
Requires  
changes
Requires  
changes
OK (this is  
what happens  
if we continue  
on as we are)
Strategy
(No clearly 
articulated 
strategy or 
speciﬁc  
goals)
(No clearly 
articulated 
strategy or  
speciﬁc  
goals)
(No clearly 
articulated 
strategy or  
speciﬁc  
goals)
(No clearly 
articulated 
strategy or  
speciﬁc  
goals)
Structure
No impli- 
cations for 
structure
No impli- 
cations for 
structure
No impli- 
cations for 
structure
No 
implications 
for structure
Culture
No impli- 
cations for 
culture
Requires a 
signiﬁcant 
shift toward 
team/col- 
laboration
Requires a 
signiﬁcant 
shift toward 
team/col- 
laboration
No 
implications 
for culture
Capabilities
Requires  
some 
growth—
hiring of 
designers 
and 
scientists
Requires 
some 
growth—
hiring of 
designers 
and 
scientists
Reduction  
of workforce 
(can’t support 
it)
F I G U R E  8.5 Wind-Tunneling Summary for Technology Corporation


---PAGE BREAK---

184 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
The collective use of workshops designed in the scenario implementa-
tion phase is generally thought to build organizational resilience and ro-
bustness. For example, the scenario immersion activity described in this 
chapter asked participants to identify strategies that work in all scenarios. 
The purpose of this is to build a strategy that can handle the stresses of all 
of the scenarios—a robust strategy. Scenario planning is not a magic bullet 
and is not intended to gather up all of the potential futures. Rather, the pur-
pose is to pose a variety of alternatives to decision makers such that they will 
be more prepared for anything that might come to pass. Resilient organiza-
tions are those that ﬁnd ways to survive in rapidly changing environmental 
conditions. The activities suggested in this chapter are all aimed at develop-
ing the ability to respond quickly to major shifts in the environment.
Resilience can be deﬁned as “the ability to recover readily from illness, 
depression, adversity, or the like” (Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary and The-
saurus, 2006, p. 677). Some of the purposes of scenario planning are to 
learn about the possible futures, prepare for them, and avoid catastrophe, 
but equally important is the ability to recover quickly from challenging situ-
ations. Thus, for many organization leaders, simply thinking through the 
options can decrease the response time to challenging events. A reduced 
response time can give some companies an edge over their competition.
THE STRATEGIC CONVERSATION
The other general outcome of the scenario implementation phase is to be-
gin or sustain an ongoing conversation about strategy and alternatives—the 
strategic conversation. If the organization is not currently using any struc-
tured approach to strategy, this will be revolutionary. The simple idea is 
that strategy must be more than an annual retreat-style event. Strategy must 
become a part of the daily conversation that takes place within the organiza-
tion. Scenarios are tools for having this conversation, but it is the informal 
parts of the conversation—in the hallways, when colleagues just “stop by” 
each other’s ofﬁces, or conversations that happen over lunch—that use the 
scenario planning process as a foundation from which to leap forward to 
other insight and creativity.
The crux of the institutional aspects of the processual paradigm is 
conversation. The learning loop model shows the interwovenness of 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
185
thinking and action. If action is based on planning on the basis of a 
mental model, then institutional action must be based on a shared men-
tal model. Only through a process of conversation can elements of ob-
servation and thought be structured and embedded in the accepted and 
shared organizational theories-in-use. (van der Heijden, 1997, p. 41)
An effective strategic conversation requires (1) a common language, (2) 
alignment of ideas, (3) willingness to engage in rational argumentation, and 
(4) the evolution of ideas inside the organization (van der Heijden 1997).
COMMON LANGUAGE
The requirement for common language is logical and not complex. Stated 
simply, organization members participating in any process need a common 
understanding of the process to be used and some way to deﬁne and sort 
through the jargon that has invaded today’s business world.
ALIGNMENT OF IDEAS
Strategy literature increasingly includes reference to the notion of alignment 
(Manning, 2002; Mintzberg, Ahlstrand, & Lampel, 1999). While most 
of the strategy literature refers to alignment among organization, process, 
and individual goals, the strategic conversation aims to produce alignment 
among ideas. The strategic conversation stresses the importance of revealing 
and analyzing mental models in scenario planning and in this context, the 
notion of idea alignment can be considered as an output of building a col-
lective mental model (Wack, 1985b). Sharing assumptions, values, and the 
basic scaffolding of a uniﬁed purpose are critical to establishing this kind of 
alignment (Manning, 2002).
WILLINGNESS TO ENGAGE IN RATIONAL ARGUMENTATION
The scenario planning process is one of dialogue, challenge, and willing-
ness to critique ideas. Thus, participants must be comfortable engaging in 
conversation and must be open to having their ideas challenged by other 
participants. By deﬁnition, learning happens when people begin to see 
things in a new way. Without this critical piece, the strategic conversation 
becomes lip service, and none of its implications are taken seriously as 
nothing is learned.


---PAGE BREAK---

186 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
EVOLUTION OF IDEAS INSIDE THE ORGANIZATION
This ﬁnal requirement can be thought of as the result of the previous three. 
Evolution of ideas in the organization is the goal of the strategic conver-
sation. The stage for the evolution of ideas within an organization is set 
through a common language, working toward aligning ideas, and through 
a willingness to critique and be critiqued by the majority of people in an or-
ganization. Often, scenarios are just a starting point for ideas to be sparked, 
which leads to revision of the scenarios and further debate and dialogue 
until assumptions are shattered.
DIALOGUE
Although not one of van der Heijden’s initial components of the strategic 
conversation, the notion of dialogue as developed by Bohm (1989, 2002, 
2004) is an additional critical component that cannot be ignored in consid-
ering the strategic conversation. Given the positioning of communication 
in this article and in the larger context of scenario planning, it is useful to 
consider the nature of communication.
The requirements of strategic conversation are intended to clarify the 
essence of strategic conversation itself. All of these elements are integrated in 
the scenario planning system. Thus, it is a means by which to have strategic 
conversations. The distinction is that the scenario planning system features 
the formal part of the conversation. Decision makers would be wise to ﬁnd 
ways to support the informal part of the conversation as well.
CONCLUSION
To reiterate, there is a lot of freedom in ﬁnding the most useful ways to im-
plement and apply scenarios. The goal of this chapter has been to provide a 
framework for using scenarios. Consultants should feel free to be creative in 
designing a set of workshops for scenario implementation. However, keep-
ing in line with the project proposal is critical, and therefore, returning to 
the initial purpose, question, or issue is required for each project. In addi-
tion, the business model should be tested in each scenario. These two work-
shops are a minimum, in my view, and they will provoke strategic thinking 
in virtually any circumstances. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
187
This chapter has presented and described additional workshops that 
focus on analyzing current strategies, developing signals, and facilitating 
experiential exercises. These are all useful approaches to applying scenarios 
and should also be considered. These workshops demonstrate the use of 
wind-tunneling various organizational elements to ensure the development 
of resilient and robust strategies.


---PAGE BREAK---

This page intentionally left blank 


---PAGE BREAK---

 189
Phase 5— 
Project Assessment: 
Documenting Results
Assessing scenario projects is critical. Most texts on scenario planning do 
not include methods for documenting or assessing the outcomes of scenario 
planning. Pick up any of the popular scenario planning books, and check 
the index for assessment, evaluation, or results. I predict that you will not 
ﬁnd these entries. The lack of effort invested to understand the outcomes of 
scenario projects is a serious shortcoming. The dearth of evidence demon-
strating that scenario planning is an effective investment makes it difﬁcult 
to argue for the proposed beneﬁts. Most seasoned practitioners and users of 
scenario planning know through their own experience that scenarios cre-
ate value in numerous ways. However, scenario planning should be more 
than a strategic management tool falling in and out of favor depending on 
the stability of the global business environment. To establish the true con-
tribution of scenario planning, projects must be assessed to build a suite of 
evidence supporting scenario planning and its utility. Minimally, “if the 
scenario process does not bring out strategic options previously unconsid-
ered by managers, then it has been sterile” (Wack, 1985c, p. 10). 
The efforts described in this project assessment chapter are aimed at 
understanding and documenting the strategic options that can be attrib-
uted to scenario projects (Figure 9.1). Sadly, in my own experiences (includ-
ing research projects with senior executives and several prominent scenario 
planning professionals), I have heard numerous times that there is simply 
no way to measure the success of scenario projects. One premise of this 
9


---PAGE BREAK---

190 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
chapter is to disagree, and another is to present a comprehensive approach to 
documenting the beneﬁts of scenario projects.
Scenario projects are not that different from what we do every day in 
our personal lives. We consider a variety of possibilities in our future and 
then plan accordingly, often investing in insurance policies to prepare for an 
occurrence that may never happen, but, should it happen, we have thought-
fully considered it and planned for its possibility (Harper, 2010). An im-
portant outcome of scenario work is a clear sense of choices, implications, 
and costs and beneﬁts associated with a variety of possibilities. Thinking 
through options—even unlikely (or undesirable) options—and giving them 
equal attention and consideration is what leads to robust thinking about the 
future. This is just what an insurance provider does.
F I G U R E  9.1  The Performance-Based Scenario System—Project Assessment 
Phase
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
191
Scenario projects, by their very nature, deal with the world of percep-
tions as well as knowledge and performance. Therefore, some traditional 
approaches to assessment may not be appropriate. This chapter provides 
strategies for assessing scenario projects. The foundation for project assess-
ment is set in the project preparation phase at the start of the project. The 
desired outcomes of the project, set forth in the earlier scenario project pro-
posal, are what is measured once the project is complete. The assessment 
strategy proposed in this chapter is a modiﬁed version of the results assess-
ment system (Swanson & Holton, 1999). The results assessment system can 
be applied to any organizational intervention. An overview of the system is 
described, and then speciﬁc examples are used to illustrate the implementa-
tion of this assessment system for scenario projects.
OVERVIEW OF THE RESULTS  
ASSESSMENT SYSTEM
Swanson and Holton (1999) proposed a general assessment system for or-
ganization improvement efforts. Their system was designed to be practi-
cal, usable, and easy to implement. They were quick to point out that the 
majority of assessments in organizations (if any is done at all) focus on per-
ceptions of satisfaction (Swanson & Holton, 1999). In other words, most 
change efforts are assessed on the basis of whether participants perceived 
the project to be useful and enjoyable. To move beyond this level, a more 
comprehensive approach is required. Consequently, the results assessment 
system has three domains: satisfaction, learning, and performance (Swan-
son & Holton, 1999). All three of these domains should be included in a 
responsible assessment effort. 
SATISFACTION RESULTS
Satisfaction results measure opinions about the utility of the change inter-
vention. Usually, short surveys are distributed, and participants rate their 
perceptions of the event. Often, these are the only assessment measures used 
at all. Responsible assessment must include other measures, but perceptions 
matter, and they are an important part of estimating the success of any 
project. The key is to obtain the data, use what is pertinent, and prevent 
overanalysis of satisfaction results. Satisfaction results should be obtained 
from both participants and stakeholders. 


---PAGE BREAK---

192 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
Participants 
Participant perceptions can provide valuable information for making subtle 
adjustments to any change project. Participant perceptions should not over-
take the project and become the primary, or most important, measure of 
success. These results can be used to improve practical issues related to the 
experience of the project. 
Stakeholders 
Several categories of stakeholders are possible, and each should be included 
in a measure of satisfaction. Stakeholders are leaders of divisions or systems 
within the organization, or anyone with a vested interest in the organiza-
tion. Stakeholders can be internal or external, such as board members, pro-
ducers or consumers of company products, or anyone with a primary or 
secondary investment in the organization (Swanson & Holton, 1999). A 
short survey should be designed and sent to representatives from each stake-
holder group. The purpose of these surveys is to take a quick measure of 
whether the project has met stakeholder expectations. 
LEARNING RESULTS
Measures of learning are critical to organizational change efforts, as learn-
ing is a prerequisite to change. People cannot change their behaviors, have 
strategic insights, or create a novel way of seeing a situation if they have not 
learned. Learning begins in the mind, and neuroscience is increasingly able 
to explain, physiologically, how learning happens (see Dispenza, 2007). For 
assessment purposes, it is important to ﬁnd out whether participants have 
learned during the course of the project. Because learning is required for ac-
tion, the logical other component in this domain is new expertise. In other 
words, the aim of this domain is to assess what it is that participants know 
and can do differently as a result of their engagement in the project.
Knowledge
Knowledge assessments involve having participants demonstrate the knowl-
edge they gained through the course of the change project (Swanson & 
Holton, 1999). Knowledge gains are usually measured with tests. However, 
other techniques for analyzing knowledge gained, discussed later, are more 
appropriate in the scenario planning context. The general idea is to ﬁnd a 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
193
way to determine what participants know after the project that they did not 
know before the project.
Expertise
Expertise refers to action and doing. That is, participants should also be 
able to do something differently based on knowledge they have gained 
throughout the project. The goal of assessing expertise is to ﬁnd a way for 
participants to demonstrate how what they have learned has changed their 
behaviors.
PERFORMANCE RESULTS
Performance results are the most difﬁcult part of assessment for scenario 
projects given the timeline of events. Performance results rest in two key 
areas: system and ﬁnancial. System results generally refer to the product, 
good, or service that can be increased or maximized through the change 
intervention. The ﬁnancial results refer to the conversion of system result 
gains into a ﬁnancial measure. 
System
System results can be the general performance indicators of the organization 
as a whole. These are the products produced, contracts sold, hours billed, 
and services provided. They are deﬁned as “the units of mission-related out-
puts in the form of goods and/or services having value to the customer and 
that are related to the core organizational, work process, and group or indi-
vidual contributors in the organization” (Swanson & Holton, 1999, p. 14).
Financial
Financial results are “[t]he conversion of the output units of goods and 
or services attributable to the intervention into ﬁnancial interpretation” 
(Swanson & Holton, 1999, p. 16). Financial results convert any increases in 
system results into a monetary measure (see Swanson, 2001a).
SUMMARY
This short overview of the results assessment system is intended to orient 
readers to a comprehensive approach to assessment. Most organizations stop 
at satisfaction surveys, if they assess anything at all. Responsible performance 
improvement efforts must apply these concepts to speciﬁc organizational 


---PAGE BREAK---

194 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
interventions. The following section reﬁnes the system for use in the context 
of scenario planning.
ADAPTING THE RESULTS ASSESSMENT  
SYSTEM TO SCENARIO PLANNING
Some aspects of scenario projects are difﬁcult to assess, particularly when 
they are successful. For example, how does the team know that they have 
helped to avoid a catastrophe if they have, indeed, avoided it? How can in-
novative ideas and strategic insights be attributed directly to the scenario 
planning project? Because of these difﬁculties, most authors have chosen to 
avoid dealing with how to assess scenario projects entirely. Given the costs 
associated with most scenario planning projects, it is responsible to spend 
time thinking about how the project has beneﬁtted the organization. That 
is the purpose of adjusting the results assessment system for use in looking 
at the effectiveness of scenario planning projects.
To reiterate, many of the important and expected outcomes of the proj-
ect were described and deﬁned in the project reparation phase. This, once 
again, highlights the importance of the preparation phase in that the at-
tention given to outcomes and expectation at the start of the project inﬂu-
ences the ease and elegance of the project assessment. Spend time up-front 
deﬁning the outcomes of the project, and keep the expectations and goals in 
mind throughout.
USING A VARIETY OF MEASURES IN EACH DOMAIN
Because the assessment of scenario projects is not well documented and can 
be difﬁcult, scenario project leaders should consider a variety of tools and 
approaches. These can include both quantitative and qualitative strategies 
for gathering and analyzing information. I suggest using the results assess-
ment system as a framework and trying out a variety of speciﬁc tools within 
each domain. For example, using surveys to gather satisfaction results 
from participants and stakeholders is relatively straightforward. However, 
tests to assess knowledge gained from scenario planning projects require a 
closer attention. One way is to directly ask participants what they learned 
throughout the project. The same skills used for interviews at the start of 
the scenario project can be used to inquire into its results. This section 
describes how the satisfaction, learning, and performance domains of the 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
195
results assessment system can be adjusted to form a comprehensive assess-
ment strategy for scenario projects.
Satisfaction Results in Scenario Projects
There is little need to adjust the method for assessing satisfaction results in 
the results assessment system. The method uses short surveys designed to 
capture basic opinions and reactions to the scenario project. 
Participants. The recommended approach is to design a simple survey 
with ten or fewer questions plus room for comments and distribute it to 
participants at the conclusion of the project. Data can be entered into a basic 
software program and analyzed quickly. For example, Microsoft Excel can be 
used to compute mean scores for each item. A sample participant survey is 
provided in Figure 9.2.
Stakeholders. Stakeholder satisfaction surveys are also simple and ef-
fective. Again, a short survey should be sent to project stakeholders after the 
conclusion of the project. The purpose is to gather stakeholder perceptions 
of the usefulness of the project. A sample stakeholder satisfaction survey is 
in Figure 9.3.
Learning Results in Scenario Projects
Unless the manager’s thinking changes, there will be no behavior changes 
(Wack, 1985b). Results in the learning domain are intended to capture 
whether, and to what degree, the thinking may have changed. Learning 
results may require some adjustment from the original results assessment 
system given the context of scenario planning and the fact that there is no 
prescribed content to be learned in scenario projects. For example, tradi-
tionally, paper-and-pencil tests are used to assess content mastery, and some 
form of observation is used to determine the improved expertise. These ap-
proaches are not always appropriate in scenario projects, but that does not 
mean the domain should be neglected. The solution is in using other strate-
gies that ﬁt the purpose of scenario projects. 
Knowledge. Clearly, the intention is that participants learn during 
the scenario project process. Because what is learned can vary signiﬁcantly 
among participants in a group, a useful strategy is to look for patterns or 
themes that connect the learning experience to the participants. For exam-
ple, instead of looking at individual decisions per person, decision-making 


---PAGE BREAK---

196 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
F I G U R E  9.2 Participant Satisfaction Survey
SCENARIO PLANNING PROJECT
Project Title  ________________________________ 
Date  ____________
Project Leader  _______________________________ 
Code  ____________
Please answer the following questions. Your responses will help us improve future 
programs. Circle the response that best represents your opinion.
Strongly  
agree
Agree
No  
opinion
Disagree
Strongly  
disagree
 1.  This project was useful for me in my role 
in the organization.
1
2
3
4
5
 2.  I was motivated to participate in this 
project.
1
2
3
4
5
 3.  The project made me think differently 
about the organization.
1
2
3
4
5
 4.  I learned about the industry and external 
environment in this project.
1
2
3
4
5
 5.  I expect that I will use what I learned in 
this project.
1
2
3
4
5
 6.  My colleagues were motivated to 
participate in this project.
1
2
3
4
5
 7.  I have a better understanding of 
challenges facing the organization.
1
2
3
4
5
 8.  I will encourage others to participate in 
these projects in the future.
1
2
3
4
5
 9.  I will make decisions differently based on 
what I learned.
1
2
3
4
5
10.  This project will benefit the organization 
as a whole.
1
2
3
4
5
What was the most valuable part of this project for you? 
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
What was the least valuable part of this project for you? 
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
Additional comments are appreciated. 
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
197
F I G U R E  9.3 Stakeholder Satisfaction Survey
SCENARIO PLANNING PROJECT
Project Title  ________________________________ 
Date  ____________
Project Leader  _______________________________ 
Code  ____________
Please answer the following questions. Your responses will help us improve future 
programs. Circle the response that best represents your opinion.
Strongly  
agree
Agree
No  
opinion
Disagree
Strongly  
disagree
 1.  This project has shown benefits for the 
organization.
1
2
3
4
5
 2.  I was motivated to support the purpose of 
this project.
1
2
3
4
5
 3.  The project has shown results.
1
2
3
4
5
 4.  I can see evidence that participants 
learned about the industry.
1
2
3
4
5
 5.  I expect that our employees will use what 
was learned in this project.
1
2
3
4
5
 6.  My colleagues were motivated to 
participate in this project.
1
2
3
4
5
 7.  I have a better understanding of 
challenges facing the organization.
1
2
3
4
5
 8.  I will encourage others to participate in 
these projects in the future.
1
2
3
4
5
 9.  I will make decisions differently based on 
results of this project.
1
2
3
4
5
10.  This project has possible long-term 
benefits for the organization.
1
2
3
4
5
What was the most valuable part of this project for you? 
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
What was the least valuable part of this project for you? 
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
Additional comments are appreciated. 
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________


---PAGE BREAK---

198 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
patterns or tendencies may be more appropriate. Useful tools for assessing 
these patterns include van der Merwe’s Conversation Quality and Engage-
ment Checklist (2007), Watkins and Marsick’s Dimensions of the Learning 
Organization Questionnaire (1995), and Scott and Bruce’s General Deci-
sion Making Style Survey (1994). 
The Conversation Quality and Engagement Checklist (CQEC) was de-
veloped by Louis van der Merwe at the Centre for Innovative Leadership 
(www.cil.net). CIL specializes in capacity-building scale in (1) scenario-
based strategy, (2) leadership development, (3) systems thinking, (4) or-
ganization effectiveness, and (5) executive coaching. The CQEC has been 
used in practice for over twenty years as a metric for conversation quality in 
scenario work. It is divided into two categories: Level I skills and Level II 
skills. Level I skills assess how individuals perceive their personal commu-
nication capabilities. Level II skills assess individual perceptions of interper-
sonal communication skills. The CQEC has also been used and validated in 
a variety of organizations, industries, and contexts (van der Merwe, Cher-
mack, Kulikowich, & Yang, 2007). The Conversation Quality and En-
gagement Checklist is provided in Figure 9.4 as an example of the kinds of 
surveys and instruments that can be useful in scenario projects.
The CQEC was used with Technology Corporation in a pretest/post-
test design. Participants assessed their own skill levels before and after the 
scenario project. Again, mean scores for Level I and Level II skills were 
computed, and a t-test was conducted between pre- and posttest scores. Re-
sults showed that participants perceived improvement in their individual 
and interpersonal dialogue, conversation quality, and engagement skills 
over the course of the project.
The Dimensions of Learning Organization Questionnaire (DLOQ) is 
an instrument designed to assess perceptions of an organization’s learning 
culture. In scenario projects, the DLOQ can be used to assess participant 
perceptions of the organization’s orientation toward learning as a critical 
function. The instrument has been heavily validated (Yang, 2003; Yang, 
Watkins, & Marsick, 2004) and has been shown as a proxy for ﬁrm ﬁnan-
cial performance (Ellinger, Ellinger, Yang, & Howton, 2002). The DLOQ 
measures seven factors: (1) creating continuous learning opportunities, (2) 
promoting inquiry and dialogue, (3) encouraging collaboration and team 
learning, (4) creating systems to capture and share learning, (5) empower-
ing people toward a collective vision, (6) connecting the organization to its 
environment, and (7) providing strategic leadership for learning. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
199
F I G U R E  9.4 The Conversation Quality and Engagement Checklist
Please assess your conversation and engagement skills and score yourself. Ask 
somebody else to also score your skills, and compare both scores. Use this 
checklist both in the work setting as well as other settings such as any leadership, 
social and family settings to keep practicing and improving your skills. Work on 
improving Level 1 Skills first.
Name  __________________________________________________________
FEEDBACK—LEADERSHIP, AND MANAGING  
ACCOUNTABILITY AND PERFORMANCE
Complete the following statements by indicating which level of frequency 
most accurately reflects your conduct in conversations and engagement in 
a team and one-to-one setting. Each score should be accompanied by 
concrete feedback support by describing specific behavior in specific 
situations.
Start the assessment process by asking: 
  During leadership and performance conversations, . . .
  (follow the items below)
Never 
Sometimes
Often
Usually
Always
LEVEL I SKILLS
 1.  I use active listening to understand another person’s point of view.
1
2
3
4
5
 2.  I paraphrase what is said to ensure deeper understanding.
1
2
3
4
5
 3.  I take responsibility for myself by choosing language that indicates this.
1
2
3
4
5
 4.  I listen to what is being said and am self-aware when judging.
1
2
3
4
5
 5.  I maintain balance between asking questions and stating my opinions.
1
2
3
4
5
 6.  I do my best to be explicit about the assumptions under my opinions.
1
2
3
4
5
 7.  I constantly question my opinions with intent of reaching observable data.
1
2
3
4
5
 8.  I use concrete examples to describe behavior, sensing, feelings, and 
impact.
1
2
3
4
5
 9.  I stay engaged to identify events that could assist in understanding 
underlying patterns of behavior and structural aspects.
1
2
3
4
5
10.  I use open-ended questions to clarify the patterns and structures.
1
2
3
4
5
LEVEL II SKILLS
11.  I avoid third party involvement (triangulation) by dealing directly 
with others with the issues at hand.
1
2
3
4
5
12.  I confront others constructively when I disagree with their opinions.
1
2
3
4
5
13.  I take a stand and express outcomes while remaining engaged with the 
conversation at hand.
1
2
3
4
5
14.  I make informed choices about personal behavior by balancing the 
purpose of the conversation, its desired results, and current reality.
1
2
3
4
5
15.  I encourage others to make choices that support engagement in the 
conversation.
1
2
3
4
5
16.  I define personal and organizational boundaries and review them 
when necessary.
1
2
3
4
5
(continued)


---PAGE BREAK---

200 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
F I G U R E  9.4 The Conversation Quality and Engagement Checklist (continued)
 
Never 
Sometimes
Often
Usually
Always
LEVEL II SKILLS (continued)
17.  I know my personal patterns of behavior and “hot buttons” and can 
intervene effectively and make choices. 
1
2
3
4
5
18.  I understand the origins of my behavioral patterns and “hot buttons.”
1
2
3
4
5
19.  I apply conflict resolution skills as required.
1
2
3
4
5
20.  I use applicable coaching skills such as deep listening, empathy, 
respect, concreteness, and genuineness as appropriate.
1
2
3
4
5
SUB TOTAL
TOTAL SCORE
DEVELOPING CONVERSATION QUALITY  
AND ENGAGEMENT SKILLS—SCORES
Conversation quality and engagement skills can improve the quality of your relationships both at work and at 
home. These essential life skills are the foundation to learning and leadership.
Score
Description and Interpretation Guidelines
0–25
Low potential for leadership. Others feel out of touch, and no effort is made to be in 
touch; even disrespect. Conversations easily escalate into conflict and leave feelings of 
frustration. General lack of trust and alignment. Low morale and commitment is 
common. Open, authentic conversations are difficult and seldom happen. Teams and 
individuals don’t know what their priorities and roles are, and results are unclear.  
26–50
Medium potential for leadership. Others feel that you are somewhat distant. Conver- 
sations are often unsatisfactory, and people don’t know where they stand. Trust is at a low 
level. Open and authentic conversations sometimes happen and when they do the 
contrast is immediately noticed. Indirect behavior with third parties is commonplace, 
and many areas of undiscussability develop. Priorities are often unclear, and choices are 
difficult to make; boundaries are also unclear and easily violated.
51–75
Average to above-average potential for leadership. Trust levels are building. Practicing 
conversation and engagement skills in real time is accepted and encouraged. Regular 
feedback and coaching for the purposes of learning is commonplace. Priorities are clear 
and tough choices are made and adhered to. Boundaries are often the focus of conver- 
sations. Systems thinking is a way of looking at the world and influencing it, and this 
informs many choices at interpersonal and intrapersonal levels.
76–100
High potential for leadership. Priorities are clear and there is continuous improvement 
with little wastage. Raising of performance standards and changes in direction are both 
easily executed. Others experience openness and authenticity in the leadership process. 
Confidence, humility, courage, firmness, vulnerability, and openness characterizes 
relationships. Confronting in a tough yet compassionate and constructive way occurs 
frequently and is skillfully executed using conversation and engagement skills naturally, 
and sometimes intuitively. Thinking and actions are informed by a systems perspective 
and self-knowledge. Trust is continuously being built and the team performs at a high 
level and in alignment with the overall goals and with each other.
(continued)


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
201
The DLOQ was used with Technology Corporation in a pretest/
posttest design. Measures of participant perceptions were taken using the 
DLOQ at the start of the scenario project and again at its conclusion. Pre- 
and posttest scores were then compared. The mean scores for each of the 
seven factors were considered, and then a t-test was conducted. The results 
indicated participants perceived improvements in how their organization 
created learning opportunities, promoted inquiry and dialogue, encouraged 
team learning, connected the organization to its environment, and provided 
strategic leadership for learning. 
The General Decision Making Style Survey (GDMS) is another tool 
for assessing knowledge results. The GDMS includes ﬁve decision-making 
styles, and individuals will tend to favor one of these styles. The ﬁve styles 
are (1) rational decision making, (2) intuitive decision making, (3) depen-
dent decision making, (4) spontaneous decision making, and (5) avoidant 
decision making. 
The GDMS was also used to assess changes in decision-making 
styles in Technology Corporation. Again, using a pretest/posttest design, 
F I G U R E  9 . 4  The Conversation Quality and Engagement Checklist (continued)
Leadership is defined as influence potential. Leadership is executed through the 
capacity to take a stand and then skillfully, in a nonanxious way, holding this 
stand while staying in touch with the system you lead, until the followers align 
themselves with your stand.
Competent conversation and engagement consists of frequent face-to-face 
communications one on one as well as one on many, which are characterized by 
openness and authenticity, together with a tough-minded focus on agreed purpose 
and results. This enables high performance through robust, trusting relationships 
and a learning climate. In this approach, individuals and teams are taking per-
sonal responsibility and are accountable, which enables rapid self-correcting, 
which in turn supports the capacity for self-organizing at individual, team, and 
organizational levels. 
Select one or two of the skills that you would like to improve and include them 
in your Personal Development Plan (PDP). Create practice areas in different set-
tings where you can raise your level of competence, including contracting for reg-
ular structured feedback processes.
Copyright © 2000 CIL Ltd. All rights reserved. Used under license to Centre for Innovative 
Leadership BV, PO Box 14836, 1001 LH, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; telephone:  
+44 1414 160660; e-mail: info@cil.net; website: www.cil.net.


---PAGE BREAK---

202 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
participants took the survey before and after the scenario project. Results 
indicated signiﬁcant shifts in participant decision-making styles. Of partic-
ular interest is that participants who scored high on rational decision mak-
ing in the pretest, tended to shift into other decision-making styles through 
the scenario project. Intuitive and dependent decision-making categories 
showed signiﬁcant increases in posttest scores. Overall, the results suggested 
that the scenario project promoted intuitive and dependent approaches to 
decision making. 
These instruments captured participant perceptions of the organiza-
tion’s learning capabilities, individual communication skills, and individual 
decision-making styles. These surveys and instruments are best used when a 
measure is taken at the beginning of the project and again at its conclusion 
so that change comparisons can be made. A variety of tools can be used to 
assess cognitive changes, and facilitators should use tools related to the goals 
and purpose of the scenario project. Any surveys used for project assessment 
should, however, be directly related to the expected outcomes deﬁned in the 
project preparation phase. The instruments listed here are examples that are 
related to common general objectives of scenario projects.
Another effective strategy for understanding what participants learned 
during the scenario project is to simply ask them. This approach will provide 
details and anecdotes that are missed by the survey technique. At times, it is 
more powerful to hear participant stories of their “aha” moments and strate-
gic insights. A few simple questions can launch a useful conversation about 
what was learned and how it may affect the ways in which participants go 
about their work. Suggested questions are as follows:
• What have you learned as a result of participating in this project?
• Did you have any major strategic insights or “aha” moments? If so, can 
you describe them?
Expertise. As with assessing knowledge, assessing expertise gained 
from a scenario planning project is tricky. Typically, expertise is observed. 
Changed behaviors and the application of expertise can be demonstrated 
in the performance of speciﬁc work tasks. In the context of scenario plan-
ning, expertise is more difﬁcult to assess. Where appropriate, the observa-
tion method of participants “doing” may still be used. For example, if an 
individual usually makes decisions independently, without the review of 
external information and without conversations including colleagues and 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
203
other experts prior to the scenario project, changes in how that individual 
approaches decision making may be quite obvious afterward. It is common for 
people to rely on conversations, colleagues, and further information gathering 
in making decisions after participating in scenario planning projects (Cher-
mack & Nimon, 2008). Behavioral changes can be observed. The key is to 
create time and space in which the behaviors can be seen and discussed openly.
The knowledge assessment instruments can be used as proxies for be-
haviors and converted into an expert observation checklist. Using expert 
observations to assess behavior change moves the assessment beyond self- 
reported data and gains a level of objectivity. The knowledge assessment 
tools described here informed the construction of an expert observation work-
sheet. These items are combined in the scenario expertise audit (see Figure 9.5). 
The audit is aimed at gathering evidence of performed behaviors that con-
tribute to a valued service or product (Swanson & Holton, 1999). It is based 
on expertise observation templates provided by Swanson and Holton (1999).
The scenario expertise audit should be used for expert ratings of project 
participants. The audit can be used to randomly observe individual par-
ticipants after the project has concluded. The goal is to ﬁnd evidence for 
changed observable behaviors when participants have returned to their nor-
mal work functions. The audit combines elements from each of the knowl-
edge assessment instruments outlined earlier. 
Interview techniques can be an additional proxy for assessing expertise 
gains. It is revealing to simply ask participants or fellow participants how 
they or others function differently after participating in scenario planning. 
Questions like this will prompt participants to reﬂect about their learning 
experience. At times, a useful strategy is to send the questions a few days 
prior to the interview so that participants can think through how their be-
haviors may have changed as a result of the scenario planning experience. 
Alternatively, sometimes immediate reactions are more useful. Other rel-
evant questions can include the following:
• How has your learning affected your behavior as a result of 
participating in this scenario project?
• How has learning of others affected the behavior as a result of 
participating in this scenario project?
• How do you function differently in your work that you would 
attribute to participating in the scenario project?


---PAGE BREAK---

204 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
F I G U R E  9.5 The Scenario Expertise Audit
Project Title  ________________________________________ 
Date  ______________
Participant Being Observed  ____________________________ 
Code  _____________
Experts should use the following items to rate participant performance in normal work 
activities.
0
Unable to 
observe
No opportunity 
to observe
1
Not  
evident
Does not 
demonstrate
2
Functional
Applies skills; 
requires some 
guidance
3
Proficient
Uses skills in 
complex situations; 
minimal guidance
4
Expert
Coaches and 
supports others
Behaviors                      Ratings*
0
1
2
3
4
In conversations, the participant:
 1.  Uses active listening to understand another person’s point of view.
 2.  Maintains balance between asking questions and stating opinions.
 3.  Questions his or her opinions with intent of reaching observable data.
 4.  Uses concrete examples to describe behavior, sensing, feelings, and 
impact.
 5.  Confronts others constructively when opinions differ.
In decision making the participant:
 6.  Plans important decisions carefully.
 7.  Relies on instincts.
 8.  Relies on intuition.
 9.  Uses the assistance of other people when making important decisions.
10.  Uses the advice of other people in making important decisions.
Regarding learning culture, the participant:
11.  Extends effort to share and distribute learning/knowledge.
12.  Continuously looks for opportunities to learn.
13.  Helps other people learn.
14.  Rewards people for learning.
15.  Gives honest feedback for development.
*For any rating of 2 or lower, attach development recommendations and explanations.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
205
• How do others function differently in their work that you would 
attribute to participating in the scenario project?
PERFORMANCE RESULTS IN SCENARIO PROJECTS
Performance measures in scenario planning projects are necessarily esti-
mates. Purposes of scenarios are either to “avoid regret or to generate in-
sights that were previously beyond the mind’s reach” (Wack, 1985b, p. 87). 
But how can these be valued? In fact, the entire insurance industry is based 
on assigning values to things that have not happened yet. While there is 
no standard formula for valuing strategic insights or avoiding catastrophes, 
estimates are a useful way of suggesting the utility of scenario planning. 
Assessing performance results is absolutely dependent on the purpose of the 
scenario project. Logically, the more speciﬁc the purpose, the easier it will 
be to estimate the performance results. For example, a project in which fo-
cused scenarios are used to examine the uncertainties around building a 
new oil-drilling platform in a remote location is much easier to evaluate 
than general global scenarios used to explore the technology environment 
for a cell-phone company. The more narrow the scope of the project, the 
more deﬁned the estimates of system results can be. Scenario project system 
results and ﬁnancial results are directly linked. Time spent carefully deﬁn-
ing and estimating the system results will make for an easier assessment 
because the ﬁnancial results merely required the conversion of system results 
to a monetary value. 
System
At their most general level, system results are indicated by the fact that the 
organization is still viable and operating. This point may seem obvious, but 
most organizations have an average life span of forty to ﬁfty years (de Geus, 
1997). The ability to stay a viable, proﬁtable organization is the primary 
measure of system performance. More speciﬁc system results include ways 
in which the scenario project is perceived to inﬂuence the productivity of 
the organization. For example, Shell’s scenarios that explored whether to 
construct an oil-drilling rig in Siberia included estimates of how that drill-
ing rig would increase its oil supply, thus adding value to the company. 
Similarly, scenario projects that reveal opportunities or foster innovative 
product ideas may carry an estimate of how that idea can lead to results. For 
example, if an engineering organization is the ﬁrst to achieve a technological 


---PAGE BREAK---

206 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
breakthrough and develop a new ﬂow technology that is superior to Coriolis 
(a current standard in material ﬂow technology), there would be positive 
implications for the organization’s system results. Conversely, heading off a 
catastrophe or loss has its own positive result.
For example, Toyota has long boasted its product quality. Toyota was 
under strong ﬁre for not following its own famous quality management 
principles (Liker, 2010). Error rates and defective products are system re-
sults that may be useful in scenario projects. Error rate and defective prod-
uct numbers can be gathered before the scenario planning project and again 
afterward. Assuming that the strategic issue is focused on resolving error is-
sues, the number of errors or defective products can be compared before and 
after scenario planning to establish improvement. Furthermore, error rates 
and defective products can easily be converted into ﬁnancial data. So, re-
solving quality problems has direct implications for ﬁnancial performance.
In another case, leaders in BP Amoco didn’t explore the “what ifs” as-
sociated with the risks of drilling for oil ﬁve thousand feet below the surface 
of the ocean at all. Fumbling around with what to do after over two million 
gallons of oil ﬂowed into the ocean, while the whole world watched, had 
serious implications for the oil giant. The complete lack of considering the 
possible outcomes of a high-risk activity could have been the demise of the 
organization. 
Financial
Fear and greed are effective motivators for organizational decision mak-
ers—fear of the regrets, and motivators toward the strategic insights referred 
to by Wack (1984). And few things inspire fear and greed better than dollar 
signs. In looking at the ﬁnancial results of a scenario planning project, the 
task is to convert system results into a dollar value. If we use the same ex-
amples just cited, increasing oil reserves would have a dollar value attached 
to it that would be relatively easy to compute. Likewise, developing a new 
ﬂow technology before competitors would provide strategic marketing op-
portunities and sales that could be estimated as a ﬁnancial return to the 
organization. Other examples are as follows:
• Apple Computer’s iPad is a signiﬁcant technological development. 
Using this as an example (and speculating that Apple developed a 
scenario project around such a tablet), estimates would have been 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
207
made that quantiﬁed the system results (projected demand and pro- 
duction numbers of the tablet computer) and ﬁnancial results (sales 
and proﬁts) based on previous successes with the iTunes music (now 
media) store and the iPhone.
(Note that this example positions scenario planning as an activity that could 
generate ideas for the innovative, new product.)
• A research and development company using scenarios to explore the 
viability of several projects may ﬁnd that focusing on fewer projects 
could leverage greater human capital. One possible outcome is that one 
speciﬁc project becomes a marketable new technology. If we assume 
the scenarios included this possibility, estimates of sales and produc- 
tion quantities could be generated based on perceived demand for the 
product. 
Another effective question is what discontinuities have been avoided 
due to anticipatory thinking? Using a ﬁnancial savings approach, each sce-
nario can be approached from the mind-set of ﬁnancial resources saved if 
things that may change the nature of our business are anticipated.
Sound ﬁnancial data on projected or estimated costs and beneﬁts from 
an internal organizational ﬁnancial expert can also be used in assessing 
system and ﬁnancial results (see Swanson, 2001a, 2001b). Data gathering 
should be designed to spark conversations about how estimates of savings 
or proﬁts can be made due to avoiding major discontinuities or realizing 
innovative opportunities. Suggested thinking with which to begin this data 
gathering with experts includes the following:
• What if scenario A happens and we are not prepared? What kind of 
losses would we be looking at? 
• Alternatively, what if scenario A happens and we are well prepared? 
What gains can we imagine due to strategic insights that lead to 
innovative products? (See Figure 9.6—the strategic gains and losses 
matrix.)
In Technology Corporation, we estimated costs and potential beneﬁts 
based on assumptions that led to either signiﬁcant strategic gains or losses 
within each scenario. For each scenario, we brainstormed what the implica-
tions of the story line could be. There was a logical consistency that ﬂowed 


---PAGE BREAK---

208 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
from the stories that were told in each scenario. The estimated ﬁnancial 
implications for each case are summarized in Figure 9.7. 
COST/BENEFIT MODELS AND RETURN ON INVESTMENT
Finally, there is high utility in considering cost/beneﬁt and return-on-
investment models. In the project preparation phase, I suggested using a 
simple ﬁnancial forecast model—the ﬁnancial assessment beneﬁt model 
(Swanson, 2004): 
Performance Value – Cost = Beneﬁt
At this point in the project, the costs are known. The exercises in deﬁn-
ing system and ﬁnancial results are aimed at estimating the performance 
value of the project. These values can then be inserted into the simple equa-
tion, and the beneﬁt of the scenario planning project can be estimated. Of 
course, the goal is that the performance value exceeds the costs. In my ex-
perience, using even modest estimates of performance value produces some 
amount of beneﬁt. This model essentially produces the return on invest-
ment. While other, more complex models can be used, this simple model 
is usually effective in demonstrating the estimated beneﬁts of scenario 
planning.
F I G U R E  9.6  The Strategic Gains and Losses Matrix
Scenario A 
•  If we are not prepared, what kind 
of losses would we be looking at? 
•  If we generate strategic insights, 
what estimates of sales and profits 
can be made?
Scenario B 
•  If we are not prepared, what kind 
of losses would we be looking at? 
•  If we generate strategic insights, 
what estimates of sales and profits 
can be made?
Scenario C 
•  If we are not prepared, what kind 
of losses would we be looking at? 
•  If we generate strategic insights, 
what estimates of sales and profits 
can be made?
Scenario D 
•  If we are not prepared, what kind 
of losses would we be looking at? 
•  If we generate strategic insights, 
what estimates of sales and profits 
can be made?


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
209
The scenario project proposal in Chapter 5 demonstrates how the esti-
mation of ﬁnancial beneﬁts begins at the start of the project. While costs of 
scenario projects can seem high at ﬁrst, consider the implications of saving 
from one major catastrophe or one major strategic insight. For example, 
if Toyota had done some scenario planning, not around brake pedals or 
ﬂoor mats, but around the managed response to quality defects, executives 
might have avoided a very costly and damaging sequence of events. The 
same could be said for BP Amoco. Oil cleanup in the Gulf of Mexico, drilling 
moratoriums, lawsuits for oil workers, compensating states with affected tour-
ism industries, and many other related costs rose to potentially devastating 
heights after the oil spill in the summer of 2010. The costs to the natural 
ecosystem in the Gulf of Mexico and, by its integrated nature, the world 
will not be realized for years, maybe decades.
F I G U R E  9.7  The Strategic Gains and Losses Matrix for Technology 
Corporation
Concorde
Strategic Losses
Relying on the expertise of a few, 
losses could be significant from 
inability to leverage collective human 
capital. Major project lost due to lack 
of collaboration could potentially cost 
up to $1 million.
Airbus
Strategic Gains
Collective collaboration could bring 
about new projects and more 
efficient development of those 
projects. Major project leading to 
innovative technology that can be 
taken to market (e.g., mobile phone) 
could be worth $5 million or more.
Titanic
Potentially facing bankruptcy if 
nothing changes. Little opportunity 
for strategic gains in this situation.
Horse and Buggy
Strategic Losses 
Collaborative efforts without new 
funding sources allow for sustained 
business, but minimal development.  
Potential losses are considerable for 
high numbers of missed opportunities. 
Potentially $10 million or more in 
losses.
Strategic Gains
It is still possible that a novel insight 
could produce a marketable product.


---PAGE BREAK---

210 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR ASSESSING 
SCENARIO PROJECTS
The information relevant to assessing a scenario project can be put into a 
table as a comprehensive plan for assessing scenario projects. Figure 9.8 is an 
example of how this information can be synthesized. The earlier these ele-
ments are considered in the project, the more relevant the measures will be. 
If possible, these items should be considered as part of the project prepara-
tion phase, and measurements of expected outcomes can be documented in 
the scenario project proposal. The scenario assessment plan is a road map for 
documenting the results of a scenario project. Using a comprehensive assess-
ment plan ensures the ability to discuss results and track the contribution of 
the scenario project to individual, process, and organization performance.
The elements of the project come together for Technology Corporation 
in Figure 9.9. The major assessment elements are taken directly from the 
F I G U R E  9 . 8  
A Comprehensive Plan for Assessing Scenario Projects
Quantitative
Qualitative
Satisfaction Results
 
Participant
Survey (10 items, strongly agree to 
strongly disagree)
Interview 
questions: 
 
Stakeholder
Survey (10 items, strongly agree to 
strongly disagree)
Interview 
questions: 
Learning Results
 
Knowledge
Surveys/instruments that measure  
aspects of the organization related to  
the purpose of the project
Interview 
questions: 
 
Expertise
Observations of behaviors where 
appropriate using the Scenario  
Expertise Audit
Interview 
questions: 
Performance Results
 
System
Estimates of system results based on  
the initial purpose of the project.
Interview 
questions: 
 
Financial
Performance Value – Cost = Benefit
Estimates of discontinuities avoided
Estimates of profits due to strategic 
insights
Interview 
questions: 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
211
F I G U R E  9 . 9  
 Comprehensive Scenario Project Assessment for Technology 
Corporation
Quantitative
Qualitative
Satisfaction Results
 
Participant
Survey (10 items, strongly 
agree to strongly disagree)
Interview questions: 
1.  Are you satisfied or 
dissatisfied with the 
scenario planning project?  
Why?
2.  What things contributed 
most to the utility (or lack 
of utility) of the project?
 
Stakeholder
Survey (10 items, strongly 
agree to strongly disagree)
Interview questions: 
1.  Describe your level of 
satisfaction with the 
scenario planning project.  
2.  What things contributed 
most to the utility (or lack 
of utility) of the project?
Learning Results
 
Knowledge
Surveys/instruments that 
measure:
• Decision making
• Learning organization 
• Characteristics
• Mental models
•  Conversation quality  
and engagement
Note: Use instruments 
pre– and post–scenario 
planning to measure 
change.
Interview questions: 
1.  What have you learned as a 
result of participating in this 
project?
2.  Did you have any major 
strategic insights, or “aha” 
moments?  If so, can you 
describe them?
 
Expertise
Observations of behaviors 
where appropriate using  
the Scenario Expertise 
Audit
Interview questions: 
1.  How has your learning 
affected your behavior as a 
result of participating in 
this project?
2.  What things do you do 
differently in your work 
that you would attribute to 
participating in the scenario 
planning project?
(continued)


---PAGE BREAK---

212 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
proposal outlined at the start of the project. The project assessment phase 
features the actual measures taken that can then be compared to create an 
overall picture of the project’s success and inﬂuence. 
CONCLUSION
Assessing scenario planning projects is critical to understanding and docu-
menting their effects. Furthermore, establishing evidence of the contribu-
tions of scenario projects lends credibility to strategic activities in general. 
This chapter has presented a comprehensive approach to assessing scenario 
planning projects. The goal has been to present a method for estimating the 
beneﬁts of scenario planning, and making the case that scenario planning 
can result in a variety of beneﬁts. Among these beneﬁts are participant and 
stakeholder satisfaction, participant knowledge and expertise, and system 
and ﬁnancial improvements. 
F I G U R E  9.9  Comprehensive Scenario Project Assessment for Technology 
Corporation (continued)
Quantitative
Qualitative
Performance Results
 
System
Estimates of system results 
based on the initial  
purpose of the project
Interview questions: 
1.  Has the scenario planning 
project helped the 
organization be more 
productive?
2.  If so, how?  In what ways?
3.  Have there been strategic 
insights, creative leaps, or 
other innovations you feel 
are attributable to the 
scenario planning project? 
Please describe them.
 
Financial
Performance Value – Cost  
 = Benefit
Estimates of discontinuities  
 avoided
Estimates of profits due to  
 strategic insights
Interview questions: 
1.  How has the scenario 
planning project 
contributed to the financial 
stability of the organization?


---PAGE BREAK---

  
P H A S E 5—P R O J E C T  A S S E S S M E N T  
213
The literature on scenario planning generally does not include meth-
ods or approaches to assessing the outcomes of scenario planning projects. 
This chapter has acknowledged the difﬁculties in such an assessment and 
provided a framework for synthesizing the results of scenario projects. The 
elements of this approach form a complete and theoretically sound approach 
to assessing scenario projects that moves beyond simple reaction forms and 
into observable, objective results. Using the tools and techniques provided 
in this chapter creates a mechanism for clearly understanding and docu-
menting the impact of scenario projects.


---PAGE BREAK---

This page intentionally left blank 


---PAGE BREAK---

 215
P
A
R
T
T
H
R
E
E
LEADING SCENARIO  
PROJECTS
C H A P TE RS
 
10  Managing Scenario Projects
 
11  Human Perceptions in the Scenario System 
 
12  Initiating Your First Scenario Project
SCENARIO PLANNING is a complex organizational activity, with many bar-
riers and nuances that are often skimmed over or receive little attention. 
Some dilemmas are not easily solved. Part Three of Scenario Planning in 
Organizations explores some cutting-edge thinking that can suggest ways of 
overcoming common barriers in scenario planning. 
The following chapters make up this part:
• Chapter 10, “Managing Scenario Projects”
• Chapter 11, “Human Perceptions in Scenario Planning” 
• Chapter 12, “Initiating Your First Scenario Project.”
Chapter 10 describes several common pitfalls in scenario planning. A 
scenario project worksheet is also provided to help structure the entire sce-
nario project, as well as avoid the pitfalls. This chapter will help keep the 
project on track, and its tools are useful in overall project management.
Chapter 11 reviews some recent neurology research and suggests how 
several barriers to human creativity can be overcome. This chapter also 


---PAGE BREAK---

216 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JE C T S
speculates on some techniques from brain research that may improve the 
effectiveness of scenario planning and certainly form the foundation for in-
teresting research questions in future scenario planning research.
Chapter 12 summarizes the key points of Scenario Planning in Orga-
nizations and offers some tips for how to get started on your own scenario 
projects.


---PAGE BREAK---

 217
Managing  
Scenario Projects
The purpose of this chapter is to provide recommendations for helping you 
manage scenario projects. The skills and abilities required to make scenario 
projects work are diverse, and they improve over time and experience. The 
nature of scenario work avoids speciﬁc procedures that are repeated in each 
project. However, scenario projects do lend themselves to frameworks (such 
as the phases presented in this book). In addition, there are several strategies 
I have learned from making my own mistakes and from hearing about 
others. These insights are followed by twenty scenario pitfalls presented in 
the scenario planning literature (Schoemaker, 2005), including their solu-
tions. This chapter can thus serve as a guide providing a few key leverage 
points for getting the most out of scenario projects.
STRATEGIES TO MANAGE SCENARIO PROJECTS
Scenario projects have many dimensions and need to be thoughtfully 
managed. Important strategies for managing scenario projects include the 
following:
• Spending time on the problem, issue, or question
• Recognizing the importance of the team
• Spending time on analysis
• Deﬁning important outcomes
• Putting your scenarios to use 
• Assessing your impact
• Recognizing an evolving context 
10 


---PAGE BREAK---

218 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JE C T S
These activities are suggested as important pieces of the scenario system, 
and when paid attention to, they can help your scenario project stay on 
track and deliver results. Each is described in detail. 
SPENDING TIME ON THE PROBLEM, QUESTION, OR ISSUE
How the scenario project is framed inﬂuences everything. The initial prob-
lem, question, or issue must be referenced repeatedly throughout the proj-
ect. The more speciﬁc you can be about the issue at the outset, the easier it 
is to consistently address that issue throughout. However, it is useful to keep 
in mind that initial scenarios are usually general “learning” scenarios that 
explore the external environment. So, if your organization is new to scenario 
planning, it is very useful to design a ﬁrst set of scenarios focused on a gen-
eral understanding of the external environment. Using these scenarios as 
context, you can then move into a second set of scenarios focused on a spe-
ciﬁc issue. This approach will allow thinking to sharpen on a speciﬁc issue 
and design a set of scenarios speciﬁcally to illuminate the problem. Because 
this second set of scenarios is highly focused, the project will be easier to as-
sess and likely to have a more lasting impact on decision making.
If an organization is already using general-level scenarios, a project 
team can jump directly into the “decision” scenarios, moving straight to the 
problem, question, or issue and working directly on it. 
The importance of spending time on the problem, question, or issue 
cannot be overstated. Having a speciﬁc issue creates boundaries for the 
project. Given the volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity of the 
business environment, there will be difﬁculties enough in steering a project 
designed to “promote organizational learning.” Such a general focus is not 
easily assessed. The more speciﬁc the focus of the scenario project can be, 
the more easily it can be assessed. In addition, the pressure for speciﬁc as-
sessment data can vary across organizations.
The importance of specifying a problem, question, or issue is intimately 
related to how decision makers view the utility of the project. Organizations 
using scenario planning as a one-time effort usually result in project failures. 
These failures are due to the generation of contextual learning scenarios that 
do not offer enough speciﬁcs for managers to exercise their judgment.
RECOGNIZING THE IMPORTANCE OF THE TEAM
The right team is critical to the success of any scenario project. Team mem-
bers can provide valuable information about the history, context, issues, 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
M A N A G I N G S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T S 
219
personalities, and politics. Therefore, teams must include members inter-
nal to the organization. Critical functions of the team include overseeing 
the administrative management of the project; keeping the initial problem, 
question, or issue central to the work done in the project; gathering relevant 
information; conducting research; and facilitating workshops. The team 
should also be multilevel and cross-functional.
My own failure to recognize the importance of the team in an early sce-
nario project is an example. I did not assign anyone as the project coordina-
tor. As a result, workshops and meetings were poorly attended because there 
was nobody internal to the organization coordinating the various events 
and communicating the details of the projects among team members. 
Another example from my own projects involved having someone as-
signed to the team who turned out to be looking for ways to sabotage the 
project. Although such malintent does not happen often, organization poli-
tics can come into play. Team membership should be negotiated. The more 
committed, excited, and motivated the team members are, the more likely 
the outcomes will meet and even exceed the expectations of decision makers.
SPENDING TIME ON ANALYSIS
Chapter 6 was dedicated to analysis activity. The activities described allow 
the team to understand the problem, question, or issue in its context. Analy-
sis activities should not be cut short or otherwise reduced to save project 
costs. This is a critical phase in the scenario system as it establishes what is 
known about the issue. Forecasts and trend reports can often be used as a 
substitute for thinking on the part of the user; therefore, the goal of analysis 
and the scenario exploration phase is to generate the team’s own under-
standing and thinking about the problem, question, or issue.
Projects that reduce time and commitment to the exploration phase 
have little impact. This is because the workshops and subsequent phases are 
tailored to what is learned during analysis and scenario exploration. As is 
the case with any organizational improvement activity, everything rests on 
this foundational work. I have seen projects in which little time is given to 
understanding the issue, and these projects have generally lacked the mo-
mentum for signiﬁcant impact. 
DEFINING IMPORTANT OUTCOMES
One key to making scenarios work is having an idea of what the expecta-
tions are. While these expectations can become a moving target, the more 


---PAGE BREAK---

220 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JE C T S
that is known about what decision makers hope to get out of the project, the 
more the project can be tailored to address those expectations. Some man-
agers and executives are comfortable with ambiguity and vague outcomes 
like “continuous learning about the industry,” but the vast majority will 
have speciﬁc desired outcomes in mind. Ask for them.
My own experience has told me that the type of organization matters 
as well. For example, scenario projects I have worked on with engineer-
ing ﬁrms have had speciﬁc, targeted outcomes. These projects have also re-
quired more effort to stimulate strategic thinking than working with design 
teams in technology-driven industries. In other words, organizational cul-
ture and personality can drive an orientation toward more speciﬁc (or more 
ambiguous) outcomes.
PUTTING YOUR SCENARIOS TO USE
Perhaps the most common reason for disappointment in scenario projects is 
a lack of use. So many consulting companies now provide scenario planning 
interventions, yet few boast anything beyond developing scenarios for their 
client organizations. The development of scenarios can be highly creative 
and fun, but using them should be the most rewarding phase. The amount 
of time and effort spent on scenario development should be mirrored in 
scenario implementation.
This book provides a framework for using scenarios. Speciﬁc workshops 
have been described with guidance for making them work. Communicating 
and using the scenarios is the opportunity to begin an organization-wide 
strategic conversation. This conversation can be the catalyst for real change 
inside the organization. Do not let the delivery of three or four scenarios be 
the end of your project. You must use them to challenge thinking within 
and across the organization. 
ASSESSING YOUR IMPACT
Most scenario projects lack assessment or evaluation. How do decision 
makers know they are getting anything for their investment? Some claim 
to simply “know.” Particularly in lean economic times (although equally 
important anytime), organizational change interventions must have docu-
mentation of their delivered outcomes. Chapter 9 of this book has laid out 
a comprehensive approach to scenario project assessment. The proposed 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
M A N A G I N G S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T S 
221
activities take time and resources. However, if carried out, these assessment 
techniques will make the case that scenario planning is easily worth every 
penny invested.
If you have experience with other assessment tools, use them. The pur-
pose is to begin establishing evidence that scenario planning works. 
Scenario planning literature is full of claims about decision making, 
learning, and navigating the future, but little evidence is provided to 
support these claims. Most scenario planners could tell you stories of 
their successes or failures, which may constitute a form of evidence, but 
few people document these stories. Though helpful, these stories also are 
not always compelling to ﬁnancially driven executives. Scenario proj-
ects should include a cost/beneﬁt analysis. Even if the ﬁgures it contains 
are estimates or forecasts, they should be included. The scenario system 
presented in this book demands that you assess the projected ﬁnancial 
beneﬁts of the project at the outset. Following up at the conclusion of 
the project and beyond should be a simple exercise in collecting a few 
pieces of relevant data. 
RECOGNIZING AN EVOLVING CONTEXT
A very exciting aspect of scenario planning is the increasing variety of con-
texts in which it is being used. The Mont Fleur Scenarios (Kahane, 1992) 
were the ﬁrst example of using the scenario planning technique in a noncor-
porate context. The Mont Fleur Scenarios brought together a diverse group 
of business leaders, politicians, civil rights activists, artists, and others con-
cerned with the future of South Africa. Their scenario efforts were aimed 
at building a community sharing a vision for a better South Africa. Adam 
Kahane, the primary facilitator, was previously a member of Shell’s scenario 
team. Kahane has since focused his efforts more carefully in this area, mov-
ing on to scenarios for Colombia. 
These projects (and particularly the Mont Fleur Scenarios) were a clear 
signal that scenarios could be useful beyond corporate planning. Part group 
decision-making process, part team building, part envisioning, part analy-
sis, among others, it is easy to see that the scenario system can apply in a va-
riety of contexts. The world in general features the same characteristics (e.g., 
volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity) as the business environ-
ment, and tools for thinking differently about the future can be applied to 


---PAGE BREAK---

222 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JE C T S
problems related to global climate change, health care, water supply, ecol-
ogy, and other natural resources.
ADDITIONAL PITFALLS AND  
ACCOMPANYING SOLUTIONS
Schoemaker (2005) has described twenty common pitfalls in scenario 
planning. These pitfalls are divided into ten process pitfalls and ten con-
tent pitfalls. Although there is some overlap with the strategies for man-
aging scenario projects described earlier in this chapter, they will all be 
presented—along with proposed solutions—to keep the integrity of Schoe-
maker’s list.
TEN PROCESS PITFALLS
The ﬁrst ten pitfalls are speciﬁcally related to managing the scenario proj-
ect process (Schoemaker, 2005). These pitfalls are results of an inability 
to understand the nuances related to facilitating scenario projects and the 
administrative side of directing and steering scenario projects.
• Failure to ensure top leadership support. Any organizational change 
intervention must have leadership support in order to be successful. 
Scenario planning is an executive-level activity, so if the executives are 
not involved, forget it!
• Not enough contribution from outside. The dangers of groupthink (too 
much homogeneity in the thinking) are ever present with scenario 
planning. Using outside sources—“remarkable people” or experts in a 
variety of disciplines—pays signiﬁcant dividends (Wack, 1984). In  
my experience, each project should use a minimum of two external 
experts. The more participants involved in the project, the more 
external experts should be sought.
• Lack of balance between line and staff people. A basic feature of scenario 
planning is that it must involve a cross section of the organization. 
That includes levels and functions. If it doesn’t, it’s not scenario plan- 
ning. Make sure each function in the organization is represented in  
the conversation. 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
M A N A G I N G S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T S 
223
• Unrealistic expectations. This pitfall is avoided by clarifying expec-
tations and documenting them in the scenario project proposal. 
Expectations should be clariﬁed before any exploration or development 
work is begun. 
• Poorly deﬁned roles. The scenario project proposal also demands the 
identiﬁcation of team members and clariﬁcation of roles. The impor- 
tance of this issue has been discussed thoroughly but cannot be 
overstated.
• Failure to keep on track. Again, the scenario project proposal demands 
the articulation of a strategic problem, issue, or question. Clearly 
deﬁning this issue and consistently coming back to it are critical to 
success. 
• Too many scenarios. Do not use more than four scenarios. The system 
presented in this book is designed to produce four useful scenarios. 
Having more than four scenarios is overwhelming for decision makers 
and complicates the project.
• Not enough time allowed. The scenario project proposal calls for an 
agreed-on time line. If decision makers expect to complete a scenario 
project with two workshops in two weeks, explain the consequences 
and conditions required for thinking strategically. If they insist, an 
alternative is to suggest a different facilitator. It is important to be 
ready to remove yourself from projects that are set up to fail. Short- 
cutting with an unrealistic time frame is a sure path to disappointing 
and low-utility outcomes. 
• Failure to link to existing processes. The scenario system presented in 
this book connects scenario development to the organization through 
several workshops. Those workshops are speciﬁcally designed to link 
the scenario project to various existing processes inside the organi- 
zation, including organization culture, structure, current strategies, 
human resources, design, and others. 
• Failure to link to our everyday world. Scenarios have to be relevant for 
the managers who will use them. Projects that fail to capture the 
things that managers are concerned with in their everyday decision 
making will have little impact. An effective way to overcome this 
pitfall is to use information gathered in the interviews and make 
sure it appears in the scenarios. The interview questions described 


---PAGE BREAK---

224 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JE C T S
in the scenario exploration phase are designed to draw out the 
things managers worry about in their roles as organizational 
leaders. If these items appear in the scenarios, relevance is increased 
that will catch the users’ attention. 
TEN CONTENT PITFALLS
The following ten pitfalls are related to the content in the scenarios them-
selves (Schoemaker, 2005). Again, solutions are suggested based on the sys-
tem provided in this book.
• Failure to take the long view. Scenario projects should look ahead ﬁve, 
ten, or twenty years to stimulate creative thinking. The goal is to get 
participants into a space that is truly unknown to them. Targeting 
scenarios within a year or two is often too close to managers’ mind-
sets, and their scenarios will often be extrapolations of their current 
thinking and their own understanding of trends.
• Failure to take the wide view. Scenarios have to expand beyond your 
own industry. Given the complexity of today’s business environment, it 
is difﬁcult to see how an honest look at any issue would fail to link it 
to numerous other issues in a variety of industries. Thus, the scenario 
exploration phase provides the tools for analyzing issues in their 
context, revealing their interdependencies.
• Too much attention to trends. Trends are often used as a substitute for 
real thinking. Trends are not a viable shortcut to deep analysis and the 
development of real knowledge. Trends are a part of the scenario 
exploration phase and should be considered. If allowed to dominate, 
however, trends can derail the development of understanding. 
• Too homogeneous a range of views. Again, using “remarkable people,” or 
experts outside the organization, from different industries can prevent 
this pitfall. Diversity of thinking is important, and one signal that 
views are too homogeneous is when meetings and workshops are 
completed quickly, with minimal dialogue or challenge. This can be 
an indicator of a very efﬁcient team of people who work well together, 
but as the project leader, it may be a signal for you to bring in a 
different perspective. 
• Lack of internal logic. Scenarios are not compelling when they are not 
based on facts and research. This is why “scenario light” projects, 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
M A N A G I N G S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T S 
225
based on concepts and ideas, without deep analysis, are so often 
useless. 
• Failure to look at deeper-level causes, failure to challenge mind-sets, and 
failure to make the scenarios dynamic. These three scenario pitfalls are 
attributable to the fact that there are no methods or systems available 
for checking the utility of any given set of scenarios. This book pre- 
sents a scenario quality checklist designed to promote deep analysis, 
optimize the likelihood of changing mind-sets, and ensure dynamic, 
compelling scenario stories. Using a checklist like this, or developing 
your own, and asking the input of the team to make sure these items 
are addressed will help you avoid these issues.
• Irrelevance. Again, using information from interviews with managers 
will immediately bring the scenarios to their doorstep. Obviously, 
having people for whom the scenarios must be relevant involved in the 
process is critical.
• Failure to create a real breakthrough. This pitfall signals an overarching 
problem with most scenario planning methods. What is a breakthrough? 
Existing methods don’t push for a deﬁned purpose, goals, or expected 
outcomes of the scenario project. So a breakthrough is a nebulous, 
undeﬁned, and in most cases random event. True, there must be room 
in the scenario project for things unplanned to emerge (Mintzberg, 
Ahlstrand & Lampel, 2005). However, breakthroughs can also be 
outcomes of deep, disciplined thinking about and critical analysis of 
strategic issues. The system presented in this book is designed to 
optimize scenario projects toward articulated purposes, expected 
outcomes, and deep thinking.
CONCLUSION
Most of the pitfalls in scenario planning projects can be avoided by using the 
scenario system presented in this book. The scenario project management 
worksheet (Figure 10.1) is designed to make the scenario system immedi-
ately applicable and to help translate the concepts presented in this book to 
any organization. It will help plan, structure, and manage the phases of per-
formance-based scenario planning, and it can be used as a guide throughout 
the project for avoiding the common problems in scenario projects that have 
been discussed. 


---PAGE BREAK---

226 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JE C T S
This chapter has presented key issues in managing scenario projects, 
including the following: 
• Spending time on the problem, issue, or question 
• Recognizing the importance of the team
• Spending time on analysis
• Deﬁning important outcomes 
• Putting your scenarios to use
• Assessing your impact
• Recognizing an evolving context
The guidance provided to address these issues is largely a result of my own 
experience in designing, managing, and facilitating scenario projects.
This chapter has also presented the common pitfalls in scenario projects 
according to Schoemaker (2005). These descriptions and accompanying so-
lutions are intended to help you manage and facilitate your own scenario 
projects and avoid some of the more common issues that come up. Tips 
for optimizing scenario projects will help project facilitators avoid common 
traps and barriers to generating successful, strategically insightful scenario 
projects. Finally, this chapter has shared the scenario project management 
worksheet, which will help you plan, structure, and facilitate a scenario 
project. This worksheet makes the concepts from this book immediately 
applicable in any organization.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
M A N A G I N G S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T S 
227
F I G U R E  10.1  The Scenario Project Worksheet
SCENARIO PROJECT WORKSHEET
This sheet is a general guide for planning and managing scenario projects and can 
be used as an organizational guide and project management checklist. There is a 
total of five phases to the Performance-Based Scenario System.
Phase 1: Project Preparation
Defined Problem, Question, or Issue:  __________________________________
Stated Purpose of the Project:  ________________________________________
Project Scope and Time Line:  ________________________________________
Roles and People Assigned:  __________________________________________
 Project Leader:  ___________________  Coordinator:  _________________
 Remarkable People: ______________________________________________
 Team Members:  ________________________________________________
 Other:  ________________________________________________________
Expected Outcomes of the Project:  ____________________________________
Measurement Tools:  _______________________________________________
Phase 1: Project Preparation Phase Pitfall Management 
Yes 
No
 Is top leadership participating in the project? 
 ____ ____
 Are remarkable people recruited to participate in the project? 
 ____ ____
 Is there a balance between line and staff participants? 
 ____ ____
 Is the time line realistic given the expectations? 
 ____ ____
 Does the project link to existing processes? 
 ____ ____
 Will the project address fundamental issues in organization  
  management? 
 ____ ____
Phase 2: Scenario Exploration
A.  External Analysis: 
 STEEP forces  
(check those that 
 Thinking hats  
apply) 
 Trends and forecasts 
 
 Other: ____________________
B. Internal Analysis: 
 Interviews (list interview participants):
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 Analyze the business idea  
 
 Analyze the theory of the business
(continued)


---PAGE BREAK---

228 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JE C T S
F I G U R E  10.1  The Scenario Project Worksheet (continued)
C. Analysis and Synthesis Tools Used: 
 
 Questionnaires  
 
 Observations 
 
 Existing data: __________________
 
 Swanson’s Performance Diagnosis Matrix
 
 Rummler and Brache’s Nine Performance Variables
 
 Other analysis and synthesis tools: 
 
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________
D.  Analysis is thorough and demonstrates our own          Yes  No 
understanding of the problem or issue. 
 ____  ____
Phase 2: Scenario Exploration Phase Pitfall Management 
Yes 
No
  Scenarios extend 5, 10, 15, or 20 years into the future? 
 ____ ____
  Other industries included in the analysis and scenarios? 
 ____ ____
  Trends are included but do not dominate? 
 ____ ____
Phase 3: Scenario Development
A. Workshop Planning (Dates): 
  Brainstorming  ________ 
  Ranking by impact  _______ 
  Ranking by relative uncertainty  _________
B. Two Critical Uncertainties (High Impact + High Uncertainty) for the Scenario 
Matrix:
  1.  __________________________ 
2.  ___________________________
C. Draft Scenario Matrix:
(continued)


---PAGE BREAK---

  
M A N A G I N G S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T S 
229
F I G U R E  10.1  The Scenario Project Worksheet (continued)
D. Research Agenda (elements that require more data gathering and 
investigation):
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
E. Draft Scenario Titles/Themes/Possibilities:
 
 __________________  
___________________ 
 __________________
 
 __________________  
___________________ 
 __________________
 
 __________________  
___________________ 
 __________________
F.  Plots: 
Suggestions:   ____ Revolution  ____ Cycles       ____ Infinite Possibility  
____ Lone Ranger  ____ My Generation
 
Other:
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
G. Story Writing (name[s] of individual[s] to write each scenario):
  1.  __________________________ 
2.  ___________________________
  3.  __________________________ 
4. ____________________________
H. Communication Strategy:
 
 Workbook  
 Podcasts
 
 Website  
 Presentations
 
 Video  
 Workshops
 
 Activities: ______________________________________
 
 Other: _________________________________________
Phase 3: Scenario Development Phase Pitfall Management 
Yes 
No
  Four scenarios (if other, check for novelty; avoid best/worst)? 
 ____ ____
  Scenarios have input from external experts? 
 ____ ____
  Scenarios are logical and well researched? 
 ____ ____
  Scenarios include deep analysis and are data driven? 
 ____ ____
Phase 4: Scenario Implementation
A. Workshop Planning for Using the Scenarios (dates):  
  Revisit the initial problem/question _________
  Theory of the business _________
  Business idea _________ 
  Analyze current strategies _________
  Developing signals _________ 
  Experiential exercise _________
(continued)


---PAGE BREAK---

230 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JE C T S
F I G U R E  10.1  The Scenario Project Worksheet (continued)
B. Outcomes
  • Key Strategies Useful in All Scenarios:
  1.  __________________________ 
2.  ___________________________
  3.  __________________________ 
4. ____________________________
  • Signals:
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
 
 _____________________________  
 _____________________________
Phase 4: Scenario Implementation Phase Pitfall Management 
Yes 
No
  Scenarios are interesting and relevant for managers? 
 ____ ____
  Scenario can create a real breakthrough? 
 ____ ____
Phase 5: Project Assessment Phase
Quantitative
Qualitative
Satisfaction Results
Participant
Survey (10 items, strongly 
agree to strongly disagree) 
 
 
Interview questions: 
Stakeholder
Survey (10 items, strongly 
agree to strongly disagree) 
 
 
Interview questions: 
Learning Results
Knowledge
Surveys: 
1. _______________
2. _______________
3. _______________
4. _______________
5. _______________
6. _______________
Interview questions: 
(continued)


---PAGE BREAK---

  
M A N A G I N G S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T S 
231
F I G U R E  10.1  The Scenario Project Worksheet (continued)
Quantitative
Qualitative
Learning Results (continued)
Expertise
Observations of behaviors 
where appropriate using 
the Scenario Expertise 
Audit (who will be 
observed?)
1. _______________
2. _______________
3. _______________
4. _______________
5. _______________
6. _______________
Interview questions: 
Performance Results
System
Estimates of system 
results based on the initial 
purpose of the project 
 
Interview questions: 
Financial
Performance Value 
Performance Value – Cost 
= Benefit
Estimates of 
discontinuities avoided
Estimates of profits due to 
strategic insights
Interview questions: 


---PAGE BREAK---

This page intentionally left blank 


---PAGE BREAK---

 233
Human Perceptions  
in the Scenario System
Scenario planning is a social activity. It integrates learning, social interac-
tion, dialogue, and human perceptions. These things come together in the 
form of a recalibrated view of the organization and its situation if the project 
has been successful. 
Three critical barriers to optimal innovation and human creativity are 
(1) perception, (2) a natural fear response, and (3) social intelligence (Berns, 
2008). Decision makers are limited by a brain that requires approximately 
forty watts—the amount needed to power a lightbulb (Berns, 2008). To 
perform its many complex functions, the brain must be efﬁcient, and there-
fore it draws on past experiences and any other easily accessible information 
sources to make sense of its situation. Decision makers are limited by fear of 
uncertainty and the public consequences of decisions with unfavorable re-
sults. Many people become easily paralyzed by the prospect of being wrong. 
Finally, optimal human innovation requires the ability to convince other 
people that an idea has merit, and this requires social intelligence (Berns 
2008). An analysis of highly innovative, creative thinkers revealed that 
these people found ways to overcome such barriers. The results are pub-
lished in Berns’s 2008 book Iconoclast. 
This chapter examines these core barriers to optimal human innovation 
and potential. More speciﬁcally, it explores the role of scenario projects in 
overcoming these barriers. The barriers identiﬁed by Berns are intricately 
linked to strategic decision making—for which scenario planning has been 
positioned as a critical aid. This chapter uses examples from neurology re-
search to make the case that scenario planning can address these barriers to 
11


---PAGE BREAK---

234 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
innovative and creative human activity, and help people overcome problems 
of perception, fear, and social intelligence. 
Additional research studies based on the thinking underlying quantum 
physics reveal the untapped potential of the human brain. These studies 
suggest a new take on the relationship between thought and action. Sample 
research studies that relate to the power of scenarios are presented and the 
implications considered.
THE NEUROLOGY OF LEARNING
Brain research suggests that by the time we are in our mid-thirties, we have 
literally “memorized” the majority of repeated activities in our lives (Dis-
penza, 2007). For example, the process of waking up, putting on clothing, 
brushing teeth, preparing the kids for school, and driving to work require 
minimal focused thought because we have literally memorized the neces-
sary routines required to accomplish these activities. The brain is a relatively 
small organ given what it is responsible for, and one of its key features is 
efﬁciency (Berns, 2008). The brain must be efﬁcient because it is trying to 
reduce the amount of energy it uses to accomplish its tasks (Berns, 2008). 
The way the brain accomplishes efﬁciency is by creating neural networks. 
These networks can consist of billions of neurons that learn to “ﬁre” to-
gether when activities are repeated over and over again. There is a network 
of related neurons that ﬁre together for each repeated activity in your life. 
For example, one group of neurons is responsible for brushing your teeth, 
and one for driving your car. 
Learning can be described as the process developing neural networks that 
ﬁre together and become habitual. When we ﬁrst learn to drive a car, it seems 
exceedingly complex. But, in a relatively short period of time, driving seems to 
require little concentrated thought at all. Learning can also be described as 
the process of “unwiring” existing neural networks, and “rewiring” neurons 
in different ways (Dispenza, 2007). The accompanying “aha” experience is a 
result of neurons in the brain making new connections as new concepts are 
absorbed and linked to other concepts (Berns, 2008). The brain is far more 
complex than we have understood, and the potential for new discoveries is vast.
PERCEPTION
The problem of perception is not new, but the impact of problems of per-
ception is often greater than we realize. According to the neuroscience view, 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
H U M A N  P E R C E P T I O N S  I N  T H E  S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
235
imagination uses the same neurons as natural sight but works in reverse 
(Berns, 2008). As a result, imagination is an extension of past experience—
what you are able to imagine is based on what you have experienced in the 
past. Again according to the neuroscience view, the way to increase your 
capacity to imagine is to continuously bombard your brain with new experi-
ences (Dispenza, 2007). 
Recurring experiences build neural networks, which eventually lead 
to the ability to perform a task expertly without directing much conscious 
thought toward that activity. In strategic and organizational contexts, neu-
ral networks can be equated with mental models—the buildup of past ex-
periences, beliefs, assumptions, and expertise that tell us what to do. When 
these networks or mental models lead to successful results, there is little 
incentive to question them. 
The description of the scenario system presented in this book makes a 
clear case for how perceptions can be shifted. However, the social approach 
to strategy required by scenario planning is not automatic. A secondary bar-
rier to adjusting perceptions is simply arrogance. Participants must engage 
in the project with a willingness to question their knowledge and be faced 
with the possibility they might be wrong. People who are unwilling to con-
sider that their knowledge or expertise may be wrong will get little out of 
scenario planning.
FEAR
Fear is usually what prevents participants from opening up enough to ex-
amine their assumptions and perceptions. Fear can be viewed as a driver of 
perceptions. There is risk associated with questioning the popular view—
asking, “What if the experts are wrong?”—but there is also risk in ignoring the 
volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity in the external environment. 
Which is a greater risk? Executives eventually ﬁnd that ego does not have a use-
ful place in solving difﬁcult strategic dilemmas, and scenario planning does not 
require a “bet the farm” strategy as one of its outcomes. As a result, scenario 
planning seems a much less risky way of questioning conventional wisdom 
because it does not require commitment to a single strategy for moving 
ahead. It is actually a more natural approach to decision making. 
Berns’s (2008) research has shown that the most effective strategy for 
mitigating fear in group situations is to “recruit one like-minded individual” 
(p. 103). This makes it highly unlikely that any single individual will be up 


---PAGE BREAK---

236 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
against the collective view of the group. Scenario planning has a built-in 
mechanism in using outside experts speciﬁcally designed to prevent group-
think. However, many scenario projects do not make use of this critical 
resource, and the results show it. The barrier of fear is overcome in scenario 
planning by using its time-tested methods, including alternative voices, 
and making sure that views are diverse enough to prevent one-against-all 
situations. 
SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE
Familiarity and reputation are two key aspects of social intelligence, and 
they go hand in hand (Berns, 2008). These aspects are important when 
attempting to communicate ideas. Though less relevant in scenario plan-
ning in terms of a barrier, these aspects become factors in considering who 
should be involved in the scenario project (team members and other outside 
experts) and in presenting ideas to decision makers. In scenario planning, 
the goal is less to convince others that your idea is correct or right, and more 
to convince people to entertain ideas contrary to their own. 
However, there is a role for convincing other people in the organization 
that scenario planning is a useful, appropriate approach to strategy. This is 
why internal leaders should be recruited as participants and team members. 
Every organization has leaders who are not leaders in formal title. Participa-
tion of these informal leaders sends a signal to the rest of the organization 
that the project is useful and likely to produce results. Louis van der Merwe 
called these individuals “linking pins” throughout the organization because 
they connect people across the organization regardless of functional silos.
THREE STUDIES ON THE BRAIN  
AND PERCEPTIONS
The visual and creative nature of scenario planning carries additional im-
plications. Recent neurology research suggests that the more deeply partici-
pants can be pushed into visualizing the scenarios, the more effective they 
will be. A review of these research studies provokes some exciting specula-
tions about the potential results of participants who focus and concentrate 
deeply on the content and possible outcomes presented in each scenario. 
The next section reviews several research studies and speculates what these 
research studies could mean in the context of scenario planning.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
H U M A N  P E R C E P T I O N S  I N  T H E  S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
237
The brain’s capacity to imagine is particularly unique. Emerging re-
search in this area is producing some startling discoveries with important 
implications. Research studies of note include work on visualized weight-
lifting versus actual weightlifting (Yue, 2001), work on visualized piano 
playing versus actual piano playing (Pascual-Leone, Dang, Cohen, Brasil-
Neto, Cammorata, & Hallett, 1995), and work on comparing the effects of 
maximal voluntary and imagined muscle contractions (Yue & Cole, 1992). 
Each of these studies is summarized brieﬂy.
VISUALIZED WEIGHTLIFTING VERSUS ACTUAL WEIGHTLIFTING 
Research participants were asked to “imagine ﬂexing one of their biceps as hard 
as possible in training sessions ﬁve times a week” (Yue, 2001, p. 1717). Research-
ers recorded brain activity and electrical impulses at the motor neurons of the 
biceps muscles. “The volunteers who thought about ﬂexing their biceps showed 
a 13.5 per cent increase in strength after three weeks, and maintained that 
gain for three months after training stopped” (Yue, 2001, p. 1717).
VISUALIZED PIANO PLAYING VERSUS ACTUAL PIANO PLAYING 
Researchers used cortical motor mapping on subjects learning a one-handed 
exercise on the piano (Pascual-Leone, Dang, Cohen, Brasil-Neto, Cammo-
rata, & Hallett, 1995). Subjects were assigned to a physical practice group, 
a mental practice group, or a control group. Subjects in the physical practice 
group practiced the exercise for two hours daily, subjects in the mental prac-
tice group visualized the exercise for two hours daily, and the control group 
did not practice the exercise. 
Over the course of ﬁve days, mental practice alone led to signiﬁcant 
improvement in the performance of the ﬁve-ﬁnger exercise, but the im-
provement was signiﬁcantly less than that produced by physical practice 
alone. However, mental practice alone led to the same plastic changes 
in the motor system as those occurring in the acquisition of the skill by 
repeated physical exercise. (Pascual-Leone et al., 1995, p. 1037) 
MAXIMAL VOLUNTARY AND IMAGINED MUSCLE CONTRACTIONS
Researchers compared the results between groups with maximal voluntary 
muscle contractions and imagined muscle contractions in the left ﬁfth ﬁn-
ger (Yue & Cole, 1992). A third group served as the control group. “Av-
erage abduction force of the left ﬁfth digit increased 22 per cent for the 


---PAGE BREAK---

238 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
imagining group, and 30 per cent for the actual contraction group” (Yue & 
Cole, 1992, p. 1114). 
BRAIN STATES
These research studies show that imagined activities can cause similar re-
sults to actual activities. What is important about these ﬁndings is that they 
suggest we take the power of the brain and its capabilities for granted. Fur-
thermore, the measurement of brain waves in all of these studies showed 
that participants in the visualization/imagination groups all had signiﬁcant 
changes in the nature of their brain waves during the imagination exercises. 
Participants in these groups all transitioned from beta brain waves to alpha 
brain waves, indicating a mental state of relaxed focus and concentration.
These research studies suggest that profound changes can be realized 
when the brain transitions from beta waves to alpha waves (i.e., from the 
hurried, hectic pace of everyday life to relaxation and calm). Some have 
called this state meditation, and Csikszentmihalyi (1998) would call it 
“ﬂow.” There need be nothing mysterious about achieving a state of total 
concentration and focus. Most people have experienced a time of such ab-
sorption in an activity that they lost a sense of time and space. This state 
is measurable in functional MRI brain scans. Participants in these research 
studies achieve such a mental state according to their brain wave scans. 
THE BRAIN IN SCENARIOS
Whereas traditional approaches to strategy and strategic planning focus on 
trend reports and updates of budget projections, scenario projects are de-
signed to help decision makers understand the dynamics at play in uncer-
tain environments. Scenarios helps decision makers uncover blind spots, the 
things they don’t know they don’t know, and reframe the strategy process as 
a learning activity. 
VISUALIZATION IN SCENARIOS
The experience of visualization and “being in” a speciﬁc scenario and then 
being asked to explain how it came to be has been a profound tool, but 
brain activity during scenario immersion has not yet been studied. An early 
hypothesis based on neurology research would be that participants who 
achieve beta brain waves and get “lost” in the scenarios are more likely to 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
H U M A N  P E R C E P T I O N S  I N  T H E  S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
239
have strategic insights. If conﬁrmed, there would be implications for facili-
tating scenario projects. How can scenarios be presented such that the like-
lihood of provoking focused concentration is maximized? What is the best 
format for presenting scenarios with a goal of capturing the full attention 
of participants? I would love to see functional MRI scans of various partici-
pants in scenario projects. Of course, it is not quite that simple!
SEEING
Scenario planning literature frequently uses a metaphor of seeing, as in the 
sense that scenarios allow the participant to “see” the same situation in a 
different way. Every way of seeing is based on a certain set of assumptions, 
and if those assumptions or mental models can be changed, there is the 
potential for new learning, cognitive shift, new understanding, and, con-
comitantly, new and most desirable outcomes. 
Additional neurological research suggests that the human brain can-
not tell the difference between what it experiences through the known ﬁve 
senses and what it imagines (Le Doux, 2000; Schwartz, Stapp, & Beau-
regard, 2005). In a recent research, scientists monitored neurological ac-
tivity in subjects and found the same activities in exactly the same areas 
of the brain when subjects were seeing and when they were remembering 
(Schwartz et al., 2005).
MEMORIES OF THE FUTURE
This ﬁnding is signiﬁcant in the context of scenario planning because it 
blurs the lines between reﬂection and action—between thinking and doing. 
More speciﬁcally, this research suggests that scenario planning is a means 
for creating a memory that can serve as actual experience. 
High-utility scenario planning creates memories of the future (Ingvar, 
1985). However, by deﬁnition, these are memories of things that have not 
actually occurred. Scenario planning helps participants to make sense of 
their experience, linking the past to the present and future, and creating 
alternative future end states (Burt, 2006). The extent to which these future 
states create memories could be largely dependent on the extent to which 
each participant is engaged in the project—often a function of facilitation, 
relevance, and learning. 


---PAGE BREAK---

240 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
MAXIMIZING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF 
SCENARIOS
Other chapters in this book have presented criteria for assessing the qual-
ity of scenarios. This chapter has brieﬂy described some provocative ideas 
that speculate on human perceptions and brain activity during the scenario 
project. Neurology research conﬁrms that people learn more when they 
concentrate and focus on the task at hand. This book has argued that in 
many organizations, strategy has become an automated activity consisting 
of updating budget projections and injecting popular trends as priority ac-
tivities. Largely, thinking and learning have become lost as important parts 
of the planning process. Scenario planning puts thinking and learning at 
the forefront of strategy, which has implications for, yet is inﬂuenced by, 
human perceptions and brain activity. 
Emerging research on human perceptions provokes questions about 
how to most effectively engage participants. Choosing participants who are 
motivated to learn is always helpful. However, the mode in which scenarios 
are presented can make or break the deal for participants as well. Scenario 
planning, therefore, becomes a delicate balance between the learning orien-
tation of participants and the skills of facilitators. Both work together to cre-
ate a focused, deliberate effort at studying and understanding the dynamics 
at play in a speciﬁc situation.
CONCLUSION
The goal of this chapter has been to consider some stimulating ideas on the 
horizon for facilitators and participants in scenario projects. Three barriers 
to optimal human perception and innovation have been presented. It has 
been suggested that scenario planning is a natural system for dealing with 
these barriers. Related neurology research was brieﬂy discussed to show that 
the human brain functions differently when its attention is directed and 
focused. These research studies are intended to provoke new ideas regard-
ing the format, presentation, and engagement of participants in scenario 
projects.


---PAGE BREAK---

 241
Initiating Your First  
Scenario Project
Many scenario projects are gloriﬁed brainstorming sessions with little 
connection to critical organization inputs and outputs. The most difﬁcult 
yet most compelling use of scenarios will connect innovative thinking to ev-
eryday work. Participants should approach their work differently as a result 
of working on scenario projects. Sustaining these changes requires attention 
to detail, accountability, and general management skills—and, leadership is 
really management done well (Mintzberg, 2009).
Stressing the importance of up-front analysis and project assessment 
adds considerably to the robustness of a scenario project. Most currently 
available methods do not require these analysis and assessment compo-
nents, and as a result, using the system presented in this book may seem 
daunting. The added activities are designed to feed directly into, and out 
of, the scenario construction phase. The nuts and bolts of scenario projects 
as presented in this book require time spent understanding the issue, ap-
proximately six days of workshops over two to three months, and assessment 
activities. These bookend activities will be the biggest shift for users of other sce-
nario methods. However, these components are critical and require statements 
of expectations up-front and evidence of value at the project’s conclusion. To 
help get a handle on the ﬂow of a scenario project, the scenario project man-
agement worksheet was presented in Chapter 10. The worksheet is intended 
to be used as a guide for structuring and managing a scenario project in any 
organization, and to make the concepts described in this book immediately 
useful. 
12


---PAGE BREAK---

242 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
Essentially, the activities in the preparation and assessment phases are 
aimed at connecting the scenario project to performance improvement. 
Given a tendency to dismiss strategic initiatives as “too difﬁcult” or “impos-
sible” to evaluate, responsible facilitators of scenario projects will ﬁnd a way 
to show the value of what they do. The phases in this book provide a clear 
approach to all the elements required for successful scenario planning.
Frustration with planning methods that simply do not work are what 
usually initiates a ﬁrst scenario project. Perhaps your organization is stuck 
in the once-a-year planning retreat, or maybe your current approach to 
planning takes last year’s ﬁnancial data, adds a percentage, and rolls out 
new goals and growth targets, and that’s called strategy. Whatever the case, 
the premise of this book is that the majority of planning methods cannot 
account for uncertainty, and they are generally unsuitable for dealing with 
the nature of today’s strategic dilemmas. So, if you have read this book, you 
are probably ready to try something else.
HOW TO GET STARTED
Users of this book are likely to fall into one of two categories: (1) those 
wanting to carry out a scenario project for the ﬁrst time or (2) those who 
have tried scenarios before but were disappointed with the outcome. No 
matter which category you are in, initiating your scenario project rests on 
two key items: (1) ﬁnding out whether decision makers understand what 
scenario planning is really about and (2) developing commitment and sup-
port for the project. These two items lay the foundation for beginning the 
scenario project proposal. 
If decision makers are not familiar with scenario planning, there is 
some educating to do. A short presentation can easily cover the beneﬁts of 
scenario planning and what differentiates it from other approaches to plan-
ning. The ﬁrst two chapters of this book provide the relevant material and 
explain the beneﬁts and general process of scenario planning. Part of any 
brieﬁng on scenario planning should emphasize involvement as critical to 
the success of the project and that support on its own is not enough. 
The second task is to develop support and commitment. It should be 
clear that scenario projects are not individual-driven projects. They require 
support and involvement from senior decision makers, colleagues, manag-
ers, line workers, and outside experts. They require a substantial amount 


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N I T I A T I N G  Y O U R F I R S T S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T  
243
of coordination and resources—the most important of which are people 
who are ready to think deeply and critically about the organization and its 
environment. 
Sometimes the excitement about scenario projects can catch on like 
wildﬁre. The prospect of time to reﬂect and think is appealing to many de-
cision makers, and some will jump at the chance. Scenario projects are also 
appealing because they blend creativity, analysis, thinking, and action. The 
biggest struggle can involve economic conditions and time commitments. 
These challenges can be overcome by presenting the potential beneﬁts of a 
single strategic insight. Scenario projects may appear expensive when costs 
are viewed alone, but once the ﬁnancial implications of ideas that lead to in-
novative products or save the organization from a serious shift are realized, 
these costs seem to shrink in the larger perspective. 
Once you have developed an understanding of the scenario planning 
system and support for the project has been cultivated, you can consider the 
logistics of the project preparation phase. Starting with the steps described 
in the project preparation phase will lead you through the critical elements 
that go into the project proposal. The following phases (and their corre-
sponding chapters in this book) lead you through the rest. 
Again, the scenario project management worksheet (Figure 10.1) should 
not be missed by anyone planning to take this book and its concepts into 
action. The worksheet synthesizes the phases of the performance-based sce-
nario system and translates the content of this book into clear activities.
THE PERFORMANCE-BASED SCENARIO  
SYSTEM IN REVIEW
The performance-based scenario system is presented again in Figure 12.1, 
complete with each of its phases and their major components.
Following the systematic framework provided here will lead to successful 
and innovative scenario project results. The scenario system was designed to 
avoid the major pitfalls in the scenario literature and is a practical system. 
Experts in planning will tell you that using a systematic approach will 
relieve some of the headaches associated with vague, uncertain, complex 
and ambiguous problems. Working through the preparation, exploration, 
construction, implementation, and assessment phases connects the sce-
nario project to organizational inputs and outputs. In particular, the project 


---PAGE BREAK---

244 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
preparation and project assessment phases work directly with measures of 
performance. 
The preparation and exploration phases form the foundation of the 
problem and its nuances. As a result, these phases provide the outputs on 
which the rest of the scenario project is based. Therefore, shortcut or sloppy 
work in the preparation and exploration phases can easily lead to scenarios 
that have no utility. Examples of such projects are those that simply quan-
tify different outcomes of obvious variables. For example, scenarios inside 
Shell that simply showed oil prices going up, down, or remaining the same 
were hardly insightful or innovative. That is because they are based on such 
F I G U R E  12.1  The Performance-Based Scenario System
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


---PAGE BREAK---

  
I N I T I A T I N G  Y O U R F I R S T S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T  
245
obvious information. Deep analysis reveals critical variables hiding under-
neath the system, and it takes hard thinking and a lot of time to ﬁnd them. But 
the rewards are seen in compelling scenarios that provoke strategic insights. 
The scenario development phase presents materials found in other sce-
nario publications. However, this book presents a case to illustrate each 
phase and each step of the scenario system. Thus, examples and relevant 
materials are provided along the way. The result is a clearer explanation 
of the workshops and suggested activities that can be abstract and hard to 
grasp otherwise. 
The scenario implementation and project assessment phases are two 
of the book’s unique contributions. Few sources on scenario planning sug-
gest methods for using the scenarios to provoke strategic insights, and even 
fewer provide examples. Scenarios fail to live up to expectations unless they 
are used to examine and further analyze parts of the organization and, ul-
timately, to take action. This book shows a clear path for putting scenarios 
to use. In addition, it provides an assessment strategy that, when used, will 
produce a complete picture of the scenario project’s impact. While not easy 
work, these phases bring the scenario project out of the abstract and concep-
tual realm, and put them into practice.
CONCLUSION
The goal of scenario planning in organizations is to avoid the crises asso-
ciated with fundamental shifts in the organizational environment and to 
take advantage of opportunities that may not be obvious. It means being 
prepared for an uncertain future. Therefore, scenario planning is a system 
designed to heighten the overall awareness of decision makers. The pro-
cesses within the scenario system are designed to put decision makers in 
touch with the realities of their industries and organizations. Following the 
scenario system in this book gives them the “pulse” of the organization. In 
the end, the purpose of scenarios is to help individuals and teams contribute 
to the organization’s ability to outperform a volatile, uncertain, complex, 
and ambiguous environment. This book demonstrates the utility of using 
scenarios in organizations.
Scenario work is challenging and should be very stimulating. Strate-
gic problems or dilemmas are complex and ambiguous, with unknown 


---PAGE BREAK---

246 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
solutions. These issues can become frustrating to work on without a sound 
set of tools for analyzing and understanding them. This book provides a 
system for tackling these difﬁcult issues and working through the phases in 
an orderly manner so as to produce results.


---PAGE BREAK---

 247
References
Ackoff, R. L. (1970). A concept of corporate planning. New York: Wiley.
Ackoff, R. L. (1978). Creating the corporate future. New York: Wiley.
Ackoff, R. L. (1981). The art of problem solving. New York: Wiley.
Alexander, W., & Serfass, R. (1998). Creating and analyzing your organization’s 
quality future. Quality Progress, 31(7), 31–36.
Allee, V. (1997). The knowledge evolution: Expanding organizational intelligence. 
Newton, MA: Focal Press.
Amara, R., & Lipinski, A. J. (1983). Business planning for an uncertain future: Sce-
narios and strategies. New York: Pergamon. 
Argyris, C., & Schon, D. A. (1996). Organizational learning II. Theory, method, 
and practice. 
Bauden, R. (1998, March). The Leadership Revolution. Keynote address to AUSTAFE 
Regional Conference, Ballarat, Victoria. 
Bechtel, W. (1998). Representations and cognitive explanations: Assessing the dy-
namicist’s challenge in cognitive science. Cognitive Science, 22(3), pp. 295–318.
Berger, P. L., & Luckmann T. (1966). The social construction of reality: A treatise in 
the sociology of knowledge. New York: Doubleday.
Berns, G. (2008). Iconoclast: A neuroscientist reveals how to think differently. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 
Bloom, M., & Menefee M. L. (1994). Scenario Planning and Contingency Plan-
ning. Public Productivity & Management Review, 17(3), 223–230.
Bohm, D. (1989). Quantum theory. London: Dover.
Bohm, D. (2002). Wholeness and the implicate order. London: Routledge.
Bohm, D. (2004). On dialogue. London: Routledge.
Brauers, J. L., & Weber, M. (1988). A new method of scenario analysis for strategic 
planning. Journal of Forecasting, 7(1), 31–47.
Brehmer, B. (1990). Strategies in real-time, dynamic decision making. In R. Hog-
arth (Ed.), Insights in decision making (pp. 262–291). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Brehmer, B. (1992). Dynamic decision making: Human control of complex sys-
tems. Acta Psychological, 81, 211–241.
Burt, G. (2006). Pre-determined elements in the business environment: Reﬂecting 
on the legacy of Pierre Wack. Futures, 38(7), 830–840. 


---PAGE BREAK---

248 
REF ERENC ES
Burt, G., & van der Heijden, K. (2002). Reframing industry boundaries for struc-
tural advantage: The role of scenario planning. In G. Ringland (Ed.), Scenar-
ios in business (pp. 223–232). New York: Wiley.
Burt, G., & van der Heijden, K. (2003). First steps: Towards purposeful activities 
in scenario thinking and future studies. Futures, 35(10), 1011–1026.
Cascio, J. (2009, October 19). Futures thinking: Asking the question. Fast 
Company.
Chandler, J., & Cockle, P. (1982). Techniques of scenario planning. London: 
McGraw-Hill.
Charon, R. (2001). Narrative medicine: A model for empathy, reﬂection, profes-
sion and trust. Journal of the American Medical Association, 286, 1897–1902.
Chermack, T. J. (2002). The mandate for theory in scenario planning. Futures 
Research Quarterly, 18(2), 25–28.
Chermack, T. J. (2004). A theoretical model of scenario planning. Human Resource 
Development Review, 3(4), 301–325.
Chermack, T. J. (2005). Studying scenario planning: Theory, research suggestions 
and hypotheses. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 72(1), 59–73.
Chermack, T. J., & Kasshanna, B. (2007). SWOT analysis: Reviewing uses, mis-
uses and implications for HRD professionals. Human Resource Development 
International, 10(4), 383–399.
Chermack, T. J., Lynham, S. A., & Ruona, W. E. A. (2001). A review of scenario 
planning literature. Futures Research Quarterly, 17(2), 7–31.
Chermack, T. J., Lynham, S. A., & van der Merwe, L. (2006). Exploring the rela-
tionship between scenario planning and perceptions of learning organization 
characteristics. Futures, 38(7), 767–777.
Chermack, T. J., & Nimon, K. (2008). The effects of scenario planning on partici-
pant decision-making style. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 19(4), 
351–372.
Chermack, T. J., & van der Merwe, L. (2003). The role of constructivist learning 
in scenario planning. Futures, 35(5), 445–460.
Chermack, T. J., van der Merwe, L., & Lynham, S. A. (2007). Exploring the rela-
tionship between scenario planning and strategic conversation quality. Tech-
nological Forecasting and Social Change, 74(3), 379–390.
Cleary, T. (1988). The art of war. Boston: Shambhala.
Collins, J. (2001). Good to great: Why some companies make the leap . . . and others 
don’t. New York: HarperCollins.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology of discovery and 
invention. New York: HarperCollins.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1998). Flow: The psychology of happiness. London: Rider 
Publications.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
REF ERENC ES 
249
D’arcy, M., M. O’Hanlong, P. Orszag, J. Shapiro, & J. Steinberg. (2006). Protect-
ing the homeland. New York: Brookings Institution Press. 
De Bono, E. (1990). Six thinking hats. New York: Penguin.
De Geus, A. (1988). Planning as learning. Harvard Business Review, 66 (2), 
70–74.
De Geus, A. (1997). The living company. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Delbecq, A., & Van de Ven, A. (1971). A group process model for problem identi-
ﬁcation and program planning. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 7(4), 
466–492.
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2000). Handbook of qualitative research (2nd ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dispenza, J. (2007). Evolve your brain: The science of changing your mind. Deerﬁeld 
Beach, FL: Health Communications Books. 
Dorner, D. (1996). The logic of failure. New York: Metropolitan Books/Holt.
Doyle, J. K., & Ford, D. N. (1999). Mental models concepts revisited: Some clari-
ﬁcations and a reply to Lane. Systems Dynamics Review, 15(4), 411–415.
Dreyfus, H. L., & Dreyfus, S. E. (1998). Frictionless forecasting is a ﬁction. In N. 
Akerman (Ed.), The necessity of friction (pp. 267–284). Boulder, CO: 
Westview.
Drucker, P. (1994). The theory of the business. Harvard Business Review, 72(5), 
95–104.
Economist. (2008, September). Scenario planning. Available: www.economist.
com/node/12000755.
Ellinger, A. D., Ellinger, A. E., Yang, B., & Howton, S. W. (2002). The relation-
ship between the learning organization concept and ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial perfor-
mance: An empirical assessment. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 
13(1), 5–21. 
Emery, F. E., & Trist, E. L. (1965). The causal texture of organisational environ-
ments. Human Relations, 18, 21–32.
Fahey, L., & Randall, R. M. (1998). What is scenario learning? In L. Fahey & R. 
Randall (Eds.), Learning from the future: Competitive foresight scenarios (pp. 
3–21). New York: Wiley. 
Flowers, B. S. (2003). The art and strategy of scenario writing. Strategy & Leader-
ship, 31(2), 29–33.
Ford, D. N., & Sterman, J. D. (1998). Expert knowledge elicitation to improve 
formal and mental models. Systems Dynamics Review, 14(4), 309–340. 
Forrester, J. W. (1961). Industrial dynamics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Forrester, J. W. (1994). Policies, decisions, and information sources for modeling. 
In J. Morecroft & J. Sterman (Eds.), Modeling for learning organizations (pp. 
51–84). Portland, OR: Productivity Press.


---PAGE BREAK---

250 
REF ERENC ES
Fosnot, C. T. (1996). Constructivism: A psychological theory of learning. In C. T. 
Fosnot (Ed.), Constructivism: Theory, perspectives and practice (pp. 31–49). 
New York: Teachers College Press.
Frentzel, W. Y., Bryson, J. M., & Crosby, B. C. (2000). Strategic planning in the 
military. Long Range Planning, 33(1), 402–429.
Freyd, J. J. (1987). Dynamic mental representations. Psychological Review, 94(4), 
427–438.
Georgantzas, N. C., & Acar, W. (1995). Scenario-driven planning: Learning to 
manage strategic uncertainty. Westport, CT: Quorum.
Gladwell, M. (2007). Blink: The power of thinking without thinking. San Francisco: 
Back Bay Books.
Global Business Network. (2003). www.gbn.com/about/scenario_planning.php. 
Accessed September 14, 2010.
Godet, M. (1987). Scenarios and strategic management: Prospective et planiﬁcation 
strategique. (D. Green & A. Rodney, Trans.). London: Butterworths.
Godet, M. (2000). The art of scenarios and strategic planning: Tools and pitfalls. 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 65, 3–22.
Godet, M., & Roubelat, F. (1996). Creating the future: The use and misuse of 
scenarios. Long Range Planning, 29(2), 164–171.
Greene, R. (1998). The 48 laws of power. New York: Penguin.
Hampden-Turner, C. (1990). Charting the corporate mind: From dilemma to strat-
egy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Harper, C. (2010). An alternative approach to marketing scenario planning. Retrieved 
from Colorado State University, Organizational Performance and Change Pro-
gram website: www.scenarioplanning.colostate.edu/researchinprogress.htm.
Hitt, M. A., Hoskisson, R. E., & Ireland, R. D. (1990). Mergers and acquisitions 
and managerial commitment to innovation in M-form ﬁrms. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 11(3), 29–47.
Hoffman, B. (2002). Lessons of 9/11: Testimony before the United States Joint Sep-
tember 11, 2001 Inquiry Staff of the House and Senate Select Committees on In-
telligence on October 8, 2002. Arlington, VA: RAND Corporation. (RAND 
Corporation Document Number CT-201)
Holton, E. F., III. (1999). Performance domains and their boundaries. In R. J. 
Torraco (Ed.), Performance improvement theory and practice (pp. 26–46). 
Advances in Developing Human Resources, 1. San Francisco: Berrett- 
Koehler.
Huss, W. R., & Honton, E. J. (1987). Scenario planning: What style should you 
use? Long Range Planning, 20(4), 21–29.
Ingvar, D. H. (1985). Memory of the future: An essay on the temporal organiza-
tion of conscious awareness. Human Neurobiology 4(1), 127–136.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
REF ERENC ES 
251
Johansen, B. (2007). Get there early: Sensing the future to compete in the present. San 
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Johnson-Laird, P. M. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kahane, A. (1992). The Mont Fleur Scenarios: What will South Africa be like in 
the year 2002? Supplement to Weekly Mail and The Guardian Weekly, Bell-
ville, South Africa.
Kahane, A. (2004). Solving tough problems. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Kahn, H., & Weiner, A. J. (1967). The year 2000: A framework for speculation on 
the next thirty-three years. New York: Macmillan.
Karlgaard, R. (2004, April 26). The age of meaning. Forbes, 35. 
Kleiner, A. (1996). The age of heretics. New York: Doubleday.
Kleiner, A. (2008). The age of heretics: A history of the radical thinkers who rein-
vented corporate management (J-B Warren Bennis Series) (2nd ed.). San Fran-
cisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kleiner, A., & Roth, G. (2000). Oil change: Perspectives on corporate transforma-
tion. London: Oxford University Press.
Kloss, L. (1999). The suitability and application of scenario planning for national 
professional associations. Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership, 10(1), 71–83.
Koenig, H. G. (2001). Spirituality in patient care: Why, how, when and what. San 
Francisco: Templeton Foundation Press. 
Kolb, D., & Rubin, I. M. (1991). Organizational behavior: An experimental ap-
proach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
LeDoux, J. E. (2000). Emotion circuits in the brain. Annual Review of Neurosci-
ence, 23(3), 155–184.
LeGault, M. E. (2007). Think: Why crucial decisions can’t be made in the blink of an 
eye. New York: Threshold.
Lewin, K. (1948). Resolving social conﬂicts: Selected papers on group dynamics. New 
York: Harper & Row.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science: Selected theoretical papers. (D. Cart-
wright, Ed.). New York: Harper & Row.
Liker, J. (2010, February 9). What should Toyota do now? Business Week. Retrieved 
September 14, 2010, from www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnﬂash/content/
feb2010/db2010029_723140.htm.
Lindgren, M., & Bandhold, H. (2003). Scenario planning: The link between future 
and strategy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Linneman, R. E., & Klein, H. E. (1979). The use of multiple scenarios by U.S. 
industrial companies. Long Range Planning, 12(1), 83–95.
Linneman, R. E., & Klein, H. E. (1983). The use of multiple scenarios by U.S. 
industrial companies: A comparison study, 1977–1981. Long Range Planning, 
16(6), 94–101.


---PAGE BREAK---

252 
REF ERENC ES
Lynch, M. D. (2005). Developing a scenario-based training program. FBI Law 
Enforcement Bulletin, 74(10), 1–8.
Lynham, S. A. (1998). The development and evaluation of a model of responsible 
leadership for performance: Beginning the journey. Human Resource Develop-
ment International, 1(2), 207–220. 
Lynham, S. A. (2000a). The development of a theory of responsible leadership for per-
formance. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota, St. Paul.
Lynham, S. A. (2000b). Leadership development: A review of the theory and lit-
erature. In K. P. Kuchinke (Ed.), Academy of Human Resource Development 
conference proceedings (pp. 285–292). Baton Rouge, LA: Academy of Human 
Resource Development.
Lynham, S. A. (2002a). The general method of theory-building in applied disci-
plines. In S. A. Lynham (Ed.), Advances in Developing Human Resources, 4(3), 
221–241. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lynham, S. A. (2002b). Quantitative research and theory building: Dubin’s 
method. In S. A. Lynham (Ed.), Advances in Developing Human Resources, 
4(3), 242–276. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lynham, S. A., Provo, J. M., & Ruona, W. E. A. (1998). The role of scenarios in 
business strategy and human resource development. In R. J. Torraco (Ed.), 
Academy of Human Resource Development conference proceedings (pp. 169–178). 
Baton Rouge, LA: AHRD.
Manning, T. (2002). Strategic conversation as a tool for change. Strategy & Leader-
ship, 35(5), 35–38.
Martin, J. (1982). Stories and scripts in organizational settings. In A. Hastorf & A. 
Isen (Eds.), Cognitive social psychology (pp. 255–305). New York: Elsevier.
Marx, K. (1953). Karl Marx and Frederick Engels on Britain. Moscow: Foreign 
Languages Publication House.
McWhorter, R., Lynham, S. A., & Porter, D. (2008). Scenario planning as devel-
oping leadership capability and capacity. Advances in Developing Human Re-
sources, 10(2), 258–284.
Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., & Randers, J. (1992). Beyond the limits. White 
River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green.
Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary and Thesaurus. (2006). Springﬁeld, MA: Merriam-
Webster.
Michael, D. N. (1973). Learning to plan and planning to learn. Alexandria, VA: 
Miles River Press.
Michael, D. N. (1995). Barriers and bridges to learning in a turbulent human 
economy. In L. Gunderson, C. Holling, & S. Light (Eds.), Barriers and bridges 
to the renewal of ecosystems and institutions (pp. 461–485). New York: Colum-
bia University Press.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
REF ERENC ES 
253
Micklethwait, J., & Woolridge, A. (1996). The witch doctors: Making sense of the 
management gurus. New York: Times Books.
Miller, S. L. (1971). The effects of communication training in small groups upon 
self-disclosure and openness in engaged couples’ systems of interaction: A ﬁeld 
experiment. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota, St. 
Paul. Dissertation Abstracts International, 32, 2819A–2820A. (University Micro-
ﬁlms No. 71-28, 263)
Miller, S. L., Nunnally, E. W., & Wackman, D. B. (1976). A communication 
training program for couples. Social Casework, 57, 9–18.
Miller, S., Wackman, D. & Nunnally, E. W. (1982). Straight talk: A new way to get 
closer to others by saying what you really mean. New York: Signet.
Mintzberg, H. (1990). The design school: Reconsidering the basic premises of stra-
tegic management. Strategic Management Journal, 11(3), 171–195.
Mintzberg, H. (1994). The rise and fall of strategic planning. London: Prentice-Hall.
Mintzberg, H. (2005). Managers, not MBA’s: A hard look at the soft practice of man-
aging and management development. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Mintzberg, H. (2009). Managing. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Mintzberg, H., Ahlstrand, B. W., & Lampel, J. (2005). Strategy safari: A guided 
tour through the wilds of strategic management. New York: Simon & 
Schuster.
Mintzberg, H., & Lampel, J. (1999). Reﬂecting on the strategy process. Sloan 
Management Review, 40(3), 21–32.
Morecroft, J. D. W. (1983). System dynamics: Portraying bounded rationality. 
OMEGA: The International Journal of Management Science, 11(2), 131–142.
Morecroft, J. D. W. (1985). Rationality in the analysis of behavioral simulation 
models. Management Science, 31(7), 900–916. 
Morecroft, J. D. W. (1990). Strategy support models. In R. G. Dyson (Ed.), Stra-
tegic planning: Models and analytical techniques. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Morecroft, J. D. W. (1992). Executive knowledge, models and learning. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 59(1), 102–122.
Moyer, K. (1996). Scenario planning at British Airways: A case study. Long Range 
Planning, 29(2), 172–181.
Nash, H. (2007). 2007 strategic leadership survey: A retail boardroom perspective. 
London: Nash.
Nunnally, E. W. (1971). Effects of communication training upon interaction aware-
ness and empathic accuracy of engaged couples: A ﬁeld experiment. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota, St. Paul. Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 32, 4736A. (University Microﬁlms No. 72-05, 561)
Nunnally, J. C. (1970). Introduction to psychological measurement. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.


---PAGE BREAK---

254 
REF ERENC ES
Nunnnaly, E. W., & Moy, C. (1989). Communication basics for human service 
professionals. New York: Sage.
Nutt, P. C. (2002). Why decisions fail: Avoiding the blunders and traps that lead to 
debacles. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Ogilvy, J. (1995). Living without a Goal. New York: Doubleday.
Ogilvy, J. (2002). Creating Better Futures: Scenario Planning as a Tool for a Better 
Tomorrow. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ogilvy, J., & Schwartz, P. (1998). Plotting your scenarios. In L. Fahey & R. Ran-
dall (Eds.), Learning from the future (pp. 1–19). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Ogilvy, J., & Schwartz, P. (2000). China’s Futures. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Oxford English Dictionary. (2001). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oxford English Dictionary. (2006). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pascual-Leone, A., Dang, N., Cohen, L. G., Brasil-Neto, J. P., Cammorata, A., & 
Hallett, M. (1995). Modulation of muscle responses evoked by transcranial 
magnetic stimulation during the acquisition of new ﬁne motor skills. Journal 
of Neurophysiology, 74(3), 1037–1045. 
Penrose, R. (2004). The road to reality: A complete guide to the laws of the universe. 
New York: Vintage Books.
Phelps, R., Chan, C., & Kapsalis, S. C. (2001). Does scenario planning affect per-
formance? Two exploratory studies. Journal of Business Research, 5(1), 
223–232.
Piaget, J. (1977). Equilibration of cognitive structures. New York: Viking.
Pink, D. H. (2006). A whole new mind: Why right-brainers will rule the future. New 
York: Riverhead Books.
Porter, M. E. (1980). Competitive strategy. New York: Free Press.
Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive advantage. New York: Free Press. 
Provo, J., Lynham, S. A., Ruona, W. E. A., & Miller, R. (1998). Scenario building: 
An integral methodology for learning, decision-making, and human resource 
development. Human Resource Development International, 1(3), 327–340.
Ramirez, R., Selsky, J. W., & van der Heijden, K. (Eds.). (2008). Business planning 
for turbulent times: New methods for applying scenarios. London: Earthscan.
Reason, P., & Bradbury, H. (2001). Handbook of action research, participative in-
quiry and practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Reynolds, G. (2010). Presentation Zen: Simple design principles and techniques to 
enhance your presentations. Berkeley, CA: New Riders.
Ringland, G. (1998). Scenario planning: Managing for the future. New York: 
Wiley.
Ringland, G. (2002). Scenarios in business. New York: Wiley.
Rochlin, G. I. (1998). Essential friction: Error-control in organizational behavior. 
In N. Akerman (Ed.), The necessity of friction. Boulder, CO: Westview.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
REF ERENC ES 
255
Rochlin, G. I., La Porte, T. R., & Roberts, K. H. (1987). The self designing high-
reliability organization: Aircraft carrier ﬂight operations at sea. Naval War 
College Review, 40(4), 76–90.
Rogers, C. (1957). The necessary and sufﬁcient conditions of therapeutic personal-
ity change. Journal of Consulting Psychology 21(2), 95–103.
Rogers, C. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Rogers, C., & Skinner, B. F. (1956). Some issues concerning the control of human 
behavior. Science 124(2), 1057–1065.
Rummler, G. A., & Brache, A. P. (1995). Improving performance: How to manage 
the white space on the organization chart. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Schoemaker, P. J. H. (1993). Multiple scenario development: Its conceptual and 
behavioral foundation. Strategic Management Journal, 14, 193–213.
Schoemaker, P. J. H. (1995). Scenario planning: A tool for strategic thinking. 
Sloan Management Review, 37(2), 25–40.
Schoemaker, P. J. H. (2005). Navigating uncertainty: From scenarios to ﬂexible 
options. In M. A. Hitt & R. D. Ireland (Eds.), The Blackwell encyclopedia of 
management (Vol. 3, pp. 190–193). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Schwartz, J. M., Stapp, H. P., & Beauregard, M. (2005). Quantum physics in 
neuroscience and psychology: A neurophysical model of mind-brain interac-
tion. Biological Sciences, 360(1458), 1309–1327.
Schwartz, P. (1991). The art of the long view. New York: Doubleday.
Schwartz, P. (1996). The art of the long view: Planning for the future in an uncertain 
world. New York: Doubleday. 
Scnaars, S. P. (1989). Megamistakes: Forecasting and the myth of rapid technological 
change. New York: Free Press.
Scott, S. G., & Bruce, R. A. (1994). Decision-making style: The development and 
assessment of a new measure. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 
55(5), 818–831. 
Selin, C. (2007). Professional dreamers: The future in the past of scenario plan-
ning. In B. Sharpe & K. van der Heijden (Eds.), Scenarios for Success (p. 27–51). 
New York: Wiley.
Senge, P. (1990). The ﬁfth discipline. New York: Doubleday.
Senge, P. (1994). Learning to alter mental models. Executive Excellence, 11(3), 16–17. 
Senge, P. M., Kleiner, A., Roberts, C., Ross, R. B., & Smith, B. J. (1994). The ﬁfth 
discipline ﬁeldbook: Strategies and tools for building a learning organization. 
New York: Doubleday.
Sharpe, B. (2007). Conversations with Peter Schwartz and Napier Collyns. In B. Sharpe 
and K. van der Heijden (Eds.), Scenarios for Success (pp. 13–26). New York: Wiley.
Shaw, G., Brown, R., & Bromiley, P. (1998, May–June). Strategic stories: How 3M 
is rewriting business planning. Harvard Business Review, 76(3), 41–50.


---PAGE BREAK---

256 
REF ERENC ES
Simon, H. A. (1957). Administrative behavior. New York: Macmillan.
Simpson, D. G. (1992). Key lessons for adopting scenario planning in diversiﬁed 
companies. Planning Review, 20(3), 11–18.
Swanson, R. A. (1994). Analysis for improving performance: Tools for diagnosing orga-
nizations and documenting workplace expertise. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Swanson, R. A. (1999). The foundations of performance improvement and impli-
cations for practice. In R. J. Torraco (Ed.), Performance improvement theory 
and practice (pp. 1–25). Advances in Developing Human Resources, 1. San 
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Swanson, R. A. (2001a). Assessing ﬁnancial beneﬁts of human resource development. 
Cambridge, MA: Perseus. 
Swanson, R. A. (2001b). Human resource development and its underlying theory. 
Human Resource Development International, 4(3), 1–14. 
Swanson, R. A. (2007). Analysis for improving performance: Tools for diagnosing or-
ganizations and documenting workplace expertise (2nd ed.). San Francisco: 
Berrett-Koehler. 
Swanson, R. A., & Holton, E. F., III. (1999). Results: How to assess performance, 
learning and perceptions in organizations. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Swanson, R. A., & Holton, E. F., III. (2001). Foundations of human resource devel-
opment. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Swanson, R. A., & Holton, E. F., III. (Eds.). (2005). Research in organizations: 
Foundations and methods of inquiry. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Swanson, R. A., Lynham, S. A., Ruona, W., & Provo, J. (1998). Human resource 
development’s role in supporting and shaping strategic organizational plan-
ning. In P. K. Kuchinke (Ed.), Proceedings of the Academy of Human Resource 
Development conference (pp. 589–594). Baton Rouge, LA: Academy of Human 
Resource Development.
Tessum, F. (1997). Scenario analysis and early warning systems at Daimler-Benz 
Aerospace. Competitive Intelligence Review, 8(4), 30–40.
Thomas, C. W. (1994). Learning from imagining the years ahead. Planning Re-
view, 22(3), 6–10.
Thomas, C. W. (1997). Scenarios applied. In Implementing and applying scenario 
planning. New York: Doubleday.
Torraco, R. J. (1997). Theory-building research methods. In R. A. Swanson & E. 
F. Holton III (Eds.), Human resource development research handbook: Linking 
research and practice (p. 114–137). San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Tucker, K. (1999). Scenario planning. Association Management, 51(4), 70–75.
Van der Heijden, K. (1997). Scenarios: The art of strategic conversation. New York: 
Wiley.


---PAGE BREAK---

  
REF ERENC ES 
257
Van der Heijden, K. (2000). Scenarios and forecasting: Two perspectives. Techno-
logical Forecasting and Social Change, 65, 31–36.
Van der Heijden, K. (2005a). Can internally generated futures accelerate organiza-
tional learning? Futures, 36(3), 145–159.
Van der Heijden, (2005b). Scenarios: The Art of Strategic Conversation (2nd ed.). 
New York: Wiley.
Van der Heijden, K., Bradﬁeld, R., Burt, G., Cairns, G., & Wright, G. (2002). The 
sixth sense: Accelerating organizational learning with scenarios. New York: Wiley.
Van der Merwe, L. (1994). Bringing diverse people to common purpose. In P. M. 
Senge, A. Kleiner, C. Roberts, R. B. Ross, & B. J. Smith (Eds.), The ﬁfth dis-
cipline ﬁeldbook: Strategies and tools for building a learning organization. New 
York: Doubleday.
Van der Merwe, L. (2002). Utilizing scenarios for sustainable organizational re-
newal and transformation. In Corporate Sustainability 2002, Rotterdam School 
of Management, Erasmus University, The Netherlands, June 6–7. Rotterdam: 
Erasmus University Press.
Van der Merwe, L. (2005). Planning for certainty in uncertain times: Strategic con-
versation, scenario based planning, and developing a sustainable business model. 
Amsterdam: Centre for Innovative Leadership.
Van der Merwe, L. (2007). Conversation Quality and Engagement Checklist. Am-
sterdam: Centre for Innovative Leadership.
Van der Merwe, L. (2008). Scenario-based strategy in practice: A framework. Ad-
vances in Developing Human Resources, 10(2), 216–239.
Van der Merwe, L., Chermack, T. J., Kulikowich, J., & Yang, B. (2007). Strategic 
conversation quality and engagement skills: Assessment of a new measure. 
International Journal of Training and Development, 11(3), 214–221.
Visser, M. P., & Chermack, T. J. (2009). Perceptions of the relationship between scenario 
planning and ﬁrm performance: A qualitative study. Futures, 41(3), 581–592.
Von Hippel, E. (1998). Economics of product development by users: The impact 
of sticky local information. Management Science, 44(5), 629–644.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (Orig-
inal work published 1962)
Wack, P. (1984). Scenarios: The gentle art of re-perceiving. Unpublished manuscript, 
Harvard Business School.
Wack, P. (1985a). Scenarios: Shooting the rapids. Harvard Business Review, 63 (6), 
139–150.
Wack, P. (1985b). Scenarios: Uncharted waters ahead. Harvard Business Review, 63 
(5), 73–89. 


---PAGE BREAK---

258 
REF ERENC ES
Ward, E. W., & Schreifer, A. E. (1998). Dynamic scenarios: System thinking 
meets scenario planning. In L. Fahey & R. Randall (Eds.), Learning from the 
future: Competitive foresight scenarios (pp. 140–156). New York: Wiley. 
Watkins, K. E., & Marsick, V. J. (1995). Sculpting the learning organization: Lessons 
in the art and science of systematic change. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Weick, K. E. (1979). The social psychology of organizing. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Weick, K. E. (1985). Sources of order in underorganized systems: Themes in re-
cent organizational theory. In Y. S. Lincoln (Ed.), Organizational theory and 
inquiry (pp. 106–136). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
Weick, K. E. (1990). Introduction: Cartographic myths in organizations. In A. S. 
Huff (Ed.), Mapping strategic thought (pp. 1–10). New York: Wiley.
Wilson, I. (1992). Teaching decision makers to learn from scenarios: A blueprint 
for implementation. Planning Review, 20(3), 18–22.
Wilson, I. (2000). From scenario thinking to strategic action. Technological Fore-
casting and Social Change, 65, 23–29.
Wilson, I., & Ralston, B. (2006). Scenario Planning Handbook: Developing Strate-
gies in Uncertain Times. Mason, OH: South-Western. 
Wright, G., Cairns, G., & Goodwin, P. (2009). Teaching scenario planning: Les-
sons from practice in academe and business. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 194, 323–335.
Wright, G., & Goodwin, P. (1999). Future-focused thinking: Combining scenario plan-
ning with decision analysis. Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, 8, 311–321.
Wright, G., & Goodwin, P. (2009). Decision making and planning under low 
levels of predictability: Enhancing the scenario method. International Journal 
of Forecasting, 25(4), 813–825.
Wright, G., van der Heijden, K., Burt, G., Bradﬁeld, R., & Cairns, G. (2008). 
Scenario planning interventions in organizations: An analysis of the causes of 
success and failure. Futures, 40(2), 218–236.
Yang, B. (2003). Identifying valid and reliable measures for dimensions of a learn-
ing culture. Advances in Developing Human Resources, 5(2), 152–162.
Yang, B., Watkins, K. E., & Marsick, V. J. (2004). The construct of the learning 
organization: Dimensions, measurement and validation. Human Resource De-
velopment Quarterly, 15(1), 31–55.
Yue, G. (2001, November 21). Mental gymnastics. New Scientist, 19.
Yue, G., & Cole, K. J. (1992). Strength increases from the motor program: Com-
parison of training with maximal voluntary and imagined muscle contrac-
tions. Journal of Neurophysiology, 67(5), 1114–1123.


---PAGE BREAK---

 259
Index
Acar, W., 30
Accommodation, 36, 37
Ackoff, R. L., 25
Action-process scenario projects for 
adaptive learning, 85
Adaptive learning, 85
Advocacy and inquiry in organizations, 34
“Aha” experiences, 38, 116, 136, 171, 181, 
202
Airbus scenario of Technology 
Corporation, 143, 146, 153–154
gains and losses matrix on, 209
quality assessment checklist on, 165
signals in, 180
wind-tunneling assessment of, 183
Alexander, W., 15
Alignment of ideas in strategic 
conversation, 185, 186
Amara, R., 26
Ambiguity, 5
Ansoff, Igor, 6, 9
Anticipation in scenario planning, 84, 89
Apple Computer, 206–207
Argyris, C., 34
The Art of the Long View (Schwartz), 19
Assessment of scenario projects, 66, 67, 80, 
189–213, 245
comprehensive plan for, 210–212
cost-beneﬁt analysis in. See Cost-beneﬁt 
analysis of scenario projects
in development phase, 143, 144, 159–163
checklist on, 163, 164–165
in ﬁrst scenario project, 241–242
importance of, 221
initial measures in, 96–97, 198, 201–202
learning results in. See Learning, 
assessment of
performance results in. See Performance, 
assessment of
pretest/posttest design of, 96–97, 198,  
201–202
project proposal identifying measures in, 
94–97, 98–100
satisfaction results in. See Satisfaction 
results
on utility, 225
in development phase, 143, 144,  
159–163, 164–165
wind tunneling in, 172–183
worksheet on, 230–231
Assimilation, 36, 37
Audit on expertise, 203, 204
Bandhold, Hans, 24
Bawden, R., 14
Berger, Gaston, 20
Berger, P. L., 39–40
Berns, G., 233, 235
Biases in data gathering, 102
Blind spots in scenario planning, 23
Bloom, M., 14
Bohm, D., 32, 186
Boston Consulting Group, 6, 8
Bounded rationality, 41–43
BP Amoco, 206, 209
Brache, A. P., 54–55, 57, 108, 120–121
Brain activity
research on, 234–238, 240
in scenarios, 238–239, 240
Brainstorming in scenario development, 
129, 133–134, 135
Brand, Stewart, 18
Brauers, J. L., 26–27
Breakthroughs in scenario projects, 225


---PAGE BREAK---

260 
INDEX
British Airways, 56
Business idea, 44, 108, 115–120, 176–177
revision of, 177–178
wind-tunneling assessment of, 183
Business model, in theory of business/
business idea, 115, 117
Business Planning for Turbulent Times 
(Ramirez, Selsky, and van der 
Heijden), 5
Capacity, performance diagnosis matrix on, 
121, 122, 123
Carnegie School of Thought, 41
Cascio, J., 90
Case study of scenario project, 2, 71–77.  
See also Technology Corporation case 
study
Centre for Innovative Leadership, 198
Challenging nature of scenarios, 143, 144, 
159, 160
Chan, C., 56
Chandler, Alfred, 6, 9
Chandler, J., 26
Change management in scenario 
implementation, 169–170
Cherry tree metaphor of scenarios, 86, 87
Cockle, P., 26
Cognitive psychology, 47–52
Collaboration in Technology Corporation 
case study, 73, 76, 77
Collins, Jim, 8
Collyns, Napier, 12, 14, 18
Communication
in conversation. See Conversation
dialogue in. See Dialogue
dissemination of scenarios in, 163–167
in scenario implementation workshops, 
174, 175
social intelligence in, 236
Computer applications in scenario 
planning, 21, 26, 27
Concorde scenario of Technology 
Corporation, 143, 146, 152–153
gains and losses matrix on, 209
quality assessment checklist on, 165
signals in, 180
wind-tunneling assessment of, 183
Congruence, 33, 34
Consistency, internal, in scenario planning, 
23, 24
Constructions, 36–40
Content-action scenarios for optimal 
strategy, 84
Content-thinking scenarios for making 
sense, 84
Contrasted scenarios, 21
Conversation
quality of, and engagement, 32–35
checklist on, 198, 199–201
in reality maintenance, 40
strategic, 35, 84, 184–187
Conversation Quality and Engagement 
Checklist, 198, 199–201
Coordinators on scenario team, 93, 94, 219
Core competencies, 115, 116, 117, 118
Cost-beneﬁt analysis of scenario projects, 
207, 208–209, 221
in comprehensive assessment plan, 210, 
212
in ﬁrst scenario project, 243
in project preparation phase, 95, 99–100
Critical uncertainties, 128–129
two-by-two matrix on, 141–144
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 238
Culture, organizational, 73–76, 77
Daimler-Benz Aerospace, 57
Data gathering
in scenario development, 147
in scenario exploration, 101–120
in external analysis, 101–107
in internal analysis, 107–120
stickiness of information in, 44–45, 46
De Bono, E., thinking hats approach of, 
102, 105–107, 109
Decision-making, 41–47
General Decision Making Style Survey 
on, 201–202
as purpose of scenario project, 85–87, 218
in scenario deployment, 65–66


---PAGE BREAK---

  
INDEX 
261
Decision scenarios, 85–87, 218
Deductive approach to scenario 
construction, 129, 130, 145
Deﬁnitions of scenario planning, 13, 14–17
De Geus, Arie, 12, 14, 17, 36
Design of scenario, assessment of, 160, 
164–165
Design school model of strategy, 63–64
The Development of a Theory of Responsible 
Leadership for Performance (Lynham), 53
Development of scenario projects, 66–67, 
70, 80, 127–168, 245
assessment of scenario utility in, 143, 144, 
159–163
checklist on, 163, 164–165
components of, 131
critical uncertainties in, 128–129
two-by-two matrix on, 141–144
deductive approach to, 129, 130, 145
dissemination of scenarios in, 160,  
163–167
inductive approach to, 129–130
ofﬁcial future in, 129, 130, 145
optimal number of scenarios in, 144–145, 
223
plots in, 138, 147–149, 150
predetermined elements in, 127–128, 141
research agenda in, 147
story details written in, 150–152
titles in, 149–150
worksheet on, 228–229
workshops in, 130, 131–146, 223
Development scenarios, 20–21
Dialogue, 32–35
compared to discussion, 32–33, 186
deﬁnition of, 32–33, 186
learning in, 38
in scenario development, 132, 136
in scenario implementation, 186
Dimensions of Learning Organization 
Questionnaire, 198, 201
Discussion, compared to dialogue, 32–33, 
186
Dissemination and distribution of 
scenarios, 160, 163–167
Doyle, J. K., 48, 49
Dreyfus, H. L., 45, 46
Dreyfus, S. E., 45, 46
Driving forces in environment, 19, 20
ranking by relative impact, 134–137
ranking by relative uncertainty, 138, 139
research on, 147
Drucker, P., 108, 115
Economic forces, STEEP analysis of, 104
Emery, F. E., 4–5
Empathy, 33
as criteria in scenario assessment, 162,  
164–165
Endogenous variables, 43
Engagement, and conversation quality, 
32–35
checklist on, 198, 199–201
Environment of organizations
driving forces in, 19, 20, 147
ranking by relative impact, 134–137
ranking by relative uncertainty, 138, 
139
external. See External environment
internal, analysis of. See Internal 
environment, analysis of
Equilibration concept, 36
Evaluation of scenario projects. See 
Assessment of scenario projects
Evolutionary approach to strategy, 9, 10
Evolution of ideas within organization,  
186
Exogenous variables, 43–44
Expected outcomes
identiﬁed in project proposal, 94–97,  
98–100
importance of deﬁning, 219–220
performance improvement in, 16–17
unrealistic, 223
Experiential learning workshops, 181
Expertise assessment, 193, 202–205
in audit, 203, 204
in comprehensive plan, 210, 211
in performance diagnosis matrix, 121, 
122, 124


---PAGE BREAK---

262 
INDEX
Exploration phase, 66–67, 70, 80, 101–125
external analysis in, 19, 101–107, 220
importance of, 219, 244
internal analysis in, 107–120, 220
synthesis tools in, 120–124
wide view in, 224
worksheet on, 227–228
External environment, 4–6, 61
analysis of, 19, 101–107, 220
sources of information in, 107
STEEP approach in, 102, 103–105
SWOT approach in, 102, 107, 108
thinking hats approach in, 102, 105–107
turbulence in, 5, 23, 61, 172
types of, 4–5
Fahey, L., 15
Fears affecting scenario planning, 235–236
Financial assessment of scenario projects, 
193, 206–208
in comprehensive assessment, 210, 212
cost-beneﬁt analysis in. See Cost-beneﬁt 
analysis of scenario projects
gains and losses matrix in, 207–208, 209
performance value in, 95, 99, 208
in project preparation phase, 95, 99–100
return on investment in, 208
Flow states, 238
Ford, D. N., 48, 49
Forecasts
in inductive approach, 129
on ofﬁcial future, 145
in STEEP analysis, 105
Forrester, J. W., 7, 12, 43, 44, 48
French School scenario planning approach, 
20–21
Freyd, J. J., 49
Friction, 44, 45–46
Future
and future-now thinking of Kahn, 7, 
10–11
memory of, 239
ofﬁcial, 129, 130, 145
and time horizon of scenario project,  
90–91, 223–224
Futures Group (Connecticut), 21–22
Futures Group (Stanford Research 
Institute), 7, 11–12
General Decision Making Style Survey, 
201–202
General Motors, 6
Georgantzas, N. C., 30
Global Business Network, 18–20, 22, 27, 50
Goals
and levels of performance, 55
strategic, 178–179
Godet, Michel, 15, 20–21
Good to Great (Collins), 8
Granularity in brainstorming workshop, 
134
Group dynamics, 34
Group interviews, 112
Groupthink, 84, 223, 236
Growth Share Matrix, 6
Habitualization, 39
Hampden-Turner, C., 4
Historical aspects
of scenario planning, 10–13
of strategic planning, 6–8
Holton, E. F., III, 191
Honton, E. J., 12
Horizon/normative scenarios, 21
Horse-and-buggy scenario of Technology 
Corporation, 143, 146, 155–157
gains and losses matrix on, 209
quality assessment checklist on, 165
signals in, 180
wind-tunneling assessment of, 183
Hudson Institute, 7, 11
Huss, W. R., 12
Iconoclast (Berns), 233
Ideas
alignment of, 185
evolution of, 186
Imagination
research on brain activity in, 237–238
in scenarios, 238–239


---PAGE BREAK---

  
INDEX 
263
Immersion workshops, 175–176
Implementation of scenarios, 66, 67, 70, 80, 
169–187, 245
change management in, 169–170
importance of, 220–221
learning and insight in, 171
in experiential workshop exercise, 181
in strategic conversations, 185, 186
in noncorporate contexts, 222
strategic conversation in, 184–187
wind tunneling in, 172–183
worksheet on, 229–230
workshops in, 173–181, 183–184
Indicators or signals in scenarios, 20,  
179–180
Inductive approach to scenario 
construction, 129–130
Industry scenarios, 26
Information gathering. See Data gathering
Innovation, barriers to, 233–240
Inquiry and advocacy in organizations, 34
Intelligence, social, 236
Internal environment, analysis of, 19,  
107–120, 220
existing data in, 114
interviews in, 107, 111–113
observations in, 114
questionnaires in, 114
SWOT approach in, 108–111
on theory of business/business idea,  
115–120
Internalization process, 40
International Computers Ltd., 57
Intersedimentation, 40
Interviews
in comprehensive assessment, 210–212
in expertise assessment, 203, 205, 210, 
211
in inductive approach to scenario 
development, 129
in internal analysis for scenario 
exploration, 107, 111–113
Job level performance, 54, 55–56, 58, 120, 
121
Kahane, A., 15, 222
Kahn, Herman, 7, 10–11, 18
Kapsalis, S. C., 56
Kleiner, A., 12, 53
Kloss, L., 15
Knowledge
assessment of, 192–193, 194, 195, 198, 
201–202
in comprehensive plan, 210, 211
friction of, 44, 45–46
Kolb, D., 38–39
Language, common, in strategic 
conversation, 185, 186
Leadership, 52–53
of informal leaders, 236
Level Five theory of, 8
of scenario team, 91–93
support of scenario planning, 53, 223
Leading indicators in scenarios, 20, 179–180
Learning, 17–18, 23, 35–40
assessment of, 192–193, 194, 195–205
on expertise, 193, 202–205, 210, 211
on knowledge, 192–193, 194, 195, 198, 
201–202, 210, 211
worksheet on, 230–231
as continuous process, 18, 38–39
deﬁnition of, 35
Model I and Model II, 34
neurology of, 234–236, 240
as purpose of scenario project, 10, 84, 85, 
89, 218, 220
in scaffolding, 38
in scenario implementation, 171
in experiential workshop exercise, 181
in strategic conversations, 185, 186
in zone of proximal development, 37–38
Learning scenarios, 84, 85, 172, 218, 220
and learning-decision scenarios, 85–87
Learning to Plan and Planning to Learn 
(Michael), 17
Legitimation, 40
Lewin, K., 34
Lindgren, Mats, 24
Lipinski, A. J., 26


---PAGE BREAK---

264 
INDEX
Listening, in project preparation phase, 81, 
83
The Living Company (de Geus), 17
Logic of scenario, 138–146, 147
Long-term strategies in theory of business/
business idea, 118
Luckmann, T., 39–40
Lynham, Susan, 52
Making sense scenarios, 84, 89
Management of scenario projects, 217–231
content pitfalls in, 224–225
in ﬁrst project, 241–246
process pitfalls in, 222–224
worksheet on, 226, 227–231, 241, 243
Maps, cognitive, 49–52
Marx, K., 39
McWhorter, Rochell, 52
Meaning
as criteria in scenario assessment, 163,  
164–165
individual construction of, 36–37
second-order objectivation of, 40
shared, 39–40
Measures in project assessment, 189–213
identiﬁed in project proposal, 94–97, 98–100
Memory
of future, 239
of scenario title and story, 42–43,  
149–150, 161
Menefee, M. L., 14
Mental models, 47–52
Michael, Don, 17
Midterm strategies in theory of business/
business idea, 118
Military planning, 6, 7, 10–11
Miller, S. L., 33–34
Mintzberg, H., 9, 29
Mission of business
performance diagnosis matrix on, 121, 
122, 123
theory of business/business idea on, 115, 
116, 118
Mont Fleur Scenarios, 222
Morecroft, J. D. W., 41
Motivation
ﬁnancial, 206
performance diagnosis matrix on, 121, 
122, 124
Muscle contraction visualization research, 
237–238
Naming of scenarios, 42, 149–150
Narrative medicine movement, 161
Neurology and brain activity
research on, 235–238, 240
in scenarios, 238–239, 240
Newland, Ted, 11, 12, 17, 24, 27
Nixon, Richard, 11
Nokia, 56
Nominal group technique, 133, 142
Nunnally, E. W., 33–34
Observation
of expertise, 202–203
of internal environment, 114
Ofﬁcial future, 129, 130, 145
Ogilvy, Jay, 18
Oil Change: Perspectives on Corporate 
Transformation (Kleiner and Roth), 53
Opportunities, SWOT analysis of. See 
SWOT analysis
Optimal strategy, 84
Organizations
environment of. See Environment of 
organizations
performance at level of, 54, 55, 56–57, 
120, 121
indicators of, 62
and scenario planning, 56–57
Outcomes of scenario planning, 13–17
assessment of, 189–213
measures in, 94–97, 98–100
breakthroughs in, 225
common types of, 96
expectations on. See Expected outcomes
Penrose, Roger, 171
Perceptions, 233–240
barriers to adjustment of, 235


---PAGE BREAK---

  
INDEX 
265
neurology of, 234–235
Performance, 54–58
assessment of, 193, 194, 205–208
in comprehensive plan, 210, 212
ﬁnancial results in, 193, 206–208, 210, 
212
in performance diagnosis matrix, 108,  
121–124
system results in, 62, 193, 205–206, 210, 
212
value of improvements in, 95, 99,  
208
worksheet on, 231
deﬁnition of, 54
levels of, 54–56, 108, 120–121
individual, 54, 55–56, 58, 120, 121
organizational, 54, 55, 56–57, 62, 120, 
121
process, 54, 55, 57, 120, 121
Performance-based scenario planning
deﬁnition of, 16–17
introduction to, 2, 3–28
theoretical foundations of, 2, 29–59
Performance-based scenario system, 2,  
66–69, 243–245
phases of. See Phases of performance-
based scenario system
Technology Corporation case study of. 
See Technology Corporation case 
study
Performance system, 62
Phases of performance-based scenario 
system, 2, 66–69, 79–80
project assessment, 189–213. See also 
Assessment of scenario projects
project preparation, 81–100. See also 
Preparation phase
scenario development, 127–168. See also 
Development of scenario projects
scenario exploration, 101–125. See also 
Exploration phase
scenario implementation, 169–187. See 
also Implementation of scenarios
Phelps, R., 56
Piaget, J., 36
Piano playing visualization research, 237
Pink, Daniel, 160, 163
Planning
as process, 62–64
strategic, 3, 6–8
as system, 62, 64
Plausibility of scenarios, 22, 23, 24
assessment of, 143, 144, 159, 160
Playful attitude
as criteria in scenario assessment, 162–163, 
164–165
in experiential learning exercise, 181
Plots of scenarios, 138, 147–149, 150
Policies and decision premises, 47
Political forces, STEEP analysis of,  
104–105
Porter, M. E., 7–8, 12, 14, 26
Predetermined elements, 127–128, 141
Preparation phase, 66–67, 70, 80,  
81–100
construction of project proposal in. See 
Proposal on scenario project
in ﬁrst scenario project, 241–242, 243
importance of, 244
initial meetings in, 81
worksheet on, 227
Presentations on scenarios, communication 
skills in, 175
Presentation Zen (Reynolds), 175
Pretest/posttest assessment, 96–97, 198, 
201–202
Problems
complex, with unknown solutions, 4
identiﬁcation of, in project preparation 
phase, 83
Procedural scenarios, 26
Processes, 9–10
performance at level of, 54, 55, 57, 120, 
121
planning as, 62–64
Project assessment, 189–213. See also 
Assessment of scenario projects
Project leader, 91–93
Project preparation phase, 81–100. See also 
Preparation phase


---PAGE BREAK---

266 
INDEX
Proposal on scenario project, 81–100
on expected outcomes and assessment 
measures, 94–97, 98–100, 219–220
on purpose of project, 83–89, 98
sample of, 98–100
on scope and time frame of project,  
89–91, 98
on team roles and responsibilities, 91–94, 98
Proto-scenarios, 138
Publication activity on scenario planning, 
13, 15
Purpose of scenario project
examined in scenario implementation 
workshop, 173–175
identiﬁed in project proposal, 83–89, 98
Quality assessment of scenario projects, 
163, 164–165. See also Assessment of 
scenario projects
Question, initial
documented in project proposal, 88
examined in scenario implementation 
workshops, 173–175
in immersion approach, 175–176
importance of, 218
Questionnaires and surveys
on internal environment, 114
on learning results, 198, 201–202, 210, 
211
on satisfaction results, 191–192, 195, 
196–197, 210, 211
Raford, Noah, xviii
Ralston, Bill, 24, 25
Ramirez, R., 5
Randall, R. M., 15
RAND Corporation, 7, 10
Ranking exercises in scenario development
quadrants of ranking space in, 140–141
on relative impact of forces, 134–137
on relative uncertainty of forces, 138, 139
Rational argumentation in strategic 
conversation, 185, 186
Rationality, 9, 10
bounded, 41–43
Reality, social construction of, 39–40
Reengineering, 8
Reference scenarios, 25
Rehearsal of scenario presentations, 175
Relevance of scenarios, 223, 224, 225
assessment of, 143, 144, 159
Remarkable people, 46, 93–94, 223, 224
Representations, mental, 49
Research agenda in scenario development, 
147
Research studies on brain activity, 235–238, 
240
Resilience, 172, 183–184
Results assessment, 189–213. See also 
Assessment of scenario projects
Return on investment, 208
Reynolds, Garr, 175
Ringland, G., 14
Robustness, 172, 183–184
Rochlin, G. I., 45
Rogers, Carl, 33
Roth, G., 53
Royal Dutch/Shell, 11, 18–20, 22, 56, 68
approach to scenario planning in, 27
insights from scenario projects in,  
244–245
internal consistency and plausibility of 
scenarios in, 23–24
learning and decision scenarios in, 85,  
86
number of scenarios developed in, 144
performance measures in, 205
predetermined elements and critical 
uncertainties in, 128
presentations on scenarios in, 175
success with scenario planning in, 12, 13
Rubin, I. M., 38–39
Rummler, G. A., 54–55, 57, 108, 120–121
Satisfaction results, 191–192, 194, 195
in comprehensive assessment, 210, 211
from participants, 192, 195, 196, 210, 211
from stakeholders, 192, 195, 197, 210, 211
worksheet on, 230
Scaffolding concept, 38, 138


---PAGE BREAK---

  
INDEX 
267
Scenario building, 64, 65, 67–68
compared to scenario deployment, 65–66
development phase in. See Development 
of scenario projects
exploration phase in. See Exploration 
phase
preparation phase in. See Preparation 
phase
Scenario deployment, 64, 65–66, 67, 68–69
assessment phase in. See Assessment of 
scenario projects
compared to scenario building, 65–66
implementation phase in. See 
Implementation of scenarios
Scenario-Driven Planning (Georgantzas and 
Acar), 30
Scenario planning
approaches to, 18–27
deﬁnitions of, 13, 14–17
history of, 10–13
outcomes of, 13–17. See also Outcomes of 
scenario planning
performance-based, 2, 3–28
deﬁnition of, 16–17
theoretical foundations of, 2, 29–59
publication activity on, 13, 15
Scenario Planning: The Link between Future 
and Strategy (Lindgren and 
Bandhold), 24
Scenario Planning Handbook (Ralston and 
Wilson), 24
Scenario system, 64–69
performance-based, 2, 66–69, 243–245
phases of. See Phases of performance-
based scenario system
Technology Corporation case study of. 
See Technology Corporation case study
scenario building component of. See 
Scenario building
scenario deployment component of. See 
Scenario deployment
Scenario team. See Team roles and 
responsibilities in scenario projects
Schoemaker, P. J. H., 14, 22–24, 222, 226
Schon, D. A., 34
Schwartz, P., 14, 18, 19, 27, 42, 175
Scope of project deﬁned in project proposal, 
89–91, 98
Selsky, J. E., 5
Senge, P., 44, 48
Serfass, R., 15
Shared meanings, 39–40
Shell. See Royal Dutch/Shell
Short-term strategies in theory of business/
business idea, 117
Signals or leading indicators in scenarios, 
20, 179–180
Simon, H. A., 42
Simpson, D. G., 14
Simulations in military planning, 7
Situational scenarios, 20
Sloan, Alfred, 6, 9
Small Business Administration (SBA), 72
Small Business Innovation Development 
Act, 72
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) 
funding, 72, 73, 77, 89
airbus scenario on, 154
Concorde scenario on, 152
horse-and-buggy scenario on, 155, 156
in theory of business, 117–118
Titanic scenario on, 157, 158
Small Business Technology Transfer 
(STTR) funding, 72, 73, 77
Social, technological, economic, 
environmental, and political (STEEP) 
analysis, 102, 103–105
Social construction of reality, 39–40
Social friction, 45
Social intelligence, 236
Socialization, primary and secondary, 40
Soft creative methods approach to scenario 
planning, 26–27
Stakeholder satisfaction, 192, 195, 197, 210, 
211
Stanford Research Institute, 7, 11–12, 24
Status quo scenarios, 144, 145
STEEP (social, technological, economic, 
environmental, and political) analysis, 
102, 103–105


---PAGE BREAK---

268 
INDEX
Stickiness of information, 44–45, 46
Story lines of scenarios, 20, 42–43
assessment of, 161, 164–165
development of, 150–152
memory of, 42–43, 161
Strategic planning, 3, 6–8
Strategy, 6–10
conversation about, 35, 84, 184–187
examined in implementation phase 
workshop, 178–179
Strengths, SWOT analysis of. See SWOT 
analysis
Supply chain processes, 57
Surveys. See Questionnaires and surveys
Swanson, R. A., 54, 95, 108, 121–124, 191
SWOT analysis
in design school model of strategy, 63
of external environment, 102, 107, 108
of internal environment, 108–111
Symphony criteria in scenario assessment, 
161–162, 164–165
System
Forrester models on, 7
internal and external elements of, 44
mental models of, 49
performance at level of, 62, 193, 205–206, 
210, 212
diagnosis matrix on, 121, 122, 123
planning, 62, 64
subsystems in, 2, 62–66
and symphony criteria in scenario 
assessment, 161–162
T groups, 34
TAIDA method, 24
Taylor, Frederick, 9
Team roles and responsibilities in scenario 
projects, 91–94, 98
clariﬁcation of, 223
of coordinators, 93, 94, 219
importance of, 218–219
of project leader, 91–93
of remarkable people, 93–94, 223, 224
Technological forces, STEEP analysis of, 
104
Technology Corporation case study, 71–77
airbus scenario in. See Airbus scenario of 
Technology Corporation
Concorde scenario in. See Concorde 
scenario of Technology Corporation
horse-and-buggy scenario in. See Horse-
and-buggy scenario of Technology 
Corporation
scenario assessment in, 198, 201
comprehensive plan for, 210, 211–212
gains and losses matrix in, 207–208, 209
scenario development in
brainstorming workshop in, 134, 135
quadrants of ranking space in, 140
quality assessment checklist on, 163, 165
ranking forces by relative impact in, 136, 
147
ranking forces by relative uncertainty 
in, 138, 139
scenario logics in, 145–146
two-by-two matrix on critical 
uncertainties in, 142–143
scenario exploration in
performance diagnosis matrix in,  
122–124
SWOT analysis in, 110–111
theory of business/business idea in,  
116–120
thinking hats approach in, 106
scenario implementation in, 174
revision of theory of business/business 
idea in, 177–178
signals and leading indicators in,  
179–180
wind tunneling in, 182–183
scenario proposal in, 98–100
on expected outcomes and assessment 
measures, 96, 97, 98–100
on purpose and question, 88–89, 98
on scope and time frame, 91, 92, 98
on team roles and responsibilities, 94, 
98
Titanic scenario in. See Titanic scenario of 
Technology Corporation
Telephone interviews, 112


---PAGE BREAK---

  
INDEX 
269
Theoretical basis of scenario planning, 2, 
29–59
Theory of business/business idea, 108,  
115–120
established in exploration phase 
workshop, 115–116, 120
of Technology Corporation, 116–120,  
177–178, 183
tested in implementation phase workshop, 
176–177
Thinking hats approach of De Bono, 102, 
105–107, 109
Thinking-process scenario projects for 
anticipation, 84
Thomas, C. W., 14
Threats, SWOT analysis of. See SWOT 
analysis
Time frame for scenario project, 223–224
deﬁned in project proposal, 89–91, 98
Time horizon of scenario project, 90–91, 
224
Titanic scenario of Technology 
Corporation, 143, 146, 157–158
gains and losses matrix on, 209
quality assessment checklist on, 165
signals in, 180
wind-tunneling assessment of, 183
Titles of scenarios, 42, 149–150
Toyota, 206, 209
Training on scenario planning, 71
Trend analysis approach to scenario 
planning, 21–22, 23, 24
Trist, E. L., 4–5
Tucker, K., 15
Turbulence in environment, 5, 23, 61, 172
Uncertainties, 5, 22–23
critical, 128–129, 220
two-by-two matrix on, 141–144
ranking of, 138, 139
quadrants of ranking space in, 140–141
research on, 147
Utility of scenario, assessment of, 225
in development phase, 143, 144, 159–163, 
164–165
Van der Heijden, K., 27, 56
on business idea, 44, 108, 115
on environmental turbulence and 
complexity, 5
on external and internal scenarios, 14
on individual level scenario planning, 58
on learning, 10, 38–39
on process level scenario planning, 57
on remarkable people, 46
on strategic conversation, 35, 46, 84, 185, 
186
Van der Merwe, Louis, 87, 198, 220, 236
Vision, in theory of business/business idea, 
117
Visual aids in scenario presentations, 175
Visualization
research studies on brain activity in,  
237–238
in scenarios, 238–239
Volatility, 5
Von Hippel, E., 44–45
VUCA (volatility, uncertainty, complexity, 
and ambiguity), 5
Vygotsky, L. S., 37–38
Wack, Pierre, 18–19, 29, 206
on decision scenarios, 85–86
on learning scenarios, 17, 84, 85
on research required for scenario 
development, 160
on role of remarkable people in scenario 
planning, 46, 93
at Royal Dutch/Shell, 12, 17, 24, 27, 68
on scenario exploration phase, 103
scenario presentations of, 175
Wackman, D. B., 33–34
Weakness, SWOT analysis of. See SWOT 
analysis
Weber, M., 26–27
Web site resources
on presentation skills, 175
of World Economic Forum, 85
Weick, K. E., 49–50
Weightlifting visualization research, 237
Weiner, A. J., 11


---PAGE BREAK---

270 
INDEX
Wilkinson, Lawrence, 18
Wilson, Ian, 24, 25
Wilson, I., 15
Wind tunneling, 68, 172–183
Worksheet on scenario project manage- 
ment, 226, 227–231, 241, 243
Workshops
in development phase, 130, 131–146, 224
in exploration phase, 115–116, 120
in implementation phase, 173–181,  
183–184
World Economic Forum, 85
Writing of scenario stories, 150–152
The Year 2000 (Kahn and Weiner), 11
Zone of proximal development, 37–38


---PAGE BREAK---

 271
About the Author
THOMAS J. CHERMACK has studied and 
practiced scenario planning for over 15 years. His 
initial interest in scenario planning was due its 
unique combination of analysis and creativity in 
exploring difﬁcult and complex issues. Tom is mo-
tivated to challenge status quo thinking and help 
people see things differently.  
Tom consults on scenario projects through his 
company Chermack Scenarios (www.thomaschermack.com) with organiza-
tions worldwide, including Saudi Aramco, Motorola, Directlink Technolo-
gies, Cargill, Emerson Process, General Mills, Centura Health, and others. 
Many of these projects have yielded profound insights for their organization 
leaders resulting in signiﬁcant re-perceptions of their organizations, envi-
ronments, and capabilities. In consulting with world-class organizations, 
Tom has seen the utility and effectiveness of scenario planning ﬁrsthand. 
An assistant professor in organizational performance and change at Col-
orado State University, Tom teaches courses on scenario planning, human 
expertise, analysis in organizations, change management, and organization 
development. With a focus on the theoretical foundations and outcomes of 
scenario planning, Tom’s research has won awards of excellence from the 
Academy of Human Resource Development and has appeared in scholarly 
journals as well as books and magazines. Much of his published work on 
the theory and practice of scenario planning includes numerous studies that 
document its beneﬁts. 
Tom is also the founder and director of the Scenario Planning Institute 
at Colorado State University (www.scenarioplanning.colostate.edu). The 
Scenario Planning Institute (the ﬁrst of its kind in the United States) is a 
hub of activity related to scenario planning, including research, consult-
ing with organizations worldwide, a program for certifying scenario plan-
ning facilitators, seminars, and other activities that link Colorado State 


---PAGE BREAK---

272 
A BOU T THE A UTHO R
University to organizations and members of the community, both locally 
and internationally.
Applied disciplines like scenario planning require both reﬂection and 
action—reﬂection, for understanding how scenario planning works and 
how it can be improved, and action, for putting new knowledge to use. Tom 
has made it a point of his career to study and apply scenario planning. An 
emphasis on both inquiry and application has provided a unique perspec-
tive, and a wealth of experiences that come together in this book.
Tom’s experiences with the research and practice of scenario planning 
have yielded invitations to speak at organizations around the world, as well 
as present seminars, workshops, and keynote addresses.
Tom lives in Fort Collins, Colorado.


---PAGE BREAK---

Berrett-Koehler is an independent publisher dedicated to an ambitious 
 mission: Creating a World That Works for All.
We believe that to truly create a better world, action is needed at all  levels— 
individual, organizational, and societal. At the individual level, our publications 
help people align their lives with their values and with their aspi ra tions for a 
better world. At the organizational level, our publications promote progres-
sive leadership and management practices, socially responsible approaches 
to business, and humane and effective organizations. At the societal level, our 
publications advance social and economic justice, shared prosperity, sustain-
ability, and new solutions to national and global issues.
A major theme of our publications is “Opening Up New Space.” Berrett- 
Koehler titles challenge conventional thinking, introduce new ideas, and foster 
positive change. Their common quest is changing the underlying beliefs, 
mindsets, institutions, and structures that keep generating the same cycles of 
problems, no matter who our leaders are or what improvement programs we 
adopt.
We strive to practice what we preach—to operate our publishing company in 
line with the ideas in our books. At the core of our approach is stewardship, 
which we deﬁ ne as a deep sense of responsibility to administer the company 
for the beneﬁ t of all of our “stakeholder” groups: authors, customers, em-
ployees, investors, service providers, and the communities and environment 
around us. 
We are grateful to the thousands of readers, authors, and other friends of the 
company who consider themselves to be part of the “BK Community.” We 
hope that you, too, will join us in our mission.
A BK Business Book
This book is part of our BK Business series. BK Business titles pioneer new 
and progressive leadership and management practices in all types of public, 
private, and nonproﬁ t organizations. They promote socially responsible ap-
proaches to business, innovative organizational change methods, and more 
humane and effective organizations.


---PAGE BREAK---

Visit Our Website: www.bkconnection.com 
Read book excerpts, see author videos and Internet movies, read our authors’ 
blogs, join discussion groups, download book apps, ﬁ nd out about the BK 
 Afﬁ liate Network, browse subject-area libraries of books, get special dis-
counts, and more!
Subscribe to Our Free E-Newsletter, the BK Communiqué
Be the ﬁ rst to hear about new publications, special discount offers, exclu-
sive articles, news about bestsellers, and more! Get on the list for our free 
e-newsletter by going to www.bkconnection.com.
Get Quantity Discounts
Berrett-Koehler books are available at quantity discounts for orders of ten or 
more copies. Please call us toll-free at (800) 929-2929 or email us at bkp 
.orders@aidcvt.com.
Join the BK Community
BKcommunity.com is a virtual meeting place where people from around the 
world can engage with kindred spirits to create a world that works for all. 
BKcommunity.com members may create their own proﬁ les, blog, start and 
participate in forums and discussion groups, post photos and videos, answer 
surveys, announce and register for upcoming events, and chat with others 
online in real time. Please join the conversation!


---PAGE BREAK---

