# Seven Faces of Business Model Innovation

The Investor
Gert Steens, President & Investment 
Analyst  / Oblonski BV
Focus: Invest in companies with the 
most competitive business models
Gert makes a living by identifying the 
best business models. Investing in the 
wrong company with the wrong model 
could cost his clients millions of euros 
and him his reputation. Understanding 
new and innovative business models 
has become a crucial part of his work. 
He goes far beyond the usual ﬁ nancial 
analytics and compares business 
models to spot strategic differences 
that may impart a competitive edge. 
Gert is constantly seeking business 
model innovations.
The Consultant
Bas van Oosterhout, Senior 
Consultant / Capgemini Consulting
Focus: Help clients question their 
business models, and envision and 
build new ones
Bas is part of Capgemini’s Business 
Innovation Team. Together with 
his clients, he is passionate about 
boosting performance and renewing 
competitiveness through innovation. 
Business Model Innovation is now a 
core component of his work because 
of its high relevance to client projects. 
His aim is to inspire and assist clients 
with new business models, from 
ideation to implementation. To achieve 
this, Bas draws on his understanding 
of the most powerful business models, 
regardless of industry.
The Designer
Trish Papadakos, 
Sole Proprietor / The Institute of You
Focus: Find the right business model 
to launch an innovative product
Trish is a talented young designer 
who is particularly skilled at grasp-
ing an idea’s essence and weaving it 
into client communications. Currently 
she’s working on one of her own ideas, 
a service that helps people who are 
transitioning between careers. After 
weeks of in-depth research, she’s now 
tackling the design. Trish knows she’ll 
have to ﬁ gure out the right business 
model to bring her service to market. 
She understands the client-facing 
part—that’s what she works on daily 
as a designer. But, since she lacks for-
mal business education, she needs the 
vocabulary and tools to take on the 
big picture. 
The Conscientious Entrepreneur
Iqbal Quadir, Social Entrepreneur / 
Founder of Grameen Phone
Focus: Bring about positive social and 
economic change through innovative 
business models
Iqbal is constantly on the lookout 
for innovative business models with 
the potential for profound social 
impact. His transformative model 
brought telephone service to over 
100 million Bangladeshis, utilizing 
Grameen Bank’s microcredit network. 
He is now searching for a new model 
for bringing affordable electricity to the 
poor. As the head of MIT’s Legatum 
Center, he promotes technological 
empowerment through innovative 
businesses as a path to economic and 
social development.


Table of Contents
Canvas
Outlook
Afterword
Process
Design
Patterns
Strategy
The book is divided into ﬁve sections: 1 The Busi-
ness Model Canvas, a tool for describing, analyzing, 
and designing business models, 2 Business Model 
Patterns, based on concepts from leading business 
thinkers, 3 Techniques to help you design business 
models, 4 Re-interpreting strategy through the 
business model lens, and 5 A generic process to 
help you design innovative business models, tying 
together all the concepts, techniques, and tools in 
Business Model Generation. }The last section offers 
an outlook on ﬁve business model topics for future 
exploration. 
Finally, the afterword provides a peek 
into “the making of” Business Model Generation.
