# Canvas

nvas


A shared language for describing, visualizing,  
assessing, and changing business models
The Business  
Model Canvas


14 
Deﬁnition of a 
Business Model
16 
The 9 Building Blocks
44 The Business Model 
Canvas Template
 


14
A business model describes  
the rationale of how an  
organization creates, delivers, 
and captures value
Def_Business Model


15
The starting point for any good discussion, meeting, 
or workshop on business model innovation should 
be a shared understanding of what a business model 
actually is. We need a business model concept that 
everybody understands: one that facilitates descrip-
tion and discussion. We need to start from the same 
point and talk about the same thing. The challenge is 
that the concept must be simple, relevant, and intui-
tively understandable, while not oversimplifying the 
complexities of how enterprises function. 
In the following pages we oΩer a concept that allows 
you to describe and think through the business model 
of your organization, your competitors, or any other 
enterprise. This concept has been applied and tested 
around the world and is already used in organizations 
such as IBM, Ericsson, Deloitte, the Public Works and 
Government Services of Canada, and many more.
This concept can become a shared language that 
allows you to easily describe and manipulate business 
models to create new strategic alternatives. Without 
such a shared language it is diΩicult to systematically 
challenge assumptions about one’s business model 
and innovate successfully.
We believe a business model can best be described 
through nine basic building blocks that show the 
logic of how a company intends to make money. The 
nine blocks cover the four main areas of a business: 
customers, oΩer, infrastructure, and ﬁnancial viability. 
The business model is like a blueprint for a strategy 
to be implemented through organizational structures, 
processes, and systems.


[
Customer 
Segments
An organization serves 
one or several Customer 
Segments.
Value 
Propositions
It seeks to solve customer 
problems and satisfy 
customer needs with 
value propositions.
Channels
Value propositions
are delivered to customers 
through communication, 
distribution, and sales 
Channels.
Customer 
Relationships
Customer relationships 
are established and 
maintained with each 
Customer Segment.
[ The 9 Building Blocks
CS 
VP
CH 
CR
1 
2 
3
4


17
Revenue 
Streams
Revenue streams result 
from value propositions 
successfully oΩered to 
customers. 
Key 
Resources
Key resources are the 
assets required to oΩer 
and deliver the previously 
described elements . . .  
Key 
Activities
. . . by performing a num-
ber of Key Activities. 
Key 
Partnerships
Some activities are 
outsourced and some 
resources are acquired 
outside the enterprise. 
Cost 
Structure
The business model 
elements result in the 
cost structure.
R$
KR
KA
KP
C$
5
6
7
8
9


18
KR
Key Resources
KP
Key Partners
KA
Key Activities
C$ 
Cost Structure


19
CS
Customer Segments
CR
Customer Relationships
VP
Value Propositions
CH
Channels
R$
Revenue Streams


The Customer Segments Building Block deﬁ nes 
the diΩerent groups of people or organizations an 
enterprise aims to reach and serve
Customers comprise the heart of any business model. Without 
(proﬁ table) customers, no company can survive for long. In order 
to better satisfy customers, a company may group them into 
distinct segments with common needs, common behaviors, 
or other attributes. A business model may deﬁ ne one or several 
large or small Customer Segments. An organization must make 
a conscious decision about which segments to serve and which 
segments to ignore. Once this decision is made, a business model 
can be carefully designed around a strong understanding of 
speciﬁ c customer needs.
Customer groups represent separate segments if: 
}Their needs require and justify a distinct oΩer
}They are reached through diΩerent Distribution Channels
}They require diΩerent types of relationships
}They have substantially diΩerent proﬁ tabilities
}They are willing to pay for diΩerent aspects of the oΩer
Customer Segments
CS 
1


21
There are diΩerent types of Customer Segments.  
Here are some examples:
Mass market 
Business models focused on mass markets don’t 
distinguish between diΩerent Customer Segments. 
The Value Propositions, Distribution Channels, and 
Customer Relationships all focus on one large group  
of customers with broadly similar needs and problems. 
This type of business model is often found in the 
consumer electronics sector. 
Niche market 
Business models targeting niche markets cater to 
speciﬁc, specialized Customer Segments. The Value 
Propositions, Distribution Channels, and Customer 
Relationships are all tailored to the speciﬁc require-
ments of a niche market. Such business models 
are often found in supplier-buyer relationships. For 
example, many car part manufacturers depend heavily 
on purchases from major automobile manufacturers. 
Segmented 
Some business models distinguish between market 
segments with slightly diΩerent needs and problems. 
The retail arm of a bank like Credit Suisse, for example, 
may distinguish between a large group of customers, 
each possessing assets of up to U.S. $100,000, and 
a smaller group of aΩluent clients, each of whose net 
worth exceeds U.S. $500,000. Both segments have 
similar but varying needs and problems. This has 
implications for the other building blocks of Credit 
Suisse’s business model, such as the Value Proposi-
tion, Distribution Channels, Customer Relationships, 
and Revenue streams. Consider Micro Precision 
Systems, which specializes in providing outsourced 
micromechanical design and manufacturing solutions. 
It serves three diΩerent Customer Segments—the 
watch industry, the medical industry, and the industrial 
automation sector—and oΩers each slightly diΩerent 
Value Propositions.  
Diversiﬁed 
An organization with a diversiﬁed customer business 
model serves two unrelated Customer Segments 
with very diΩerent needs and problems. For example, 
in 2006 Amazon.com decided to diversify its retail 
business by selling “cloud computing” services:  online 
storage space and on-demand server usage. Thus 
it started catering to a totally diΩerent Customer 
Segment—Web companies—with a totally diΩerent 
Value Proposition. The strategic rationale behind this 
diversiﬁcation can be found in Amazon.com’s powerful 
IT infrastructure, which can be shared by its retail sales 
operations and the new cloud computing service unit.
Multi-sided platforms (or multi-sided markets)
Some organizations serve two or more interdepen-
dent Customer Segments. A credit card company, for 
example, needs a large base of credit card holders  
and a large base of merchants who accept those credit 
cards. Similarly, an enterprise oΩering a free news-
paper needs a large reader base to attract advertisers. 
On the other hand, it also needs advertisers to ﬁnance 
production and distribution. Both segments are 
required to make the business model work (read  
more about multi-sided platforms on p. 76).
For whom are we creating value?
Who are our most important customers?


The Value Propositions Building Block describes 
the bundle of products and services that create 
value for a speciﬁ c Customer Segment
The Value Proposition is the reason why customers turn to one 
company over another. It solves a customer problem or satisﬁ es 
a customer need. Each Value Proposition consists of a selected 
bundle of products and/or services that caters to the requirements 
of a speciﬁ c Customer Segment. In this sense, the Value Proposi-
tion is an aggregation, or bundle, of beneﬁ ts that a company 
oΩers customers.
 
Some Value Propositions may be innovative and represent a 
new or disruptive oΩer. Others may be similar to existing market 
oΩers, but with added features and attributes.
Value Propositions
2
p
S g
,
p
tion is an aggregation, or bundle, of beneﬁ ts that a company 
oΩers customers.
Some Value Propositions may be innovative and represent a
new or disruptive oΩer. Others may be similar to existing market
oΩers, but with added features and attributes.
VP


23
A Value Proposition creates value for a Customer 
Segment through a distinct mix of elements cater-
ing to that segment’s needs. Values may be quan-
titative (e.g. price, speed of service) or qualitative 
(e.g. design, customer experience). 
 Elements from the following non-exhaustive list 
can contribute to customer value creation.
Newness
Some Value Propositions satisfy an entirely new set 
of needs that customers previously didn’t perceive 
because there was no similar oΩering. This is often, 
but not always, technology related. Cell phones, 
for instance, created a whole new industry around 
mobile telecommunication. On the other hand, 
products such as ethical investment funds have 
little to do with new technology.
Performance 
Improving product or service performance has 
traditionally been a common way to create value. 
The PC sector has traditionally relied on this factor 
by bringing more powerful machines to market. 
But improved performance has its limits. In recent 
years, for example, faster PCs, more disk storage 
space, and better graphics have failed to produce 
corresponding growth in customer demand. 
What value do we deliver to the customer?  
Which one of our customer’s problems are we helping  
to solve? Which customer needs are we satisfying?  
What bundles of products and services are we oΩering  
to each Customer Segment?
Customization
Tailoring products and services to the speciﬁc  
needs of individual customers or Customer  
Segments creates value. In recent years, the 
concepts of mass customization and customer 
co-creation have gained importance. This approach 
allows for customized products and services,  
while still taking advantage of economies of scale. 


“Getting the job done”
Value can be created simply by helping a customer 
get certain jobs done. Rolls-Royce understands this 
very well: its airline customers rely entirely on Rolls-
Royce to manufacture and service their jet engines. 
This arrangement allows customers to focus on 
running their airlines. In return, the airlines pay 
Rolls-Royce a fee for every hour an engine runs. 
Design 
Design is an important but diΩicult element to mea-
sure. A product may stand out because of superior 
design. In the fashion and consumer electronics 
industries, design can be a particularly important 
part of the Value Proposition. 
Brand/status
Customers may ﬁ nd value in the simple act of using 
and displaying a speciﬁ c brand. Wearing a Rolex 
watch signiﬁ es wealth, for example. On the other end 
of the spectrum, skateboarders may wear the latest 
“underground” brands to show that they are “in.”
Price 
OΩering similar value at a lower price is a common 
way to satisfy the needs of price-sensitive Cus-
tomer Segments. But low-price Value Propositions 
have important implications for the rest of a busi-
ness model. No frills airlines, such as Southwest, 
easyJet, and Ryanair have designed entire business 
models speciﬁ cally to enable low cost air travel. 
Another example of a price-based Value Proposi-
tion can be seen in the Nano, a new car designed 
and manufactured by the Indian conglomerate Tata. 
Its surprisingly low price makes the automobile 
aΩordable to a whole new segment of the Indian 
population. Increasingly, free oΩers are starting to 
permeate various industries. Free oΩers range from 
free newspapers to free e-mail, free mobile phone 
services, and more (see p. 88 for more on FREE). 
2


25
Cost reduction
Helping customers reduce costs is an important 
way to create value. Salesforce.com, for example, 
sells a hosted Customer Relationship management 
(CRM) application. This relieves buyers from the 
expense and trouble of having to buy, install, and 
manage CRM software themselves.
Risk reduction
Customers value reducing the risks they incur  
when purchasing products or services. For a used 
car buyer, a one-year service guarantee reduces  
the risk of post-purchase breakdowns and repairs.  
A service-level guarantee partially reduces the 
risk undertaken by a purchaser of outsourced IT 
services. 
Accessibility
Making products and services available to custom-
ers who previously lacked access to them is another 
way to create value. This can result from business 
model innovation, new technologies, or a combina-
tion of both. NetJets, for instance, popularized the 
concept of fractional private jet ownership. Using an 
innovative business model, NetJets oΩers individu-
als and corporations access to private jets, a service 
previously unaΩordable to most customers. Mutual 
funds provide another example of value creation 
through increased accessibility. This innovative 
ﬁnancial product made it possible even for those 
with modest wealth to build diversiﬁed investment 
portfolios.
Convenience/usability
Making things more convenient or easier to use 
can create substantial value. With iPod and iTunes, 
Apple oΩered customers unprecedented conve-
nience searching, buying, downloading, and listen-
ing to digital music. It now dominates the market.


The Channels Building Block describes how a 
company communicates with and reaches its 
Customer Segments to deliver a Value Proposition 
Communication, distribution, and sales Channels comprise a 
company's interface with customers. Channels are customer touch 
points that play an important role in the customer experience. 
Channels serve several functions, including:
}Raising awareness among customers about a company’s 
 products and services
}Helping customers evaluate a company’s Value Proposition
}Allowing customers to purchase speciﬁ c products and services
}Delivering a Value Proposition to customers
}Providing post-purchase customer support 
Channels
3
CH


27
Through which Channels do our Customer Segments  
want to be reached? How are we reaching them now? 
How are our Channels integrated? Which ones work best? 
Which ones are most cost-eΩicient? How are we  
integrating them with customer routines?
Channels have ﬁve distinct phases. Each channel can 
cover some or all of these phases. We can distinguish 
between direct Channels and indirect ones, as well as 
between owned Channels and partner Channels. 
Finding the right mix of Channels to satisfy how 
customers want to be reached is crucial in bringing 
a Value Proposition to market. An organization can 
choose between reaching its customers through its 
own Channels, through partner Channels, or through 
a mix of both. Owned Channels can be direct, such as 
an in-house sales force or a Web site, or they can be 
indirect, such as retail stores owned or operated by the 
organization. Partner Channels are indirect and span a 
whole range of options, such as wholesale distribution, 
retail, or partner-owned Web sites.
 
Partner Channels lead to lower margins, but they 
allow an organization to expand its reach and beneﬁt 
from partner strengths. Owned Channels and particu-
larly direct ones have higher margins, but can be costly 
to put in place and to operate. The trick is to ﬁnd the 
right balance between the diΩerent types of Channels, 
to integrate them in a way to create a great customer 
experience, and to maximize revenues.
 
Channel Types
Channel Phases
      Sales force
1. Awareness
How do we raise aware-
ness about our company’s 
products and services?
2. Evaluation
How do we help custom-
ers evaluate our organiza-
tion’s Value Proposition?
3. Purchase
How do we allow custom-
ers to purchase speciﬁc 
products and services? 
4. Delivery 
How do we deliver a Value 
Proposition to customers?
5. After sales
How do we provide 
post-purchase customer 
support?
     Web sales
      Own stores
      Partner 
                 stores
      Wholesaler
Indirect
Direct
Own
Partner


The Customer Relationships Building Block 
describes the types of relationships a company 
establishes with speciﬁ c Customer Segments 
A company should clarify the type of relationship it wants to 
establish with each Customer Segment. Relationships can range 
from personal to automated. Customer relationships may be 
driven by the following motivations:
} Customer acquisition 
} Customer retention 
} Boosting sales (upselling)
Customer Relationships
In the early days, for example, mobile network operator Customer 
Relationships were driven by aggressive acquisition strategies 
involving free mobile phones. When the market became saturated, 
operators switched to focusing on customer retention and increas-
ing average revenue per customer. 
 
The Customer Relationships called for by a company’s business 
model deeply inﬂ uence the overall customer experience.
CR
4


29
We can distinguish between several categories of 
Customer Relationships, which may co-exist in a 
company’s relationship with a particular  
Customer Segment:
Personal assistance 
This relationship is based on human interaction.  
The customer can communicate with a real customer 
representative to get help during the sales process or 
after the purchase is complete. This may happen on-
site at the point of sale, through call centers, by e-mail, 
or through other means. 
Dedicated personal assistance
This relationship involves dedicating a customer 
representative speciﬁcally to an individual client. It 
represents the deepest and most intimate type of 
relationship and normally develops over a long period 
of time. In private banking services, for example, dedi-
cated bankers serve high net worth individuals. Similar 
relationships can be found in other businesses in the 
form of key account managers who maintain personal 
relationships with important customers. 
Self-service
In this type of relationship, a company maintains no 
direct relationship with customers. It provides all the 
necessary means for customers to help themselves. 
Automated services
This type of relationship mixes a more sophisti-
cated form of customer self-service with automated 
processes. For example, personal online proﬁles give 
customers access to customized services. Automated 
services can recognize individual customers and their 
characteristics, and oΩer information related to orders 
or transactions. At their best, automated services can 
simulate a personal relationship (e.g. oΩering book or 
movie recommendations). 
Communities
Increasingly, companies are utilizing user communities 
to become more involved with customers/prospects 
and to facilitate connections between community 
members. Many companies maintain online com-
munities that allow users to exchange knowledge and 
solve each other’s problems. Communities can also 
help companies better understand their customers. 
Pharmaceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline launched a 
private online community when it introduced alli, a 
new prescription-free weight-loss product.  
 
GlaxoSmithKline wanted to increase its under-
standing of the challenges faced by overweight 
adults, and thereby learn to better manage customer 
expectations. 
Co-creation
More companies are going beyond the traditional 
customer-vendor relationship to co-create value with 
customers. Amazon.com invites customers to write 
reviews and thus create value for other book lovers. 
Some companies engage customers to assist with the 
design of new and innovative products. Others, such 
as YouTube.com, solicit customers to create content 
for public consumption.
What type of relationship does each of our Customer  
Segments expect us to establish and maintain with them? 
Which ones have we established? How costly are they?  
How are they integrated with the rest of our business model?


The Revenue Streams Building Block represents 
the cash a company generates from each Customer 
Segment (costs must be subtracted from revenues to 
create earnings)
If customers comprise the heart of a business model, Revenue 
Streams are its arteries. A company must ask itself, For what value 
is each Customer Segment truly willing to pay? Successfully 
answering that question allows the ﬁ rm to generate one or more 
Revenue Streams from each Customer Segment. Each Revenue 
Stream may have diΩerent pricing mechanisms, such as ﬁ xed list 
prices, bargaining, auctioning, market dependent, volume depen-
dent, or yield management. 
Revenue Streams
A business model can involve two diΩerent types of Revenue Streams:
1. Transaction revenues resulting from one-time customer payments
2. Recurring revenues resulting from ongoing payments to either 
 deliver a Value Proposition to customers or provide post-purchase 
 customer support 
R$
5


31
There are several ways to generate Revenue Streams: 
Asset sale
The most widely understood Revenue Stream derives 
from selling ownership rights to a physical product. 
Amazon.com sells books, music, consumer electron-
ics, and more online. Fiat sells automobiles, which 
buyers are free to drive, resell, or even destroy. 
Usage fee
This Revenue Stream is generated by the use of a 
particular service. The more a service is used, the 
more the customer pays. A telecom operator may 
charge customers for the number of minutes spent on 
the phone. A hotel charges customers for the number 
of nights rooms are used. A package delivery service 
charges customers for the delivery of a parcel from 
one location to another.
Subscription fees
This Revenue Stream is generated by selling continu-
ous access to a service. A gym sells its members 
monthly or yearly subscriptions in exchange for 
access to its exercise facilities. World of Warcraft 
Online, a Web-based computer game, allows users to 
play its online game in exchange for a monthly sub-
scription fee. Nokia’s Comes with Music service gives 
users access to a music library for a subscription fee. 
Lending/Renting/Leasing
This Revenue Stream is created by temporar-
ily granting someone the exclusive right to use a 
particular asset for a ﬁxed period in return for a 
fee. For the lender this provides the advantage of 
recurring revenues. Renters or lessees, on the other 
hand, enjoy the beneﬁts of incurring expenses for 
only a limited time rather than bearing the full costs 
For what value are our customers really willing to pay?  
For what do they currently pay? How are they currently 
paying? How would they prefer to pay? How much does 
each Revenue Stream contribute to overall revenues?
of ownership. Zipcar.com provides a good illustration. 
The company allows customers to rent cars by the 
hour in North American cities. Zipcar.com’s service 
has led many people to decide to rent rather than 
purchase automobiles. 
Licensing 
This Revenue Stream is generated by giving customers 
permission to use protected intellectual property in 
exchange for licensing fees. Licensing allows rights-
holders to generate revenues from their property with-
out having to manufacture a product or commercialize 
a service. Licensing is common in the media industry, 
where content owners retain copyright while selling 
usage licenses to third parties. Similarly, in technology 
sectors, patentholders grant other companies the right 
to use a patented technology in return for a license fee.


Brokerage fees
This Revenue Stream derives from intermediation 
services performed on behalf of two or more parties. 
Credit card providers, for example, earn revenues 
by taking a percentage of the value of each sales 
transaction executed between credit card merchants 
and customers. Brokers and real estate agents earn 
a commission each time they successfully match a 
buyer and seller. 
Advertising
This Revenue Stream results from fees for advertising 
a particular product, service, or brand. Traditionally, 
the media industry and event organizers relied heavily 
on revenues from advertising. In recent years other 
sectors, including software and services, have started 
relying more heavily on advertising revenues. 
   
Each Revenue Stream might have diΩerent pricing 
mechanisms. The type of pricing mechanism chosen 
can make a big diΩerence in terms of revenues gener-
ated. There are two main types of pricing mechanism: 
ﬁ xed and dynamic pricing.
5


33
Fixed Menu Pricing
Predeﬁned prices are based on static variables
Dynamic Pricing
Prices change based on market conditions 
List price
Fixed prices for individual products, services,  
or other Value Propositions
Negotiation 
(bargaining)
Price negotiated between two or more partners  
depending on negotiation power and/or negotiation skills
Product feature 
dependent
Price depends on the number or quality of  
Value Proposition features
Yield management
Price depends on inventory and time of purchase  
(normally used for perishable resources such as hotel 
rooms or airline seats)
Customer segment
dependent 
Price depends on the type and characteristic  
of a Customer Segment
Real-time-market
Price is established dynamically based on supply  
and demand
Volume dependent 
Price as a function of the quantity purchased
Auctions
Price determined by outcome of competitive bidding
Pricing Mechanisms


34
The Key Resources Building Block describes 
the most important assets required to make a 
business model work  
Every business model requires Key Resources. These resources 
allow an enterprise to create and oΩer a Value Proposition, reach 
markets, maintain relationships with Customer Segments, and 
earn revenues. DiΩerent Key Resources are needed depending on 
the type of business model. A microchip manufacturer requires 
capital-intensive production facilities, whereas a microchip designer 
focuses more on human resources.
 
Key resources can be physical, ﬁ nancial, intellectual, or human. 
Key resources can be owned or leased by the company or acquired 
from key partners.
Key Resources
KR
6


35
Key Resources can be categorized as follows:
Physical
This category includes physical assets such as 
manufacturing facilities, buildings, vehicles, machines, 
systems, point-of-sales systems, and distribution 
networks. Retailers like Wal-Mart and Amazon.com 
rely heavily on physical resources, which are often 
capital-intensive. The former has an enormous global 
network of stores and related logistics infrastructure. 
The latter has an extensive IT, warehouse, and logistics 
infrastructure.
 
Intellectual 
Intellectual resources such as brands, proprietary 
knowledge, patents and copyrights, partnerships, 
and customer databases are increasingly important 
components of a strong business model. Intellectual 
resources are diΩicult to develop but when success-
fully created may oΩer substantial value. Consumer 
goods companies such as Nike and Sony rely heavily 
on brand as a Key Resource. Microsoft and SAP 
depend on software and related intellectual property 
developed over many years. Qualcomm, a designer 
and supplier of chipsets for broadband mobile 
devices, built its business model around patented 
microchip designs that earn the company substantial 
licensing fees. 
Human
Every enterprise requires human resources, but 
people are particularly prominent in certain business 
models. For example, human resources are crucial in 
knowledge-intensive and creative industries. A phar-
maceutical company such as Novartis, for example, 
relies heavily on human resources: Its business model 
is predicated on an army of experienced scientists 
and a large and skilled sales force. 
Financial
Some business models call for ﬁnancial resources  
and/or ﬁnancial guarantees, such as cash, lines of 
credit, or a stock option pool for hiring key employ-
ees. Ericsson, the telecom manufacturer, provides 
an example of ﬁnancial resource leverage within a 
business model. Ericsson may opt to borrow funds 
from banks and capital markets, then use a portion of 
the proceeds to provide vendor ﬁnancing to equipment 
customers, thus ensuring that orders are placed with 
Ericsson rather than competitors.
What Key Resources do our Value Propositions require?
Our Distribution Channels? Customer Relationships?  
Revenue Streams?


The Key Activities Building Block describes 
the most important things a company must do 
to make its business model work 
Every business model calls for a number of Key Activities. These 
are the most important actions a company must take to operate 
successfully. Like Key Resources, they are required to create and 
oΩer a Value Proposition, reach markets, maintain Customer 
Relationships, and earn revenues. And like Key Resources, Key 
Activities diΩer depending on business model type. For software 
maker Microsoft, Key Activities include software development. 
 
For PC manufacturer Dell, Key Activities include supply chain 
management. For consultancy McKinsey, Key Activities include 
problem solving. 
Key Activities
p ,
y
,
y
Activities diΩer depending on business model type. For software 
maker Microsoft, Key Activities include software development.
For PC manufacturer Dell, Key Activities include supply chain
management. For consultancy McKinsey, Key Activities include
problem solving.
KA
7


37
Key Activities can be categorized as follows:
Production
These activities relate to designing, making, and 
delivering a product in substantial quantities and/or 
of superior quality. Production activity dominates the 
business models of manufacturing ﬁrms. 
 
Problem solving 
Key Activities of this type relate to coming up with 
new solutions to individual customer problems.  
The operations of consultancies, hospitals, and other  
service organizations are typically dominated by 
problem solving activities. Their business models call 
for activities such as knowledge management and 
continuous training. 
Platform/network
Business models designed with a platform as a Key 
Resource are dominated by platform or network-
related Key Activities. Networks, matchmaking 
platforms, software, and even brands can function as 
a platform. eBay’s business model requires that the 
company continually develop and maintain its plat-
form: the Web site at eBay.com. Visa’s business model 
requires activities related to its Visa® credit card 
transaction platform for merchants, customers, and 
banks. Microsoft’s business model requires managing 
the interface between other vendors’ software and its 
Windows® operating system platform. Key Activi-
ties in this category relate to platform management, 
service provisioning, and platform promotion.
What Key Activities do our Value Propositions require?
Our Distribution Channels? Customer Relationships?  
Revenue streams?


The Key Partnerships Building Block describes 
the network of suppliers and partners that make 
the business model work
Companies forge partnerships for many reasons, and partnerships 
are becoming a cornerstone of many business models. Companies 
create alliances to optimize their business models, reduce risk, or 
acquire resources. 
We can distinguish between four diΩerent types of partnerships:
1. Strategic alliances between non-competitors
2. Coopetition: strategic partnerships between competitors
3. Joint ventures to develop new businesses
4. Buyer-supplier relationships to assure reliable supplies
Key Partnerships
1. Strategic alliances between non-competitors
2. Coopetition: strategic partnerships between competitors
3. Joint ventures to develop new businesses
4. Buyer-supplier relationships to assure reliable supplies
KP
8


39
It can be useful to distinguish between three  
motivations for creating partnerships:
Optimization and economy of scale
The most basic form of partnership or buyer-supplier 
relationship is designed to optimize the allocation of 
resources and activities. It is illogical for a company to 
own all resources or perform every activity by itself. 
Optimization and economy of scale partnerships are 
usually formed to reduce costs, and often involve 
outsourcing or sharing infrastructure. 
Reduction of risk and uncertainty
Partnerships can help reduce risk in a competitive 
environment characterized by uncertainty. It is not 
unusual for competitors to form a strategic alliance 
in one area while competing in another. Blu-ray, for 
example, is an optical disc format jointly developed  
by a group of the world’s leading consumer electron-
ics, personal computer, and media manufacturers. 
The group cooperated to bring Blu-ray technology to 
market, yet individual members compete in selling 
their own Blu-ray products. 
Acquisition of particular resources and activities
Few companies own all the resources or perform all 
the activities described by their business models. 
Rather, they extend their own capabilities by relying  
on other ﬁrms to furnish particular resources or 
perform certain activities. Such partnerships can be 
motivated by needs to acquire knowledge, licenses, or 
access to customers. A mobile phone manufacturer, 
for example, may license an operating system for its 
handsets rather than developing one in-house. An 
insurer may choose to rely on independent brokers to 
sell its policies rather than develop its own sales force. 
Who are our Key Partners? Who are our key suppliers? 
Which Key Resources are we acquiring from partners? 
Which Key Activities do partners perform?


The Cost Structure describes all costs incurred to 
operate a business model
This building block describes the most important costs incurred 
while operating under a particular business model. Creating and de-
livering value, maintaining Customer Relationships, and generating 
revenue all incur costs. Such costs can be calculated relatively easily 
after deﬁ ning Key Resources, Key Activities, and Key Partnerships. 
Some business models, though, are more cost-driven than others. 
So-called “no frills” airlines, for instance, have built business models 
entirely around low Cost Structures. 
Cost Structure
C$
9


41
Naturally enough, costs should be minimized in every 
business model. But low Cost Structures are more 
important to some business models than to others. 
Therefore it can be useful to distinguish between two 
broad classes of business model Cost Structures:  
cost-driven and value-driven (many business models 
fall in between these two extremes):
Cost-driven
Cost-driven business models focus on minimizing 
costs wherever possible. This approach aims at  
creating and maintaining the leanest possible  
Cost Structure, using low price Value Propositions,  
maximum automation, and extensive outsourcing.  
No frills airlines, such as Southwest, easyJet, and 
Ryanair typify cost-driven business models.
Value-driven
Some companies are less concerned with the cost 
implications of a particular business model design, 
and instead focus on value creation. Premium Value 
Propositions and a high degree of personalized service 
usually characterize value-driven business models. 
Luxury hotels, with their lavish facilities and exclusive 
services, fall into this category. 
Cost Structures can have the following characteristics:
Fixed costs
Costs that remain the same despite the volume of 
goods or services produced. Examples include salaries, 
rents, and physical manufacturing facilities. Some 
businesses, such as manufacturing companies, are 
characterized by a high proportion of ﬁxed costs. 
Variable costs
Costs that vary proportionally with the volume of 
goods or services produced. Some businesses, such as 
music festivals, are characterized by a high proportion 
of variable costs.
Economies of scale
Cost advantages that a business enjoys as its output 
expands. Larger companies, for instance, beneﬁt from 
lower bulk purchase rates. This and other factors 
cause average cost per unit to fall as output rises.
Economies of scope
Cost advantages that a business enjoys due to a larger 
scope of operations. In a large enterprise, for example, 
the same marketing activities or Distribution Channels 
may support multiple products. 
What are the most important costs inherent in our business 
model? Which Key Resources are most expensive? Which 
Key Activities are most expensive?


VP
CR
CH
CS
KP
KA
KR
R$
C$
The nine business model Building Blocks form 
the basis for a handy tool, which we call the 
Business Model Canvas. 
This tool resembles a painter’s canvas—preformat-
ted with the nine blocks—which allows you to paint 
pictures of new or existing business models. 
The Business Model Canvas works best when printed 
out on a large surface so groups of people can jointly 
start sketching and discussing business model 
elements with Post-it® notes or board markers. 
It is a hands-on tool that fosters understanding, 
discussion, creativity, and analysis.
The Business Model Canvas


43
43}


44
The Business Model Canvas 
Cost 
Structure
Key 
Partners
Key 
Resources
Channels
Key 
Activities
Value 
Proposition
Customer 
Relationships
Customer
Segments
Revenue 
Streams


45


46
VP
CR
CH
CS
KP
KA
KR
R$
C$
46
VP
CR
CH
CS
KP
KA
KR
R$
C$


47
In 2001 Apple launched its iconic iPod brand of por-
table media player. The device works in conjunction 
with iTunes software that enables users to transfer 
music and other content from the iPod to a computer. 
The software also provides a seamless connection 
to Apple’s online store so users can purchase and 
download content. 
This potent combination of device, software, and 
online store quickly disrupted the music industry and 
gave Apple a dominant market position. Yet Apple was 
not the ﬁrst company to bring a portable media player 
to market. Competitors such as Diamond Multimedia, 
with its Rio brand of portable media players, were suc-
cessful until they were outpaced by Apple. 
Example: Apple iPod/iTunes Business Model
How did Apple achieve such dominance? Because it 
competed with a better business model. On the one 
hand, it oΩered users a seamless music experience by 
combining its distinctively designed iPod devices with 
iTunes software and the iTunes online store. Apple’s 
Value Proposition is to allow customers to easily 
search, buy, and enjoy digital music. On the other hand, 
to make this Value Proposition possible, Apple had to 
negotiate deals with all the major record companies to 
create the world’s largest online music library. 
The twist? Apple earns most of its music-related 
revenues from selling iPods, while using integration 
with the online music store to protect itself from 
competitors.


left brain 
logic
right brain 
emotion


VP
CR
CH
CS
KP
KA
KR
R$
C$
VP
CR
CH
CS
KP
KA
KR
R$
C$
left canvas 
efﬁ ciency


The public sector is often challenged  
to implement private sector principles.  
I have used the Canvas to help a 
department view itself as a  service-
oriented business,  
establishing 
externalized as-is 
and to-be business 
models. 
It has created a whole new conversa-
tion around describing and innovating 
the business.
Mike Lachapelle, Canada
I consult with small companies on using 
the freemium business model. This 
model involves giving core products 
away for free, which is very counterin-
tuitive to most businesspeople. Thanks 
to the Business Model Canvas, I can  
easily illustrate 
how it makes 
ﬁnancial sense.
Peter Froberg, Denmark
I help business owners plan their transi-
tion and exit from their companies. 
Success depends on sustaining long-
term company viability and growth. Key 
to this is a business model innovation 
program. The Canvas helps us identify 
and innovate their business models.
Nicholas K. Niemann, United States 
I’m using the Business Model Canvas in 
Brazil to help artists, cultural producers, 
and game designers to envision innova-
tive business models for the Cultural 
and Creative Industries. I apply it in the 
Cultural Production MBA at FGV and in 
the Innovation Games Lab at COPPE/
UFRJ Business Incubator.
Claudio D'Ipolitto, Brazil
When you typically think of a business 
model, the conclusion is that it is a 'for 
proﬁt' business. However, I found that 
the Canvas is also very effective in the 
non-proﬁt sector. We used it to  
DESIGN
+ ALIGN
members of the leadership team during 
the formation of a new non-proﬁt  
program. The Canvas was ﬂexible 
enough to take into account the goals  
of this social entrepreneurial venture, 
and bring clarity to the true Value 
Proposition of the business and how  
to make it sustainable.
Kevin Donaldson, United States
I wish I had known the Canvas years 
ago! With a particular tough and 
complicated print-to-digital project 
within the publishing industry it would 
have been so helpful to  
show all project 
members in this 
visual way both  
the big picture,  
their (important) 
own roles in it 
and the inter-
dependencies. 
Hours of explaining, arguing, and mis-
understanding could have been saved. 
Jille Sol, Netherlands
A close friend was looking for a new 
job. I used the Business Model 
Canvas in order to assess her 
personal business model. 
Her core competences and Value 
Proposition were outstanding but  
she failed to leverage her strategic 
partners and develop appropriate 
Customer Relationships. This adjusted 
focus opened new opportunities.
Daniel Pandza, Mexico
 
HOW 
DO YOU 
USE THE 
CANVAS?
50


Imagine 60 ﬁrst-year students, knowing 
nothing about entrepreneurship. In less 
than ﬁve days, thanks to the Business 
Model Canvas, they were able to pitch 
a viable idea with conviction and clarity. 
They used it as a tool to cover all the 
startup-building dimensions.
Guilhem Bertholet, France
I use the Business Model Canvas to 
teach early stage entrepreneurs  
across a wide range of industries as  
a much better way to  
TRANSLATE 
THEIR BUSINESS 
PLANS 
INTO THE BUSINESS 
PROCESSES 
that they (will) need to operate their 
businesses and to ensure that they are 
focused properly on being customer-
centric in a way that makes the business 
as highly proﬁtable as it can be.
Bob Dunn, United States
I have used the Canvas with a  
co-founder to design a business plan 
for a national level contest held by  
The Economic Times, India. The 
Canvas enabled me to think through 
all the aspects of the startup and put 
together a plan that VCs might ﬁnd well 
thought out and attractive to fund.
Praveen Singh, India
We were asked to redesign the language 
service of an international NGO. The 
Business Model Canvas was especially 
helpful to show the links between 
the needs of people’s day-to-day 
work and a service that was felt 
too specialized, considered only as an 
afterthought, and far away from their 
priorities.
Paola Valeri, Spain 
As a startup coach I support teams to 
create new products and design their 
businesses. The Business Model Canvas 
does a great job assisting me to  
remind the 
teams to think 
holistically about 
their business 
and prevents 
them from  
getting stuck 
on details. This helps to 
make their new venture a success.
Christian Schüller, Germany 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Business Model 
Canvas has allowed 
me to establish a 
common language 
and framework with 
colleagues. 
I've used the Canvas to explore new 
growth opportunities, assess uses  
of new business models by competitors, 
and to communicate across the  
organization how we could  
accelerate technology, market, and  
business model innovations.
Bruce MacVarish, United States
The Business Model Canvas has helped 
several health care organizations in the 
Netherlands to make the move from 
a budget driven governmental 
institution to an entrepreneurial 
value-adding organization.
Huub Raemakers, Netherlands
I used the Canvas with senior managers 
of a public company to help them 
restructure their value chain due to 
changes in sector regulation. The key 
success factor was to understand which 
new Value Propositions could be offered 
to their clients and then translated into 
internal operations.
Leandro Jesus, Brazil
 WE USED 15,000 
POST-ITS AND 
MORE THAN 
100 METERS OF 
BROWN PAPER 
to design a future organizational struc-
ture in a global manufacturing company. 
The key of all activities was, however, 
the Business Model Canvas. It con-
vinced us by its practical applicability, 
simplicity, and logical cause-and-effect 
relationships.
Daniel Egger, Brazil
I used the Canvas to do a  
REALITY 
check 
for my new startup Mupps, a platform 
where artists can make their own music 
apps for iPhone and Android phones  
in minutes. You know what? The Canvas 
made me even surer of the possible 
success! So I gotta go, work to do!
Erwin Blom, Netherlands
The Business Model Canvas has proven 
to be a very useful tool for capturing 
ideas and solutions for e-commerce 
projects. Most of my clients are SMEs 
and the Canvas helps them to  
clarify their current 
business models and 
understand and focus on the impact  
of e-commerce on their organizations.
Marc Castricum, Netherlands
I applied the Canvas to help a company 
align key staff in order to determine 
shared goals and strategic priorities, 
which were used during the planning 
process and incorporated with the BSC. 
It also ensured that the chosen initia-
tives were clearly driven by the new 
strategic priorities.
Martin Fanghanel, Bolivia 
   
51


Patte
