# Preface

Our goal in writing this book is to solve a number of puzzles posed by
the rapid rise of the platform model. These puzzles include:
•    How have platform businesses such as Uber and Airbnb managed to disrupt and dominate vast
traditional industries within just a few years of their own launch? (We address this question
throughout the book, and focus on it especially closely in chapter 4.)
•    How can platform businesses outcompete traditional companies while employing just a tiny
fraction of the number of people the incumbents employ? (See chapters 1 and 2.)
•    How has the rise of the platform transformed the principles governing economic growth and
business competition? How do platform businesses resemble the industrial giants of the past—
and how do they differ? (See chapters 2 and 4.)
•    How and why have specific companies and business leaders soared to the heights of success,
plummeted to the depths of failure—or both—as a result of their use, or misuse, of platform
business methods? Why did Blackberry fall from 49 percent market share to 2 percent in just
four years? How did Steve Jobs fumble his company’s platform-model choices in the 1980s
… and then get them dramatically right in the 2010s? (See chapters 2 and 7.)
•    How do some companies solve the challenge of attracting producers and consumers to a new
platform simultaneously, while others fail miserably? Why is free pricing sometimes a
brilliant business move, and sometimes a fatal error? (See chapters 5 and 6.)
•    Why do competitive markets flourish in some platform arenas, while in others winner-take-all
markets dominated by a single platform swiftly emerge? (See chapter 10.)
•    As platforms grow, they are subject to abuse: customers shopping on eBay can be defrauded,
women seeking dates on Match.com can be assaulted, homes rented on Airbnb can be
ransacked. Who should pay the price? And how should platform users be protected? (See
chapters 8 and 11.)
In answering questions like these, we’ve sought to create a practical
guide to the new economy that is reshaping the world in which we all live,
work, and play. Platform Revolution is an outgrowth of three careers that
have been spent immersed in studying and unraveling the mysteries of the
platform model.
Two of the authors—Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne—became
interested in the emerging network economy during the dot-com boom of
1997–2000, when both were PhD students at MIT. Those were heady times.
The NASDAQ stock index spiked by more than 80 percent as venture
capitalists poured investment money into startups boasting cool new
technologies and names featuring the prefix e or the suffix com. With
traditional metrics of business success seemingly rendered obsolete, several
companies launched hugely successful initial public offerings (IPOs)
without ever having made a dime in profit. Students and faculty alike were
dropping out of school to launch fledgling technology businesses.
Inevitably, the market came crashing down. Beginning in March 2000,
trillions of dollars’ worth of paper valuations vanished in a matter of


months. Yet amid the rubble, certain companies survived. While Webvan
and Pets.com disappeared, Amazon and eBay survived and thrived. Steve
Jobs, who had lost Apple to mistakes he made earlier, recovered, returned to
Apple, and built it into a juggernaut. Eventually, the online world emerged
from the depths of the 2000 downturn to become stronger than ever.
Why were some Internet-based businesses successful while others were
not? Were the differences a matter of random luck, or were deeper design
principles at work? What are the rules of the new economics of networks?
Geoff and Marshall set about trying to answer these questions.
It turned out to be a harder challenge than they expected. They ended up
having to develop a new economic theory of two-sided networks. Their
Harvard Business Review article “Strategies for Two-Sided Markets,”
coauthored with Harvard professor Thomas R. Eisenmann, laid out what
became one of the most widely taught theories of Internet business, one that
is still taught in MBA programs around the world. Along with the work of
other scholars, Geoff’s and Marshall’s insights helped to reshape
mainstream thinking about business regulation. Later, at the MIT Initiative
on the Digital Economy, they furthered their work with such firms as
AT&T, Dun & Bradstreet, Cisco, IBM, Intel, Jawbone, Microsoft,
Salesforce, SAP, Thomson Reuters, and many others.
The third author of this book, Sangeet Choudary, was a high school
student during the dot-com boom of the 1990s, but he was already
fascinated by the immense power of the Internet—particularly its power to
create business models capable of rapid, scalable growth. Later, while
working as the head of innovation and new ventures at Yahoo and Intuit,
Sangeet started digging deeper into the factors that spell success or failure
for Internet startups. His research on business model failure, coupled with
his conversations with venture capitalists and entrepreneurs, helped him
identify the increasing importance of a new and massively scalable business
model: the platform.
In 2012, Sangeet started focusing on platform businesses full-time. His
premise: as the world becomes increasingly networked, businesses that do a
better job of harnessing the power of platform networks will win. Sangeet
has offered guidance on platform strategy to a wide range of companies
around the world, ranging from startups to Fortune 100 firms, and his
popular blog (http://platformed.info) has been featured on leading media
globally.


In the spring of 2013, Marshall and Geoff came across Sangeet’s work,
and we immediately realized the value of a collaboration. Our partnership
coalesced in the summer of 2013 when we met for three weeks at MIT to
work together on building a cohesive view of platform dynamics. Since
then, we’ve cochaired the MIT Platform Strategy Summit, spoken about
platform models at leading world forums such as the G20 summit, Emerce
eDay, and TED, taught about platforms at the world’s leading universities,
and collaborated on implementing platform strategy with business clients
around the world.
Now the three of us have written Platform Revolution, representing our
first attempt to bring together our thinking on platforms in a cohesive,
comprehensive fashion.
We’ve been fortunate enough to have access to the ideas and experiences
of some of the greatest firms in the world, having worked with more than a
hundred companies in diverse industries on developing and implementing
their platform strategies. At the MIT Platform Strategy Summit, leaders of
organizations that are building platforms, managing them, or reacting to
them, including edX, Samsung, Apigee, Accenture, OkCupid, Alibaba, and
many others, have shared their stories with one another and with us. We
have also benefited from working with a group of world-class scholars who
have dedicated their careers to understanding the digital economy, and who
participate in the annual Workshop on Information Systems and Economics
(WISE) and the Boston University Platform Strategy Research Symposium,
as well as some of the world’s leading thinkers in adjacent fields such as
behavior design, data science, systems design theory, and agile
methodologies.
We have written this book because we believe that digital connectivity
and the platform model it makes possible are changing the world forever.
The platform-driven economic transformation is producing enormous
benefits for society as a whole and for the businesses and other
organizations that create wealth, generate growth, and serve the needs of
humankind. At the same time, it is creating sweeping changes in the rules
that have traditionally governed success and failure. We hope that Platform
Revolution will help market upstarts, incumbent organizations, regulators
and policy-makers, and engaged citizens effectively navigate the
challenging new landscape of a world in which platforms win.


GEOFFREY G. PARKER            
MARSHALL W. VAN ALSTYNE
SANGEET PAUL CHOUDARY    
OceanofPDF.com


PLATFORM
REVOLUTION
OceanofPDF.com


1
TODAY
Welcome to the
Platform Revolution
In October 2007, a tiny item appeared in an online newsletter aimed at
industrial designers—men and women who shape the appearance of
everything from coffee makers to jumbo jets. It referred to an unusual
housing option for professionals who planned to attend the upcoming joint
convention of two industrial design organizations, the International
Congress of Societies of Industrial Design (ICSID) and the Industrial
Designers Society of America (IDSA):
If you’re heading out to the ICSID/IDSA World Congress/Connecting ’07 event in San Francisco
next week and have yet to make accommodations, well, consider networking in your jam-jams.
That’s right. For “an affordable alternative to hotels in the city,” imagine yourself in a fellow
design industry person’s home, fresh awake from a snooze on the ol’ air mattress, chatting about
the day’s upcoming events over Pop Tarts and OJ.
The hosts for this “networking in your jam-jams” opportunity were Brian
Chesky and Joe Gebbia, budding designers who’d moved to San Francisco
only to find they couldn’t afford the rent on the loft they shared. Strapped
for cash, they impulsively decided to make air mattresses and their own
services as part-time tour guides available to convention attendees. Chesky
and Gebbia attracted three weekend guests and made a thousand bucks,
which covered the next month’s rent.
Their casual space-sharing experience would launch a revolution in one
of the world’s biggest industries.
