# 1. Today: Welcome to the Platform Revolution

Chesky and Gebbia recruited a third friend, Nathan Blecharczyk, to help
them make affordable room rentals a long-term business. Of course, renting
space in their San Francisco loft wouldn’t yield much revenue. So they
designed a website that allowed anyone, anywhere, to make a spare sofa or
guest room available to travelers. In exchange, the company—now dubbed
Air Bed & Breakfast (Airbnb), after the air mattresses in Chesky and
Gebbia’s loft—took a slice of the rental fee.
The three partners started out focusing on events for which hotel space
was often sold out, scoring their first big hit at the 2008 South by Southwest
festival in Austin. But they soon discovered that demand for friendly,
affordable accommodations provided by local residents existed year-round
and nationwide—and even internationally.
Today, Airbnb is a giant enterprise active in 119 countries, where it lists
over 500,000 properties ranging from studio apartments to actual castles
and has served over ten million guests. In its last round of investment
funding (April 2014), the company was valued at more than $10 billion—a
level surpassed by only a handful of the world’s greatest hotel chains.
In less than a decade, Airbnb has siphoned off a growing segment of
customers from the traditional hospitality industry—all without owning a
single hotel room of its own.
It’s a tale of dramatic, unexpected change. Yet it’s only one in a series of
improbable industry upheavals that share a similar DNA:
•    Smartphone-based car service Uber was launched in a single city (San Francisco) in March
2009. Less than five years later, it was valued by investors at over $50 billion, and is poised to
challenge or replace the traditional taxi business in many of the more than 200 global cities it
operates in—all without owning a single car.
•    China-based retailing giant Alibaba features nearly a billion different products on just one of
its many business portals (Taobao, a consumer-to-consumer marketplace similar to eBay) and
has been dubbed by The Economist “the world’s biggest bazaar”—all without owning a single
item of inventory.
•    With over 1.5 billion subscribers visiting regularly to read news, look at photos, listen to
music, and watch videos, Facebook garners an estimated $14 billion in annual advertising
revenue (2015) and is arguably the world’s biggest media company—all without producing a
single piece of original content.
How can a major business segment be invaded and conquered in a matter
of months by an upstart with none of the resources traditionally deemed
essential for survival, let alone market dominance? And why is this
happening today in one industry after another?


The answer is the power of the platform—a new business model that
uses technology to connect people, organizations, and resources in an
interactive ecosystem in which amazing amounts of value can be created
and exchanged. Airbnb, Uber, Alibaba, and Facebook are just four examples
from a list of disruptive platforms that includes Amazon, YouTube, eBay,
Wikipedia, iPhone, Upwork, Twitter, KAYAK, Instagram, Pinterest, and
dozens more. Each is unique and focused on a distinctive industry and
market. And each has harnessed the power of the platform to transform a
swath of the global economy. Many more comparable transformations are
on the horizon.
The platform is a simple-sounding yet transformative concept that is
radically changing business, the economy, and society at large. As we’ll
explain, practically any industry in which information is an important
ingredient is a candidate for the platform revolution. That includes
businesses whose “product” is information (like education and media) but
also any business where access to information about customer needs, price
fluctuations, supply and demand, and market trends has value—which
includes almost every business.
So perhaps it’s no wonder that the list of fastest-growing global brands is
increasingly dominated by platform businesses. In fact, in 2014, three of the
world’s five largest firms as measured by market capitalization—Apple,
Google, and Microsoft—all run platform business models. One of these,
Google, debuted as a public company in 2004. Another, Apple, nearly went
bankrupt a few years earlier—when it still ran a closed business model
rather than a platform. Now incumbent giants from Walmart and Nike to
John Deere, GE, and Disney are all scrambling to adopt the platform
approach to their businesses. To varying degrees, platform businesses are
claiming a large and growing share of the economy in every region of the
world (see Figure 1.1).


FIGURE 1.1. North America has more platform firms creating value, as measured by market
capitalization, than any other region in the world. Platform firms in China, with its large,
homogeneous market, are growing fast. Platform businesses in Europe, with its more
fragmented market, have less than a quarter the value of such firms in North America, and the
developing regions of Africa and Latin America are not far behind. Source: Peter Evans, Center
for Global Enterprise.
The disruptive power of platforms is also transforming the lives of
individuals in ways that would have been impossible a few years ago:
•    Joe Fairless was a New York advertising executive who dabbled in real estate investing on the
side. Teaching a real estate class on Skillshare, an education platform, introduced Joe to
hundreds of eager young investors and helped him hone his speaking skills—enabling him to
raise over a million dollars to launch his own investment firm and quit the ad business.
•    Taran Matharu was a twenty-two-year-old business student living in London when he decided
to write a book during the annual Novel Writing Month challenge. He posted excerpts on
Wattpad, a story-sharing platform, and quickly attracted over five million readers. His first
novel, Summoner, is being published in Britain and ten other countries, and Matharu is a full-
time author.
•    James Erwin was a software manual writer in Des Moines, Iowa, as well as a history buff.
Browsing the community-based news platform Reddit one afternoon, he spotted a question
about what would happen if a battalion of modern U.S. Marines took on the ancient Roman
Empire. His typed response attracted eager followers and, within weeks, a movie deal. Erwin
has now left his job to devote himself to screenwriting.
Teacher or lawyer, photographer or scientist, plumber or therapist—no
matter what kind of work you do, the chances are good that a platform is
poised to transform it, creating new opportunities and, in some cases,
daunting new challenges.
The platform revolution is here—and the world it is ushering in is here to
stay. But what exactly is a platform? What makes it unique? And what


accounts for its remarkable transformative power? These are questions
we’ll begin to explore in the remainder of this chapter.
Let’s start with a basic definition. A platform is a business based on
enabling value-creating interactions between external producers and
consumers. The platform provides an open, participative infrastructure for
these interactions and sets governance conditions for them. The platform’s
overarching purpose: to consummate matches among users and facilitate the
exchange of goods, services, or social currency, thereby enabling value
creation for all participants.
Broken down in this way, the workings of platforms may seem simple
enough. Yet today’s platforms, empowered by digital technology that
annihilates barriers of time and space, and employing smart, sophisticated
software tools that connect producers and consumers more precisely,
speedily, and easily than ever before, are producing results that are little
short of miraculous.
THE PLATFORM REVOLUTION
AND THE SHAPE OF CHANGE
To understand the powerful forces that are being unleashed by the explosion
of platform businesses, it helps to think about how value has long been
created and transferred in most markets. The traditional system employed
by most businesses is one we describe as a pipeline. By contrast with a
platform, a pipeline is a business that employs a step-by-step arrangement
for creating and transferring value, with producers at one end and
consumers at the other. A firm first designs a product or service. Then the
product is manufactured and offered for sale, or a system is put in place to
deliver the service. Finally, a customer shows up and purchases the product
or service. Because of its simple, single-track shape, we may also describe a
pipeline business as a linear value chain.
In recent years, more and more businesses are shifting from the pipeline
structure to the platform structure. In this shift, the simple pipeline
arrangement is transformed into a complex relationship in which producers,
consumers, and the platform itself enter into a variable set of relationships.
In the world of platforms, different types of users—some of them
producers, some of them consumers, and some of them people who may


play both roles at various times—connect and conduct interactions with one
another using the resources provided by the platform. In the process, they
exchange, consume, and sometimes cocreate something of value. Rather
than flowing in a straight line from producers to consumers, value may be
created, changed, exchanged, and consumed in a variety of ways and
places, all made possible by the connections that the platform facilitates.
Every platform operates differently, attracts different kinds of users, and
creates different forms of value, but these same basic elements can be
recognized in every platform business. In the mobile phone industry, for
example, there are currently two major platforms—Apple’s iOS and the
Google-sponsored Android. Consumers who sign up for one of these
platforms can consume value provided by the platform itself—for example,
the image-making capability provided by the phone’s built-in camera. But
they can also consume value supplied by a set of developers who produce
content for the platform to extend its functionality—for example, the value
provided by an app that users access through Apple’s iPhone. The result is
an exchange of value that is made possible by the platform itself.
In itself, the shift from the traditional linear value chain to the complex
value matrix of a platform may sound reasonably straightforward. But its
implications are staggering. The spread of the platform model into one
industry after another is causing a series of revolutionary changes in almost
every aspect of business. Let’s consider a few of these changes.
Platforms beat pipelines because platforms scale more efficiently by
eliminating gatekeepers. Until recently, most businesses were built around
products, which were designed and made at one end of the pipeline and
delivered to consumers at the other end.* Today, plenty of pipeline-based
businesses still exist—but when platform-based businesses enter the same
marketplace, the platforms virtually always win.
One reason is that pipelines rely on inefficient gatekeepers to manage the
flow of value from the producer to the consumer. In the traditional
publishing industry, editors select a few books and authors from among the
thousands offered to them and hope the ones they choose will prove to be
popular. It’s a time-consuming, labor-intensive process based mainly on
instinct and guesswork. By contrast, Amazon’s Kindle platform allows
anyone to publish a book, relying on real-time consumer feedback to
determine which books will succeed and which will fail. The platform


system can grow to scale more rapidly and efficiently because the
traditional gatekeepers—editors—are replaced by market signals provided
automatically by the entire community of readers.
The elimination of gatekeepers also allows consumers greater freedom to
select products that suit their needs. The traditional model of higher
education forces students and their parents to purchase one-size-fits-all
bundles that include administration, teaching, facilities, research, and much
more. In their role as gatekeepers, universities can require families to buy
the entire package because it is the only way they can get the valuable
certification that a degree offers. However, given the choice, many students
would likely be selective in the services they consume. Once there is an
alternate certification that employers are willing to accept, universities will
find it increasingly challenging to maintain the bundle. Unsurprisingly,
developing such an alternate certification is among the primary goals of
platform education firms such as Coursera.
Consulting and law firms are also in the business of selling bundles.
Firms might be willing to pay high prices for the services of experts. In
order to gain access, they must also purchase the services of relatively
junior staff at high markups. In the future, the most talented lawyers and
consultants might work individually with firms and transact across a
platform that can supply the back office and lower-level services once
provided by a law or consulting firm. Platforms like Upwork are already
making professional services available to prospective employers while
eliminating the bundling effect imposed by traditional gatekeepers.
Platforms beat pipelines because platforms unlock new sources of
value creation and supply. Consider how the hotel industry has
traditionally worked. Growth required hospitality firms like Hilton or
Marriott to add additional rooms to sell through their existing brands using
sophisticated back-office reservation and payments systems. This means
continually scouting the real estate markets for promising territories,
investing in existing properties or building new ones, and spending large
sums to maintain, upgrade, expand, and improve them.
Upstart Airbnb is, in one sense, in the same business as Hilton or
Marriott. Like the hotel giants, it uses refined pricing and booking systems
designed to allow guests to find, reserve, and pay for rooms as they need
them. But Airbnb applies the platform model to the hotel business: Airbnb


doesn’t own any rooms. Instead, it created and maintains the platform that
allows individual participants to provide the rooms directly to consumers.
In return, Airbnb takes a 9–15 percent (average 11 percent) transaction fee
for every rental arranged through the platform.1
One implication is that growth can be much faster for Airbnb or any rival
platform than for a traditional hotel company since growth is no longer
constrained by the ability to deploy capital and manage physical assets. It
may take years for a hotel chain to select and purchase a new piece of real
estate, design and build a new resort, and hire and train staff. By contrast,
Airbnb can increase its “inventory” of properties as quickly as it can sign up
users with spare rooms to rent. As a result, in just a few years, Airbnb has
achieved a scope and value that a traditional hotelier can hope to reach only
after decades of often risky investment and hard work.
In platform markets, the nature of supply changes. Supply now unlocks
spare capacity and harnesses contributions from the community which used
to be only a source of demand. Whereas the leanest traditional businesses
ran on just-in-time inventory, new organizational platforms run on not-
even-mine inventory. If Hertz could deliver a car to an airport just as the
plane arrived, it ran as well as could be expected. Now RelayRides borrows
the car of a departing traveler in order to loan it to an arriving traveler. The
person who used to pay to park an empty car now gets paid, complete with
insurance, to let others use it. Everyone wins except Hertz and the other
traditional car rental companies. TV stations built studios and hired staff to
produce video. YouTube, operating a different business model, has more
viewers than any station, and it uses content produced by the people who
watch it. Everyone wins except the TV networks and movie studios that
once had a near-monopoly on video production. Singapore-based Viki is
challenging the traditional media value chain by using an open community
of translators to add subtitles to Asian movies and soap operas. Viki then
licenses the subtitled videos to distributors in other countries.
Thus, platforms disrupt the traditional competitive landscape by
exposing new supply to the market. Hotels that must cover fixed costs find
themselves competing with firms that have no fixed costs. This works for
the new firms because there is spare capacity that can be brought to market
through the assistance of the platform intermediary. The sharing economy is
built on the idea that many items, such as automobiles, boats, and even
lawnmowers, sit idle most of the time. Before the rise of the platform, it


might have been possible to loan something to a family member, close
friend, or neighbor, but much harder to loan to a stranger. This is because it
would be difficult to trust that your home would be left in good shape
(Airbnb), your car would be returned undamaged (RelayRides), or your
lawnmower would come back (NeighborGoods).
The effort necessary to individually verify credit- and trustworthiness is
an example of the high transaction costs that used to prevent exchange. By
providing default insurance contracts and reputation systems to encourage
good behavior, platforms dramatically lower transaction costs and create
new markets as new producers start producing for the first time.
Platforms beat pipelines by using data-based tools to create
community feedback loops. We’ve seen how the Kindle platform relies on
reactions from the community of readers to determine which books will be
widely read and which will not. Platforms of all kinds rely on similar
feedback loops. Platforms like Airbnb and YouTube use such feedback
loops to compete with traditional hotels and television channels. As these
platforms gather community signals about the quality of content (in the case
of YouTube) or the reputation of service providers (on Airbnb), subsequent
market interactions become increasingly efficient. Feedback from other
consumers makes it easy to find videos or rental properties that are likely to
suit your needs. Products that receive overwhelmingly negative feedback
usually disappear from the platform completely.
By contrast, traditional pipeline firms rely on mechanisms of control—
editors, managers, supervisors—to ensure quality and shape market
interactions. These control mechanisms are costly and inefficient to grow to
scale.
Wikipedia’s success demonstrates that platforms can leverage
community feedback to replace a traditional supply chain. Reference works
like the venerable Encyclopaedia Britannica were once created through
costly, complex, difficult-to-manage centralized supply chains of academic
experts, writers, and editors. Using the platform model, Wikipedia has built
an information source comparable to Britannica in quality and scope by
leveraging a community of external contributors to grow and police the
content.


Platforms invert the firm. Because the bulk of a platform’s value is
created by its community of users, the platform business must shift its focus
from internal activities to external activities. In the process, the firm inverts
—it turns inside out, with functions from marketing to information
technology to operations to strategy all increasingly centering on people,
resources, and functions that exist outside the business, complementing or
replacing those that exist inside a traditional business.
The language used to describe this process of inversion differs from one
business function to another. In marketing, for example, Rob Cain, the CIO
of Coca-Cola, notes that the key terms used to define systems of message
delivery have shifted from broadcast to segmentation, and then to virality
and social influence; from push to pull; and from outbound to inbound. All
these terminological changes reflect the fact that marketing messages once
disseminated by company employees and agents now spread via consumers
themselves—a reflection of the inverted nature of communication in a
world dominated by platforms.2
Similarly, information technology systems have evolved from back-
office enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems to front-office consumer
relationship management (CRM) systems and, most recently, to out-of-the-
office experiments using social media and big data—another shift from
inward focus to outward focus. Finance is shifting its focus from
shareholder value and discounted cash flows of assets owned by the firm to
stakeholder value and the role of interactions that take place outside the
firm.
Operations management has likewise shifted from optimizing the firm’s
inventory and supply chain systems to managing external assets the firm
doesn’t directly control. Tom Goodwin, senior vice president of strategy for
Havas Media, describes this change succinctly: “Uber, the world’s largest
taxi company, owns no vehicles. Facebook, the world’s most popular media
owner, creates no content. Alibaba, the most valuable retailer, has no
inventory. And Airbnb, the world’s largest accommodation provider, owns
no real estate.”3 The community provides these resources.
Strategy has moved from controlling unique internal resources and
erecting competitive barriers to orchestrating external resources and
engaging vibrant communities. And innovation is no longer the province of
in-house experts and research and development labs, but is produced


through crowdsourcing and the contribution of ideas by independent
participants in the platform.
External resources don’t completely replace internal resources—more
often they serve as a complement. But platform firms emphasize ecosystem
governance more than product optimization, and persuasion of outside
partners more than control of internal employees.
THE PLATFORM REVOLUTION:
HOW WILL YOU RESPOND?
As you’ll see in this book, the rise of the platform is driving transformations
in almost every corner of the economy and of society as a whole, from
education, media, and the professions to health care, energy, and
government. Figure 1.2 is a necessarily incomplete table of some notable
current arenas of platform activity, along with examples of some of the
platform enterprises at work in those industry sectors. Note that platforms
are continually evolving, that many platforms serve more than one purpose,
and that new platform companies are appearing every day. Many of the
businesses listed here are likely to be familiar to you; some may not be. The
stories behind a number of them will be recounted in this book. Our goal
here is to provide not a comprehensive or systematic overview but simply a
sketch which we hope will convey the growing scope and importance of
platform companies on the world stage.
 
INDUSTRY
EXAMPLES
Agriculture
John Deere, Intuit Fasal
Communication and
Networking
LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, Tinder,
Instagram, Snapchat, WeChat
Consumer Goods
Philips, McCormick Foods FlavorPrint
Education
Udemy, Skillshare, Coursera, edX, Duolingo


Energy and Heavy
Industry
Nest, Tesla Powerwall, General Electric,
EnerNOC
Finance
Bitcoin, Lending Club, Kickstarter
Health Care
Cohealo, SimplyInsured, Kaiser Permanente
Gaming
Xbox, Nintendo, PlayStation
Labor and Professional
Services
Upwork, Fiverr, 99designs, Sittercity,
LegalZoom
Local Services
Yelp, Foursquare, Groupon, Angie’s List
Logistics and Delivery
Munchery, Foodpanda, Haier Group
Media
Medium, Viki, YouTube, Wikipedia,
Huffington Post, Kindle Publishing
Operating Systems
iOS, Android, MacOS, Microsoft Windows
Retail
Amazon, Alibaba, Walgreens, Burberry,
Shopkick
Transportation
Uber, Waze, BlaBlaCar, GrabTaxi, Ola Cabs
Travel
Airbnb, TripAdvisor
 
FIGURE 1.2. Some of the industry sectors currently being transformed by platform businesses,
along with examples of platform companies working in those arenas.
Figure 1.2 also suggests the remarkable diversity of platform businesses.
At a glance, there doesn’t seem to be much that companies like Twitter and
General Electric, Xbox and TripAdvisor, Instagram and John Deere all have
in common. Yet all are operating businesses that share the fundamental
platform DNA—they all exist to create matches and facilitate interactions


among producers and consumers, whatever the goods being exchanged may
be.
As a result of the rise of the platform, almost all the traditional business
management 
practices—including 
strategy, 
operations, 
marketing,
production, research and development, and human resources—are in a state
of upheaval. We are in a disequilibrium time that affects every company and
individual business leader. The coming of the world of platforms is a major
reason why. 
Consequently, platform expertise has now become an essential attribute
for business leadership. Yet most people—including many business leaders
—are still struggling to come to grips with the rise of the platform.
In the chapters that follow, we’ll provide a comprehensive guide to the
platform business model and its growing impact on practically every sector
of the economy. The insights we’ll share are based on extensive research as
well as our experience as consultants working with platform businesses
large and small, in a wide range of industries and nonprofit arenas in
countries around the world.
You’ll learn precisely how platforms work, the varying structures they
assume, the numerous forms of value they create, and the almost limitless
range of users they serve. If you’re interested in starting your own platform
business—or in modifying an existing organization to take advantage of the
power of the platform—this book will serve as a manual to help you
navigate the complexities of designing, launching, managing, governing,
and growing a successful platform. And if running a platform business isn’t
for you, you’ll learn how the growing impact of platforms is likely to affect
you as a businessperson, a professional, a consumer, and a citizen—and
how you can participate happily (and profitably) in an economy
increasingly dominated by platforms of every type.
No matter what role you play in today’s rapidly changing economy, now
is the time for you to master the principles of the world of platforms. Turn
the page, and we’ll help you do just that.


TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER ONE
    A platform’s overarching purpose is to consummate matches among users and facilitate the
exchange of goods, services, or social currency, thereby enabling value creation for all
participants.
    Because platform businesses create value using resources they don’t own or control, they
can grow much faster than traditional businesses.
    Platforms derive much of their value from the communities they serve.
    Platforms invert companies, blurring business boundaries and transforming firms’
traditional inward focus into an outward focus.
    The rise of the platform has already transformed many major industries—and more,
equally important transformations are on the way.
 
* For simplicity’s sake, we refer here to both products and services as “products.” The main
difference between the two is that products are tangible, physical objects, while services are
intangible and delivered through activities. In traditional businesses, both are delivered through linear
value chains—pipelines—which justifies our lumping them together in this discussion.
OceanofPDF.com


2
NETWORK EFFECTS
The Power of the Platform
For several weeks in June 2014, a very public debate over a seemingly
arcane topic raged between a famous finance professor at New York
University and a renowned venture capitalist in
Silicon Valley.
Aswath Damodaran—a chaired professor at NYU, author of textbooks
on corporate finance and valuation, and the 2013 recipient of the prestigious
Herbert Simon Award—launched the debate when he published an article
estimating the value of Uber, the platform company whose smartphone app
connects riders with drivers. Earlier that month, investors had ponied up
$1.2 billion in financial capital for Uber, receiving in return a share of the
company that suggested the overall value of the business was around $17
billion. Damodaran called this “a mind-boggling sum for a young company
with only a few hundred million in revenue.”1 He implied that the idea that
Uber was worth this much—or even more, as some were claiming—was yet
another mark of Silicon Valley hubris.
Damodaran’s judgment was based on the classic tools of finance. He
estimated the size of the global taxi market, Uber’s prospective market
share, and the revenues this was likely to yield. Then he used risk-adjusted
cash flows to come up with a company valuation of $5.9 billion. With
admirable forthrightness, he even posted his spreadsheet online so others
could examine and test his assumptions.
Bill Gurley, a partner at Benchmark Capital and one of Uber’s Silicon
Valley investors, took up the challenge. A venture capitalist famous for
having been among the first to spot such technology skyrockets as
