# 2. Network Effects: The Power of the Platform

OpenTable, Zillow, and eBay, Gurley argued that the $17 billion valuation
was likely an underestimate, and that Damodaran’s figure could be short by
a factor of 25.2 Gurley questioned Damodaran’s assumptions about both the
total market size and Uber’s potential market share, basing his calculations
on economist W. Brian Arthur’s analysis of network effects.3
In classic platform style, Uber performs a matching service. It helps
riders find drivers, and vice versa. As drivers sign on and coverage density
rises within a city, a number of striking growth dynamics are set in motion.
Riders tell their friends about the service; some even start driving
themselves in their spare time. Wait time falls for riders, and downtime falls
for drivers. Less downtime means that a driver can make the same amount
of money even if fares are lower, because he has more riders during the
same number of working hours. Thus, less downtime means that Uber can
cut fares and stimulate even more demand, which creates a virtuous cycle
that increases coverage density still further.
In his article, Gurley reproduced a graphic from another investor that
illustrates how this virtuous cycle works—a napkin sketch created by David
Sacks, co-founder of Yammer and veteran of PayPal (Figure 2.1).
Sacks’s napkin sketch captures a classic example of network effects. It
shows how the value of Uber to each of its participants grows the more
people use it—which attracts still more users, thereby increasing the value
of the service even more.
Network effects refers to the impact that the number of users of a
platform has on the value created for each user. Positive network effects
refers to the ability of a large, well-managed platform community to
produce significant value for each user of the platform. Negative network
effects refers to the possibility that the growth in numbers of a poorly-
managed platform community can reduce the value produced for each user.
As we’ll see, positive network effects are the main source of value
creation and competitive advantage in a platform business. However,
network effects can also be negative, and in this chapter we’ll explain how
and why negative network effects arise and what platform business
managers can do about them. But understanding value creation via positive
network effects is the essential first step.


FIGURE 2.1. David Sacks’s napkin sketch of Uber’s virtuous cycle. Reprinted by permission.
Gurley’s data showed that, by mid-2014, network effects were already
beginning to drive Uber’s growth. When Travis Kalanick, CEO of Uber,
sought seed funding in 2009, the size of the taxi and limousine market in
Uber’s hometown of San Francisco was $120 million. Based on Uber’s own
data, the market in 2014 appeared already to be three times as large and still
growing. This threefold multiple would, all by itself, justify increasing
Damodaran’s $5.9 billion valuation to the $17 billion value imputed by
investors. Unaware of this insider information, Damodaran hadn’t adjusted
his equations for network effects—as he graciously conceded in an elegant
and well-reasoned response.
DEMAND ECONOMIES OF SCALE
The network effect represents a new economic phenomenon, driven by
technological innovation. In the twentieth-century industrial era, giant
monopolies were created based on supply economies of scale. These are


driven by production efficiencies, which reduce the unit cost of creating a
product or service as the quantities produced increase. These supply
economies of scale can give the largest company in an industrial economy a
cost advantage that is extremely difficult for competitors to overcome.
Consider some of the giant businesses that grew up during the industrial
era. In steel production, the British Bessemer process of blowing air
through molten slag removed impurities and cut costs of production from
£40 to £7 per ton. Operating eighteen five-ton Bessemer blast furnaces,
Barrow Hematite Steel Company became the largest steel mill in the world
at the turn of the twentieth century. Similarly, the German Haber-Bosch
process of producing fertilizer from nitrogen in air, which is used in the
production of half of all foodstuffs consumed today, was one factor
contributing to rise of giant BASF, which is still the world’s largest
chemical company. And American Thomas Edison’s inventions in lighting
and cheap power generation gave rise to General Electric, while Henry
Ford’s use of mass production accelerated the rise of Ford Motor Company.
The bigger the business, the cheaper the costs of production, marketing, and
distribution—a positive spiral that helped companies grow steadily larger
and more profitable (until the process was derailed by government
intervention or disruptive technological change that rendered the old
economies obsolete).
In the twenty-first-century Internet era, comparable monopolies are
being created by demand economies of scale (a term used by the two
experts largely responsible for popularizing the concept of network effects,
Hal Varian, the chief economist at Google, and business professor Carl
Shapiro).4 By contrast with supply economies of scale, demand economies
of scale take advantage of technological improvements on the demand side
—the other half of the profit equation from the production side. Demand
economies of scale are driven by efficiencies in social networks, demand
aggregation, app development, and other phenomena that make bigger
networks more valuable to their users. They can give the largest company in
a platform market a network effect advantage that is extremely difficult for
competitors to overcome.
Demand economies of scale are the fundamental source of positive
network effects, and thus the chief drivers of economic value in today’s
world. This is not to say that supply economies of scale no longer matter; of


course they do. But demand economies of scale, in the form of network
effects, have become the most important differentiating factor.
Metcalfe’s law is a useful way of encapsulating how network effects
create value for those who participate in a network as well as for those who
own or manage the network. Robert Metcalfe, co-inventor of Ethernet and
founder of 3Com, pointed out that the value of a telephone network grows
nonlinearly as the number of subscribers to the network increases, making
more connections among subscribers possible.
When there’s only one node in a network, no connections are possible.
An MIT professor we know likes to joke that the prize for “greatest
salesperson in history” should go to whoever sold the first telephone.
Arguably, it had zero value, because when there’s only one telephone in the
world, you can’t call anyone. But as more people buy telephones, the value
grows. With two telephones, one connection is possible. With four
telephones, six. With twelve, sixty-six. And with 100 telephones, there are
4,950 connections. This is known as nonlinear or convex growth, and it is
precisely the characteristic growth pattern seen in companies like Microsoft
in the 1990s, Apple and Facebook today, and Uber tomorrow. (Working in
reverse, it explains the convex collapse of Blackberry in the 2000s: as users
began to flee the Blackberry platform, the loss of network nodes caused the
value of the network itself to plummet, encouraging still more people to
abandon Blackberry for other devices.)
Major economic consequences follow from this pattern. Growth via
network effects leads to market expansion. New buyers enter the market,
attracted by the growing number of friends who are part of the network. If
prices also fall—as they often do when technology matures and production
quantities increase—then network effects work together with more
attractive pricing to drive massive market adoption.
TWO-SIDED NETWORK EFFECTS
David Sacks’s napkin sketch suggests a second dynamic at work in the
growth of Uber, one we refer to as a two-sided network effect.5 In
Metcalfe’s telephone example, phone users attract more phone users. But in
the case of Uber, two sides of the market are involved: riders attract drivers,
and drivers attract riders. A similar dynamic can be seen in many other


platform businesses. In the case of Google’s Android, app developers attract
consumers, and consumers attract app developers. On Upwork (formerly
known as Elance-oDesk), job listings attract freelancers, and freelancers
attract job listings. On PayPal, sellers attract buyers, and buyers attract
sellers. And on Airbnb, hosts attract guests, and guests attract hosts. All of
these businesses attract two-sided network effects with positive feedback.
The importance of these effects for stimulating network growth is so
great that platform businesses will often spend money to attract participants
to one side of the market. They know that, if they can get one side to join
the platform, the other side will follow. Two-sided network effects with
positive feedback explain how Uber can afford to use millions of dollars of
money from Bill Gurley and other investors to give away free rides worth
$30 each. Uber’s coupons buy market share in a way that attracts a virtuous
cycle of drivers and riders who will later pay full price to participate in the
network.
A familiar (non-tech) example is a local bar that holds a weekly Ladies’
Night, when discounted drinks are offered to female customers. When the
women show up, the men appear—and they’re happy to buy their own
drinks at full price. Thus, in a two-sided market, it can sometimes make
economic sense to accept financial losses—not just temporarily, but
permanently!—in Market A if growing that market enables growth in a
related Market B. The only proviso is that the profits to be earned in Market
B must outweigh the losses incurred in Market A.
NETWORK EFFECTS VERSUS
OTHER GROWTH-BUILDING TOOLS
It’s important to distinguish network effects from other familiar market-
building tools, such as price effects and brand effects. Misunderstanding of
these distinctions is a source of the current confusion over how to value
platform business models, and contributed to the dot-com boom and bust of
1997–2000.
During the dot-com boom, investors in startups like eToys, Webvan, and
FreePC regarded market share as practically the only significant metric of
business success. Captivated by slogans like “Get big fast” and “Get large
or get lost,” they urged companies to spend lavishly to lure customers in


hopes of achieving an insurmountable market share advantage. The
companies responded: for example, via discounting and couponing, they
created price effects. Attracting customers through extraordinarily low
pricing—as low as zero in some cases—is a foolproof way of buying
market share, at least temporarily. Books like the bestselling Free: The
Future of a Radical Price, published in 2009 by Chris Anderson, then the
editor-in-chief of Wired magazine, preached the gospel of the giveaway,
positing a steady climb from “free” to “premium” to “freemium” (free +
premium) pricing of the product or service.
The problem is that price effects are evanescent. They disappear the
moment the discounts end or another firm offers a better price. Typically,
only 1–2 percent of customers convert from free to paying. Thus, as David
Cohen, CEO and founder of the venture incubator Techstars, says, you need
to reach millions of customers before the giveaway model becomes
profitable.6 Freemium models also create freeloaders than can be hard to
monetize (that is, to profit from), as FreePC discovered in 1999 when it
gave away free Pentium PCs in exchange for viewing ads and the prospect
of online sales.7
Brand effects are stickier. They arise when people come to associate a
particular brand with quality. But brand effects, like price effects, are often
difficult to sustain. They can also be extremely expensive. EToys spent
millions to establish a brand in hopes of competing with Amazon and
Toys“R”Us. Kozmo, an online company that promised free one-hour
delivery of food, books, coffee, and other basic goods in major U.S. cities,
hired actress Whoopi Goldberg as a spokesperson and paid her in stock,
only to have the business collapse soon thereafter. In January 2000—the
peak before the dot-com crash—nineteen startups bought Super Bowl ads,
spending over $2 million each in order to build brand recognition. A decade
or so later, eight of them no longer existed.8
Price effects and brand effects have their place in a startup’s growth
strategy. But only network effects create the virtuous cycle we described
above, which leads to the building of a longlasting network of users—a
phenomenon we called lock-in.
Another growth-building tool that’s easy to confuse with network effects
is virality. Derived from the expression “going viral,” virality is the
tendency of an idea or brand to be circulated rapidly and widely from one
Internet user to another.


Virality can attract people to a network—for example, when fans of an
irresistibly cute, funny, or startling video persuade their friends to visit
YouTube. But network effects keep them there. Virality is about attracting
people who are off the platform and enticing them to join it, while network
effects are about increasing value among people on-platform.
When the dot-com boom turned to bust in 2000, two of the authors of
this book (Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne) were recent PhD
graduates from MIT. We watched the cycle with fascination, observing as
smart investment firms like Benchmark and Sequoia made both lucrative
hits and expensive misses. (Benchmark Capital, the venture capital firm that
is now getting it right in the case of Uber, invested in Webvan, which was
listed by CNET as one of the biggest dot-com disasters in history,9 as did
Sequoia Capital, which nonetheless got it right with Apple, Google, and
PayPal.)
Curious about what separated the successful companies from those that
failed, we examined dozens of cases and found that the failures mostly
relied on price or brand effects. By contrast, the successes hit on an idea
that really worked—driving traffic from one user group in order to drive
profits from another user group. We described our findings in a paper that
analyzed the mathematics of two-sided network effects.10 Today, such
successful platform businesses as eBay, Uber, Airbnb, Upwork, PayPal, and
Google exhibit this model extensively.11
SCALING NETWORK EFFECTS: FRICTIONLESS ENTRY
AND OTHER SCALABILITY TOOLS
As you can see, network effects depend on the size of the network.12 So one
important corollary is that effective platforms are able to expand in size
quickly and easily, thereby scaling the value that derives from network
effects.
It’s hard to remember now, but there was a time when Yahoo was a more
popular portal to the Internet than Google. The story of how Google
overtook Yahoo—despite the latter’s four-year head start—vividly
illustrates the importance of being able to scale both sides of a network.


Yahoo started out as a human-edited database. It classified web pages
using a tree structure of subcategories within categories the same way
librarians organize books or biologists organize plant and animal species.
This worked well for a time. But during the 1990s and early 2000s, growth
in Internet users and web page producers increased exponentially—and it
soon became apparent that employee-edited hierarchical databases do not
scale well.13 One of the authors recalls submitting web pages to Yahoo, then
waiting days and weeks until the results showed up in master lists. (No
wonder frustrated users began claiming that Yahoo stood for “Yet Another
Hierarchical Officious Oracle!”)
By contrast, Google found a way to serve web page searchers by
harnessing the work of web page producers. Google’s page rank algorithm
considers the extent to which web pages link to one another. To attract page
viewers, page producers already consider what viewers want. More links
from more important pages mean higher-priority search results. Therefore,
Google’s algorithm effectively matches both sides of the network. Not only
do algorithms scale better than employees, but using web links as the key
sorting tool shifted the focus from inside the firm to outside the firm, where
the choices of the crowd could control the action—a far more scalable
model than Yahoo’s.
As the story of Google suggests, networks that permit frictionless entry
are able to grow organically almost without bound. Frictionless entry is the
ability of users to quickly and easily join a platform and begin participating
in the value creation that the platform facilitates. Frictionless entry is a key
factor in enabling a platform to grow rapidly.
Threadless is a T-shirt company founded by people with expertise in
information technology services, web design, and consulting. Their
business model involves holding weekly design contests open to outside
participants, printing only T-shirts with the most popular designs, and
selling them to their large and growing customer base. Threadless doesn’t
need to hire artistic talent, since skilled designers compete for prizes and
prestige. It doesn’t need to do marketing, since eager designers contact their
friends to solicit votes and sales. It doesn’t need to forecast sales, since
voting customers have already announced what numbers they will buy. By
outsourcing production, Threadless can also minimize its handling and
inventory costs. Thanks to this almost frictionless model, Threadless can
scale rapidly and easily, with minimal structural restrictions.


Threadless’s business model arose by accident. The founders originally
thought they were in the web services business, selling consulting to firms
who needed websites. But selling web consulting didn’t scale: each project
had to be negotiated individually, each project required dedicated staff, and
after completion, no project could be resold without modification. The
company founders launched the T-shirt contest website as a side project to
illustrate their capabilities. It was simply an online copy of an offline
contest that one of the founders had entered. When this side venture
exploded in popularity, its enormous scalability advantages became
obvious.
Scaling a network requires that both sides of the market grow
proportionally. For example, one Uber driver can serve an average of about
three Uber riders an hour. It would make no sense for Uber to have one
rider and 1,000 drivers—nor 1,000 riders and one driver. Airbnb faces a
parallel issue in scaling both hosts and guests. If one side becomes
disproportionally large, coupons or discounting to attract more participants
to the other side becomes good business.
In some cases, the growth of a platform can be facilitated by an effect we
call side switching. This occurs when users of one side of the platform join
the opposite side—for example, when those who consume goods or services
begin to produce goods and services for others to consume. On some
platforms, users engage in side switching easily and repeatedly.
Uber, for example, recruits new drivers from among its rider pool, just as
Airbnb recruits new hosts from among its guest pool. A scalable business
model, frictionless entry, and side switching all serve to lubricate network
effects.
NEGATIVE NETWORK EFFECTS:
THEIR CAUSE AND CURE
So far, we’ve been focusing on positive network effects. But the very
qualities that lead platform networks to grow so quickly may also lead them
to fail quickly. The growth of a network can produce negative network
effects that drive away participants, even leading to the death of a platform
business.


One negative network effect occurs when the growth in numbers that
enables more matches between producers and consumers also leads to
increasing difficulty, or impossibility, in finding the best match. To avoid
this dilemma, frictionless entry must be balanced through effective
curation. This is the process by which a platform filters, controls, and limits
the access of users to the platform, the activities they participate in, and the
connections they form with other users. When the quality of a platform is
effectively curated, users find it easy to make matches that produce
significant value for them; when curation is nonexistent or poorly handled,
users find it difficult to identify potentially valuable matches amid a flood
of worthless matches.
Dating platform OkCupid discovered that scale can cause network
collapse if not carefully managed. According to CEO Christian Rudder,
when you get lots of users on a dating website, the natural tendency of men
on the platform is to approach the most beautiful women. Scaling male
behavior creates the problem that most of the men who approach a highly
attractive woman will be markedly less attractive—she is “out of their
league,” as the saying goes. When these B-level males (our description, not
Rudder’s!) bombard the A-level females with requests for a date, no one is
happy. The beautiful females are unhappy and likely to abandon the site
because of all the unfiltered attention, while the B-level males are unhappy
because the women of their choice never respond. And the few highly
attractive men who might have been a good match for the most attractive
women are unhappy because the women they want have left the platform.14
Once this happens, the men at all attractiveness levels converge on the
women in the second most beautiful tier, and the whole process repeats.
Network effects reverse, and the business model breaks down.
To solve this problem, OkCupid implemented a curation strategy
involving multiple levels of network matching. The first level addresses the
obvious issue of matching compatible interests. Do both parties smoke? Do
both parties like tattoos and horror movies? Do both parties believe in
dinosaurs? This level eliminates many clearly unsuitable matches and
reduces the number of participants in the process.
The second matching level addresses the question of comparative
attractiveness—the “in her league” question. If OkCupid’s algorithm
determines, based on reactions by other users, that Joe is significantly less
attractive than Mary (for example), then Joe’s routine search for matches


will not turn up Mary’s picture. (She might show up in a highly targeted
search, but not otherwise.) Instead, Joe will be presented with a selection of
women thought to be comparable to him in attractiveness. The result is win-
win. Mary is happier because the platform helps her find what she’s looking
for while protecting her from an onslaught. And Joe is happier, too, because
women are returning his messages when previously he got the cold
shoulder.
Of course, the use of this algorithm means that, if a guy only sees
pictures of average-looking women when conducting an OkCupid search,
he probably doesn’t have the movie-star good looks he thought he had. But
his chances for a successful match have greatly increased, which should
lead in the long run to a higher level of satisfaction.
Skillful curation like that practiced by OkCupid greatly reduces negative
network effects. At the same time, it increases and leverages the benefits of
positive network effects. As the number of participants in the network
grows, the volume of information about them increases. As any statistician
will tell you, having more data to work with generally increases the
accuracy and value of the inferences you can draw from the data. Thus, the
larger your network grows, the better your curation can become—a
phenomenon we refer to as data-driven network effects. Of course, this is
dependent on having well-designed curation tools that are continually
tested, updated, and improved.
By contrast, poor curation leads to greater noise, which makes the
platform less useful and may even cause it to unravel. Such a negative
feedback loop following the exponential growth of Chatroulette quickly led
to an equally dramatic collapse.
Chatroulette pairs random people from around the world for webcam
conversations. People can leave a conversation at any time by initiating a
new connection or simply by quitting. The strangely addictive site grew
from twenty people at launch in late 2009 to more than 1.5 million users six
months later.
Initially, Chatroulette had no registration requirement and no controls of
any kind, leading to what became known as the Naked Hairy Men problem.
As the network grew without policing, a growing number of naked hairy
men showed up to chat, leading many of the non-naked, non-hairy others to
abandon the network. As legitimate users fled, the noise level on the
platform increased, setting a negative feedback loop in motion.


Chatroulette realized it needed to curate access in a way that scales with
platform growth. The platform now lets users filter other users in addition
to using algorithms to screen callers with undesirable images, and it is
growing again—though more slowly than during its initial phase.
Every successful platform faces the problem of matching content and
connections at scale—which means that, at some point in its growth, every
successful platform must address the challenge of effective curation. We’ll
return to the issue of curation in later chapters.
FOUR KINDS OF NETWORK EFFECTS
A two-sided network (i.e., one with both producers and consumers) has four
kinds of network effects. It’s important to understand and consider all four
when designing and managing a platform.
In a two-sided market, same-side effects are network effects created by
the impact of users from one side of the market on other users from the
same side of the market—the effects that consumers have on other
consumers and those that producers have on other producers. By contrast,
cross-side effects are network effects created by the impact of users from
one side of the market on users from the other side of the market—the
effects that consumers have on producers and those that producers have on
consumers. Both same-side effects and cross-side effects can be positive or
negative, depending on the design of the system and the rules put in place.
Here’s how these four types of network effects work.
The first category, positive same-side effects, includes the positive
benefits received by users when the number of users of the same kind
increases—for example, the effect that arose as the number of subscribers to
the Bell Telephone network grew. The more of your friends and neighbors
who were accessible on “the Bell,” the greater the value you received from
your Bell membership. Today, a comparable positive effect on the
consumer-to-consumer side can be seen with a gaming platform like the
Xbox MMOG: the more fellow gamers you encounter on the platform, the
greater the fun you experience when using it.
Positive same-side effects can also be found on the producer side. For
example, consider Adobe’s all-but-universal image production and sharing
platform. The more people who are creating and sharing images using the


PDF platform, the greater the benefit you get from using the same platform
for your own image production needs.
However, not all same-side effects are positive. Sometimes there is a
downside to the numbers growth on one side of a platform. This is called a
negative same-side effect. For example, consider the information
technology platform Covisint, which connects businesses that are interested
in developing cloud-based networking tools with service providers. As the
number of competing suppliers on the Covisint platform grows, customers
are attracted to the platform, which makes the suppliers happy. But when
the list of suppliers grows too great, it becomes more difficult for
appropriate providers and customers to find one another.
Cross-side effects arise when either consumers or producers gain or lose
based on the number of users on the opposite side of the platform. Positive
cross-side effects occur when users benefit from an increase in the number
of participants on the other side of the market. Think about a payment
mechanism like Visa: when more merchants (producers) agree to accept the
Visa card, the flexibility and convenience of the shopping experience
increases for shoppers (consumers), creating a positive cross-side effect.
The same effect works in the opposite direction, of course; more Visa
cardholders lead to more potential customers for merchants. In a similar
way, when the number of app developers for Windows grows, the versatility
and power of the operating system increases for users; and when the
number of Windows users grows, so do the potential benefits (financial and
otherwise) for app developers. Positive cross-side effects produce win-win
results.
Of course, cross-side effects are not necessarily symmetrical. On
OkCupid, women attract men more than men attract women. On Uber, a
single driver is more critical to growth than a single rider. On Android, a
single developer’s app attracts users more than a single user attracts
developer apps. On Twitter, the vast majority of people read, while a
minority tweet. On question-and-answer networks like Quora, the vast
majority asks questions, while a minority answers them.15
Again, however, there is the dark side to consider—the situation in
which negative cross-side effects arise. Think about a platform that
facilitates the sharing of digital media—music, text, images, videos, and the
like. In most circumstances, a growing number of producers (music
companies, for example) leads to positive benefits for consumers, but it can


also lead to growing complexity and expense—for example, too many
varying digital rights management forms to read and accept. When this
happens, the cross-side effects flip from positive to negative, leading
consumers to abandon the platform or at least reduce their usage. In a
similar way, when the proliferation of messages from competing merchants
on a platform site leads to unpleasant advertising clutter, the positive impact
of expanding producer choice may be transformed into a negative cross-
side effect that turns off consumers and damages the platform’s value.
We can foresee the arrival of growing pains at Uber as a result of
increasing negative cross-side effects. If Uber attracts too many drivers
relative to the number of riders, driver downtimes will go up; if Uber
attracts too many riders relative to drivers, rider wait times will go up (see
Figure 2.2, in which the resulting feedback loops have been inserted).
FIGURE 2.2. David Sacks’s napkin sketch of Uber, with negative feedback loops inserted.
In fact, this is happening already. As Uber reaches saturation within a
given market, too many drivers conflict with one another, increasing
downtimes and causing some drivers to abandon the market. The more


complete depiction of Uber’s growth spiral in Figure 2.2 highlights the fact
that a firm in a two-sided market must manage all four network effects.
Good platform husbandry seeks to reinforce positive network effects,
creating and strengthening as many positive feedback loops as possible.
This is another topic we’ll return to in later chapters, where we’ll offer
specific advice about how to manage these challenges effectively.
STRUCTURAL CHANGE: NETWORK EFFECTS TURN
FIRMS INSIDE OUT
As we’ve seen, in the industrial era, giant companies relied on supply-side
economies of scale. By contrast, most Internet era giants rely on demand-
side economies of scale. Firms such as Airbnb, Uber, Dropbox, Threadless,
Upwork, Google, and Facebook are not valuable because of their cost
structures: the capital they employ, the machinery they run, or the human
resources they command. They are valuable because of the communities
that participate in their platforms. The reason Instagram sold for $1 billion
is not its thirteen employees; the reason WhatsApp sold for $19 billion
wasn’t its fifty employees. The reasons were the same: the network effects
both organizations had created.
Standard accounting practices might not factor the value of communities
into the value of a firm, but stock markets do. Little by little, the
accountants are catching up. A team of experts collaborating with the
consulting and accounting firm of Deloitte published research that sorts
companies into four broad categories based on their chief economic
activity: asset builders, service providers, technology creators, and network
orchestrators. Asset builders develop physical assets that they use to deliver
physical goods; companies like Ford and Walmart are examples. Service
providers employ workers who provide services to customers; companies
like UnitedHealthcare and Accenture are examples. Technology creators
develop and sell forms of intellectual property, such as software and
biotechnology; Microsoft and Amgen are examples. And network
orchestrators develop networks in which people and companies create value
together—in effect, platform businesses. The research suggests that, of the
four, network orchestrators are by far the most efficient value creators. On
average, they enjoy a market multiplier (based on the relationship between


a firm’s market valuation and its price-to-earnings ratio) of 8.2, as
compared with 4.8 for technology creators, 2.6 for service providers, and
2.0 for asset builders.16 It’s only a slight simplification to say that that
quantitative difference represents the value produced by network effects.
Furthermore, where network effects are present, industries operate by
different rules.17 One reason is that it is far easier to scale network effects
outside a firm than inside it—since there are always many more people
outside a firm than inside it. Thus, where network effects are present, the
focus of organizational attention must shift from inside to outside. The firm
inverts; it turns inside out. The management of human resources shifts from
employees to crowds.18 Innovation shifts from in-house R & D to open
innovation.19 The primary venue for activities in which value is created for
participants shifts from an internal production department to a collection of
external producers and consumers—which means that management of
externalities becomes a key leadership skill. Growth comes not from
horizontal integration and vertical integration but from functional
integration and network orchestration. The focus on processes such as
finance and accounting shifts from cash flows and assets you can own to
communities and assets you can influence. And while platform businesses
themselves are often extraordinarily profitable, the chief locus of wealth
creation is now outside rather than inside the organization.
Network effects are creating the giants of the twenty-first century.
Google and Facebook each touch more than one-seventh of the world’s
population. In the world of network effects, ecosystems of users are the new
source of competitive advantage and market dominance.


TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER TWO
    Whereas giant industrial-era firms were made possible by supply economies of scale,
today’s giants are made possible by demand economies of scale—expressed as network
effects.
    Network effects are not the same as price effects, brand effects, or other familiar growth-
building tools.
    Frictionless entry and other features of scalability maximize the value-building impact of
network effects.
    A two-sided market (with both producers and consumers) gives rise to four kinds of
network effects: same-side effects (positive and negative) and cross-side effects (positive
and negative). A growing platform business must manage all four.
    The key to minimizing most negative network effects is quality curation, which increases
the chances of a happy match between producer and consumer.
OceanofPDF.com


3
ARCHITECTURE
Principles for Designing
a Successful Platform
How do we build a platform that invites participation and creates
significant value for all its users? How do we provide tools and services that
make it easy for producers and consumers to interact in mutually rewarding
ways? And how do we design a technological infrastructure that is capable
of scaling rapidly, and encouraging positive network effects while
minimizing negative ones?
These are daunting challenges. Platforms are complex, multisided
systems that must support large networks of users who play different roles
and interact in a wide variety of ways. An industry-wide platform—a
platform for the health care industry, for example—may need to facilitate
interactions among an enormous range of industry participants with
motivations that vary widely and change frequently as economic,
regulatory, and technological circumstances evolve.
Designers and builders of any complex system often find it difficult to
identify a logical starting point. This problem is particularly acute with
platform businesses, since they are less familiar and much more
complicated than pipeline businesses, which generally feature a
straightforward linear design. The natural tendency of those charged with
creating a new platform business is to study similar implementations and
imitate them. But because no two markets are identical, this strategy often
fails. A poorly designed platform produces little or no value for users and
generates weak network effects, or none at all.
