# 4. Disruption: How Platforms Conquer and Transform Traditional Industries

year-old company was valued by investors at $40 billion (up from the $17
billion valuation of just six months earlier), making it more valuable, at
least on paper, than such venerable commercial giants as Mitsubishi, Target,
FedEx, General Dynamics, and Sony.1 Uber, which now operates in more
than 250 cities around the world, has scaled these heights by providing an
exceedingly simple yet valuable service to both consumers and producers,
bringing quick and inexpensive rides to passengers while enabling drivers
to earn better incomes than most taxi drivers—and without having to shell
out the enormous sums required for a traditional taxi license. At the height
of the market, in mid-2013, a New York City taxi medallion was valued at
over $1.2 million.
So the Uber platform, simply by providing an online location where
riders and drivers can come together, has brought benefits to both
consumers and producers while building vast wealth for its investors. It’s a
winning proposition for everyone—except for the hundreds of thousands of
taxi drivers, car-service dispatchers, and limousine company employees
whose jobs are suddenly in jeopardy. No wonder Barry Korengold,
president of the cab drivers association in San Francisco (the city where
Uber was launched back in the summer of 2010) describes the leaders of
Uber as “robber barons”: “They started off by operating illegally, without
following any of the regulations and unfairly competing. And that’s how
they became big—they had enough money to ignore all the rules.” The
president of one San Francisco cab company predicted that the entire taxi
industry would collapse before the end of 2015—a forecast echoed by taxi
executives in cities around the world. As a result, the value of a New York
City taxi medallion fell by almost $300,000 in one year—with no bottom in
sight.2
In chapter 11, we’ll return to the question of whether platform businesses
like Uber are engaging in unfair competition, or whether traditional
incumbent companies are simply angry about being outcompeted by digital
interlopers. But for now, just let’s marvel at how swiftly and seemingly
effortlessly a platform business is revolutionizing a once-secure industry.
Even more remarkably, the changes that Uber has already brought are
probably just the opening salvo in a barrage of further disruptions that may
ultimately transform the entire transportation sector. Combining the
platform model with another technology that is rapidly moving from the
drawing board to the showroom—the self-driving car—will improve Uber’s


already stellar economic model and could lead to a series of cascading
impacts that extend beyond the taxi industry. One futurist foresees a time
when millions of people will eschew car ownership altogether, instead
relying on an instantly deployable fleet of driverless Uber vehicles to take
them wherever they want to go at a cost of around fifty cents per mile. Uber
cofounder and CEO Travis Kalanick comments, “We want to get to the
point that using Uber is cheaper than owning a car.” The ultimate promise:
“Transportation that’s as reliable as running water.”3
The implications are startling. The major automakers would be
devastated by the shrinkage of their market. So would ancillary businesses
such as auto insurance, car finance, and parking. On the other hand, the
sudden decrease in demand for parking places (since driverless cars can be
in virtually continual use) will free up tens of millions of square feet of real
estate for development, liberate lanes on practically every city street, and
drastically reduce the pollution and congestion caused by drivers cruising
the streets in search of a parking spot. If this vision for the next phase of
Uber’s growth comes true, the landscape of America may well be rendered
unrecognizable.4
And if all that is not enough, consider this observation by Kalanick: “If
we can get you a car in five minutes, we can get you anything in five
minutes.”5 Anything at all? One wonders what limits can be set on Uber’s
disruptive potential. Kalanick seems not to acknowledge any.
A CAPSULE HISTORY OF DIGITAL DISRUPTION
“Software is eating the world.” The slogan was originally used by Netscape
founder Marc Andreessen in the title of a 2011 op-ed article in the Wall
Street Journal to encapsulate how technology—particularly the Internet—
has transformed the world of business.6 The story of Internet-enabled
disruption as we’ve witnessed it so far has occurred in two main stages.
In stage one, efficient pipelines ate inefficient pipelines. Most Internet
applications during the 1990s involved the creation of highly efficient
pipelines—online systems for distributing goods and services that
outcompeted incumbent industries. Unlike traditional offline pipelines,
online pipelines benefited from low marginal costs of distribution—


sometimes as low as zero. This allowed them to target and serve large
markets with much smaller investment.
Traditional media companies were the first to feel the pinch. Newspapers
were upended by the Internet’s ability to distribute news to a global
audience without the traditional distribution costs (printing, shipping,
retailing, delivery). An efficient pipeline had eaten an inefficient one. The
unbundling of classifieds and other forms of advertising from editorial
content then stripped the newspaper model of a crucial monetization
mechanism, as the more efficient online method for delivering targeted
advertising outcompeted the traditional ink-on-paper method. Again, an
efficient pipeline ate an inefficient one.
Retail and mail order shopping soon felt the pain. Amazon’s success in
the book industry led to the fall of Borders and other bookstores.
Blockbuster’s bricks-and-mortar system for distributing DVDs failed to
compete with Netflix’s distribution economics, based initially on the online
selection of DVDs that were delivered by mail, and later on streaming
video. Music company revenues plummeted as sales of CDs collapsed,
replaced by faster and cheaper file downloads, many of them pirated or
shared illegally. Over time, many of the Internet distributors found ways to
leverage granular data about consumer choice so as to serve their customers
better than the traditional pipelines ever did.
Business revolutions such as these embodied Andreessen’s vision of
“software eating the world.” Today, having attained the status of a cliché,
his vision needs an update: “Platforms are eating the world.” We’ve entered
stage two of the disruption saga, in which platforms eat pipelines.
HOW PLATFORMS EAT PIPELINES
The evidence for this new stage of disruption is all around us. As we’ve
seen, taxi companies—and regulators—have realized that Uber is on the
march to global domination of local transportation. Once ridiculed by the
hotel industry, Airbnb has rapidly scaled to become a global provider of
accommodation, with more rooms booked every night than the largest
global hotel chains. Upwork is gradually evolving from a marketplace for
talent into an infrastructure that allows entire organizations to be built in the
cloud, connecting freelance workers from remote locations without the need


for a physical workspace and the costs associated with it. Amazon continues
to expand its impact on traditional book publishing while making inroads
into dozens of other retailing arenas. And while traditional pipeline giants
Nokia and Blackberry have lost 90 percent of their market value in the last
decade, platform giants Apple and Google have dominated the stock
market.
How and why is this happening? Let’s break it down.
In the world of platforms, the Internet no longer acts merely as a
distribution channel (a pipeline). It also acts as a creation infrastructure and
a coordination mechanism. Platforms are leveraging this new capability to
create entirely new business models. In addition, the physical and the digital
are rapidly converging, enabling the Internet to connect and coordinate
objects in the real world—for example, through smartphone apps that allow
you to control your home appliances at long distance. Simultaneously,
organizational boundaries are being redefined as platform companies
leverage external ecosystems to create value in new ways.7
In this new stage of disruption, platforms enjoy two significant economic
advantages over pipelines.
One of these advantages is superior marginal economics of production
and distribution. As we’ve noted, when hotel chains like Hilton and
Sheraton want to expand, they build new rooms and employ thousands of
staff. By contrast, Airbnb expands with near-zero marginal costs, since its
cost for adding an additional room to its network listings is minimal.
A platform’s ability to scale rapidly is further enhanced by network
effects. When positive network effects kick in, higher production leads to
higher consumption, and vice versa. More freelancers participating on
Upwork make it more attractive to companies looking to hire, which in turn
attracts more freelancers; a wider array of merchants on Etsy attracts more
customers, who in turn attract more merchants. A virtuous feedback loop is
set in motion, fueling the growth of the platform at minimal cost.
Leveraging network effects, platforms are able to build open electronic
ecosystems embracing hundreds, thousands, or millions of remote
participants. Such ecosystems can be larger than most pipeline-based
organizations and can have access to more resources than a traditional
pipeline company can command. As a result, the value created in such an
ecosystem can be much larger than the value created in a comparable
traditional organization. Therefore, firms that continue to compete on the


basis of resources that are owned internally are increasingly finding it
difficult to compete with platforms.
THE IMPACTS OF PLATFORM DISRUPTION ON VALUE
CREATION, VALUE CONSUMPTION, AND QUALITY
CONTROL
Platforms, then, have economic advantages that enable them to grow faster
than similar pipeline businesses. This phenomenon alone would lead to
significant disruption of traditional industries, as platform businesses
displace pipeline businesses at the top of the Fortune 500 rankings. But the
era of platforms-eat-pipelines is disrupting businesses in many other ways
as well. In particular, the rise of the world of platforms is reconfiguring the
familiar business processes of value creation, value consumption, and
quality control.8
Reconfiguring value creation to tap new sources of supply. As self-
serve systems, platforms grow and conquer markets when they minimize
the barriers to usage for their users. In particular, every time a platform
removes a hurdle that makes the participation of producers more difficult,
value creation is reconfigured and new sources of supply are opened up.
Wikipedia became one of the first platforms to tap a new source of
supply when it created a system that enabled volunteers to capture and
organize the world’s knowledge. Soon, YouTube was empowering any
teenager with a video camera or a smartphone to compete with movie
studios and television networks.
Today, we see the phenomenon of reconfigured value creation at work in
many kinds of platform business. Singapore-based video-
streaming platform Viki leveraged a global community of enthusiasts
(rather than hiring employees) to add subtitles to Korean and Japanese
dramas, which it then marketed in the U.S. After the resulting rapid burst of
growth, Viki was sold to the Japanese company Rakuten for $200 million.
Facebook used a similar approach to find translators for its website instead
of relying on professionals.


To fuel the continued explosion of new sources of supply, platform
businesses are steadily lowering barriers that might discourage producers.
Twitter attracted millions of content creators with its new standard literary
format—the message of 140 characters or fewer. By comparison with
traditional blogging, which required more effort and time, the tweet is a
quick and easy form of writing, which encouraged many more users to
become content producers.
In similar fashion, Airbnb works to lower the hurdles for its member-
hosts by regularly conducting events and programs designed to illustrate
and teach its best practices. Uber works to remove economic barriers that
might discourage would-be drivers by providing financial incentives like
sign-up bonuses. Platforms like Dribbble, Threadless, and 99designs have
built large ecosystems of designers, largely owing to the democratization of
the tools of design and printing over the last several years—yet another case
of barriers to entry being lowered, in part through the help of platform tools.
The proliferation of new production technologies further enables the
emergence of new groups of producers. Just as the smartphone camera
expanded the volume of content on platforms like Instagram and Vine, the
spread of 3D printing is likely to lead to a new range of platforms for
industry design. However, technology often needs the support of innovative
business design to produce massive reconfiguration of value creation.
Software for word processing, typography, and graphic design has existed
for decades, but not until Amazon’s Kindle Publishing platform offered
quick and easy access to a large readership did a whole new ecosystem of
authors emerge.
Reconfiguring value consumption by enabling new forms of
consumer behavior. The advent of the world of platforms is also disrupting
traditional consumer behavior, inspiring millions of people to use products
and services in ways that would have been unimaginable a few years ago.
As journalist Jason Tanz puts it:
We are hopping into strangers’ cars (Lyft, Sidecar, Uber), welcoming them into our spare rooms
(Airbnb), dropping our dogs off at their houses (DogVacay, Rover), and eating food in their dining
rooms (Feastly). We are letting them rent our cars (RelayRides, Getaround), our boats
(Boatbound), our houses (HomeAway), and our power tools (Zilok). We are entrusting complete
strangers with our most valuable possessions, our personal experiences—and our very lives. In the
process, we are entering a new era of Internet-enabled intimacy.9


Not so long ago, activities like these would have been viewed as weird,
if not downright dangerous. Today, they are familiar to millions, thanks to
the trust-building mechanisms established by platform businesses. A host of
upstart platforms that bill themselves as “the Uber of X” are working to
alter consumer behavior in other arenas.10
Reconfiguring quality control through community-driven curation.
When new platforms such as YouTube, Airbnb, and Wikipedia are
launched, they are often widely criticized, even ridiculed. This is because,
in their early stages, they fail to offer the quality and reliability provided by
their traditional competitors. YouTube’s early content often bordered on
pornography; much of it was pirated. Apartments listed on Airbnb would
get raided by city inspectors responding to complaints about orgies.
Wikipedia biographies declared many a living person deceased.
This is the problem with abundance. When platforms start unlocking
new sources of supply, quality often nosedives—an example of the negative
network effects we discussed in chapter 2.
These early days in the life of a platform can be difficult. However, over
time, as the curation mechanism starts to work, the platform improves its
ability to match consumers with relevant and high-quality content, goods,
and services from producers. Strong curation encourages desirable behavior
while discouraging and eventually weeding out undesirable behavior. As the
platform nurtures quality, it develops the reliability needed to attract a wide
array of customers. Mainstream competitors, often quite suddenly, find
themselves competing with an unfamiliar upstart—one that is poised to
grow much faster than they can.
Once platforms start scaling, they need to ensure that the curation
mechanism doesn’t break down. Platforms that successfully scale their
curation efforts gather better data on their users and improve their matching
algorithms over time. They also ensure that manual curation is gradually
phased out in favor of automated curation mechanisms based on socially
driven feedback loops. For example, Quora, the question-and-answer
platform, started out with in-house editors curating its content. Once a
critical mass of users started participating, curation was largely turned over
to algorithms driven by community judgments.
The rise of the world of platforms, then, doesn’t simply mean the
emergence of new business entities competing with traditional incumbent


firms. It also means the appearance of new forms of business activity, as
these changes in the modes of value creation, value consumption, and
quality control suggest.
STRUCTURAL IMPACTS OF
PLATFORM DISRUPTION
The rise of platform businesses is transforming the structure of the business
landscape in three specific ways that have largely gone unnoticed. We
describe these three forms of platform-driven disruptions as de-linking
assets from value, re-intermediation, and market aggregation.
De-linking assets from value. The most familiar platform examples—
Airbnb, Uber, Amazon—come from the business-to-consumer (B2C) arena.
How do you convert a product to a platform in the business-to-
business (B2B) arena? Many corporations own massive fixed assets like
power generation plants, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines, or
tracts of farmland. How do you build platforms around those?
The answer: you de-link ownership of the physical asset from the value
it creates. This allows the use of the asset to be independently traded and
applied to its best use—that is, the use that creates the greatest economic
value—rather than being restricted to uses specific to the owner. As a result,
efficiency and value rise dramatically.
Two of this book’s authors (Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne)
used this approach in response to a request from the state of New York to
help in designing a smart market to integrate the state’s increasing number
of distributed energy resources. These include solar rooftops, battery
storage, and household generators, as well as the virtual storage that arises
from a building’s thermal inertia. Buildings can be preheated or cooled or
can delay heating and cooling within a couple of degrees without affecting
occupants’ comfort. Together, these systems constitute resources that can be
used to help the state’s electric power system accommodate the swings in
demand and supply that are part the natural daily and seasonal cycle—but
only if there is a system in place to handle the coordination. Currently, price
signals arise from the system-wide wholesale market and are aggregated,
thereby obscuring the clearer signals that localized data would provide.


To solve this problem, we recommended a platform that separates the
physical assets from the value they create—that is, the energy produced.
Such a platform would allow small sellers to meet the demand by the larger
buyers of power, who then deliver it to end consumers. To obviate the need
for users of the platform to constantly check market prices, the system
should create automated signals so that sellers’ machines can be
programmed to respond automatically to local relevant price and demand
information distributed through the platform. 
If the New York system is implemented, significant savings would be
realized, since investments in new transmission, distribution, and generation
capacity could be delayed or avoided entirely. In addition, the system, being
highly flexible and responsive, could accommodate further deployments of
renewable energy better than the current system can, as it relies on large
power plants to respond to variability in supply and demand.
De-linking assets from value also allows expensive health care
equipment such as MRI machines (each costing $3–5 million) to be used
more efficiently. A single hospital may use just 40 to 50 percent of its own
MRI capacity. Solution: time-slice the usage, and create a market for slices
among other hospitals and small clinics that cannot afford their own
machines. Separating the asset from the value it creates can drive the
utilization rate to 70 or even 90 percent, producing incremental revenue for
the machine’s owner.
It’s just one further step to turn a local market into a statewide or
regional one. In fact, as of mid-2015, a Boston firm called Cohealo is taking
that step, with the goal of becoming the Airbnb of expensive hospital
equipment.
This concept of de-linking assets from value helped  rescue Australian
farmers from a drought more severe than that faced by California in 2015.
Like California, Australia suffered from a patchwork system of water rights
that limits the use of water to whatever an individual owner has in mind.
The system was reformed beginning in 2003 by separating land ownership
from water rights. With the help of a private company called Waterfind,
Australia created a platform for water trading that greatly increased the
economic efficiency of water use. A farmer with a low-value crop might
stop farming and sell his water to a farmer with a high-value crop, or to a
municipal water authority within transport distance. As a result, when
Australia was hit by drought starting in 2006, its farmers suffered far less


than those in California have. Now Waterfind is setting up a subsidiary
based in Sacramento, hoping to apply the same platform-based solution to
American agriculture.11
Re-intermediation. During the first stage of Internet-driven disruption,
many business commentators predicted that the biggest impact of the new
information and communication technologies would be widespread
disintermediation—the elimination of middlemen, or intermediate layers,
from industries, establishing direct connections between producers and
consumers. Experts pointed to the decline of traditional businesses like
travel agents and insurance brokers, as consumers learned to shop for
airline tickets and insurance policies without intermediaries. The same
process of disintermediation was expected to sweep many other industries
over time.
The reality has proven to be somewhat different. Across numerous
industries, platforms have repeatedly re-intermediated markets, introducing
new kinds of middlemen rather than simply eliminating layers of market
participants. Typically re-intermediation involves replacing non-scalable
and inefficient agent intermediaries with online, often automated tools and
systems that offer valuable new goods and services to participants on both
sides of the platform.
Networked platforms serve as more efficient intermediaries owing to
their ability to use market-mediating mechanisms that scale. While
traditional intermediaries relied on manual efforts, platform intermediaries
rely on algorithms and social feedback, both of which scale quickly and
efficiently. Moreover, their ability to gather data over time and use it to
make the system more intelligent allows platforms to scale their
intermediation in the market in a manner that was impossible for traditional
middlemen.
Intermediation by platform businesses is transforming industries,
creating new venues where market participants are connected with greater
power and efficiency than ever before. In the music industry, artist and
repertoire (A & R) executives, who traditionally associated themselves with
a large record label in order to attract talent, now operate as independent
professionals, scouting for talent on platforms such as YouTube and
SoundCloud. Literary agents search for new authors on content platforms
such as Quora and Medium. Small businesses run advertising campaigns


without using traditional ad agencies or media channels by relying on
Google’s AdWords platform. This, in turn, has led to the rise of an entire
new range of intermediary agencies in Asia that manage AdWords
campaigns for a fraction of the traditional price. Thus, while platforms
displace large and inefficient intermediaries, they empower small and
nimble service providers who leverage the platform to provide services to
end users.
In another form of re-intermediation, platforms create a new layer of
reputational information by leveraging social feedback about producers.
Platforms like Yelp, Angie’s List, and TripAdvisor have created an entirely
new industry based on certifying the quality of product and service
providers—in the process driving some traditional industry certifiers (such
as travel guide and consumer magazine publishers) out of business.
The re-intermediation produced by platforms is also changing the
economics of participation for producers and consumers, leading to both
new winners and new losers. In the traditional book business, publishers
absorb (and spend) the bulk of book revenues, generally paying author
royalties that range between 10 and 15 percent. By contrast, authors on
Amazon’s self-publishing platform generally retain 70 percent of the
revenues. Of course, Amazon authors must also defray many of the costs
that a traditional publisher would cover, such as editing, design, publicity,
and marketing—which makes the designation of “winners” and “losers” in
this instance more complicated.
A similar economic shift in favor of app developers was set into motion
with the emergence of the app ecosystem of the iPhone and Android. These
new economics for participants are possible because of the superior
marginal economics enjoyed by platforms.12
Market aggregation. Platforms are also creating new efficiencies by
aggregating unorganized markets. Market aggregation is the process
whereby platforms provide centralized markets to serve widely dispersed
individuals and organizations. Market aggregation provides information and
power to platform users who formerly engaged in interactions in a
haphazard fashion, often without access to reliable or up-to-date market
data.
Consider, for example, bus transportation in India. Different bus fleets
operate on interstate, intrastate, and other routes. Many different types of


bus exist, and pricing is extremely variable. Because the industry is so
fragmented and unorganized, consumer search costs and decision overhead
are high.13 Now a platform business called redBus is aggregating
information from all Indian bus operators in a central plug-and-play
infrastructure. The result is quicker, easier, and cheaper decision-making for
consumers, and, in the long run, a healthier transportation market for India.
Many successful platforms perform a similar market aggregation
function. Amazon Marketplace, Alibaba, and Etsy provide online sites
where vendors of thousands of kinds of products from around the world can
offer their wares to consumers. Service platforms like Upwork bring
thousands of skilled professionals under a single roof, making it easy for
potential employers to evaluate, compare, and hire them.
THE INCUMBENTS FIGHT BACK: PIPELINES
BECOMING PLATFORMS
Platform businesses, then, are disrupting the traditional business landscape
in a number of ways—not only by displacing some of the world’s biggest
incumbent firms, but also by transforming familiar business processes like
value creation and consumer behavior as well as altering the structure of
major industries.
What can incumbents do to respond? Are entrenched companies that
operate familiar pipeline businesses doomed to capitulate as platforms
reshape and ultimately take over their industries?
Not necessarily. But if incumbents hope to fight the forces of platform
disruption, they’ll need to reevaluate their existing business models. For
example, they’ll need to scrutinize all their transaction costs—that is, the
money they spend on processes such as marketing, sales, product delivery,
and customer service—and imagine how those costs might be reduced or
eliminated in a more seamlessly connected world. They’ll also need to
examine the entire universe of individuals and organizations they currently
interact with and envision new ways of networking them so as to create new
forms of value.14 They’ll need to ask questions such as:
•    Which processes that we currently manage in-house can be delegated to outside partners,
whether suppliers or customers?


•    How can we empower outside partners to create products and services that will generate new
forms of value for our existing customers?
•    Are there ways we can network with current competitors to produce valuable new services for
customers?
•    How can the value of the goods and services we currently provide be enhanced through new
data streams, interpersonal connections, and curation tools?
Nike has proven to be one of the most intelligent incumbent companies
seeking new ways to survive and thrive in the world of platforms. Some of
the competitive steps they’ve taken may seem obvious. They aren’t.
Pipeline businesses like Nike have traditionally scaled in one of two
ways. Some expand by owning and integrating a greater length of the value-
creation-and-delivery pipeline—for example, by buying upstream suppliers
or downstream distributors. This is referred to as vertical integration.
Others expand by widening the pipeline to push more value through it. This
is horizontal integration. When consumer goods companies grow by
creating new products and brands, it’s an example of horizontal integration.
In January 2012, Nike brought out a wearable technology device, the
FuelBand, to track user fitness activities, including steps walked and
calories burned. Like many other companies, Nike has also been developing
apps—in this case, apps related to sports and fitness. On the surface, these
might seem like traditional product-line extensions aiming at horizontal
integration. But in reality, Nike is testing an approach that, if successful,
will lead to a new form of growth—one pioneered by platform businesses
like Apple.
Over the last decade, Apple has grown in part by connecting its products
and services to one another in the cloud. The ability to sync contents and
data over iTunes and iCloud makes the ownership of multiple Apple
products particularly valuable, and much more useful than (say) the
ownership of multiple products from Sony, Toshiba, or another electronics
manufacturer. Data acts as an integration glue to make all these products
and services perform in concert.
This leads to a new form of growth. When multiple products and
services connect and interact using data, pipelines can start behaving like
platforms, producing new forms of value and encouraging users to engage
in more interactions.
Like a suite of Apple products, Nike’s FuelBand-connected shoes and
mobile apps are not simply separate products and services connected by a


brand name. Instead, they constantly interact, providing users with
information and advice about their athletic performance, their fitness
regime, and their health goals. Unlike a traditional sporting goods company,
Nike is building an ecosystem of users using the data it captures about
them. Over time, it can leverage this data to create more relevant
experiences for its users and connect them with one another to enable
valuable interactions.
Nike is not the only company taking the first steps in transforming its
traditional pipeline business into a platform business. Under Armour, a rival
of Nike in the sports and casual wear market, has been moving quickly to
build its own fitness ecosystem. In November 2013, it purchased
MapMyFitness, a leading workout and exercise tracking platform. Then, in
February 2015, it followed up by buying two more fitness platforms—
MyFitnessPal, which focuses on nutrition, and Endomondo, a “trainer in
your pocket” that mainly serves consumers in Europe. The total purchase
price for the three companies: a hefty $710 million. “What’s really
astounding,” one analyst commented, “is that none of the companies
acquired make actual devices. Instead, everything is about platform and
data. And—more importantly—users.” In combination, the three
acquisitions boast 130 million platform users.15 Like Nike, Under Armour
sees that the future of its industry is platform-based, and it is determined to
be a disruptor.
Similar competitive moves are occurring in other sectors. Industrial
giants including GE, Siemens, and Haier are connecting their machines to
the nascent Internet of things.16 These networked machines constantly
stream data into a central platform that enables them to interact with and
learn from one another.17 Access to data from this network of devices helps
each machine better utilize its resources and provide more reliable service.
Can any product or service become the basis of a platform business?
Here’s the test: if the firm can use either information or community to add
value to what it sells, then there is potential for creating a viable platform.
This creates huge opportunities for a lot of firms.
Consider McCormick Foods, a 126-year-old company that sells herbs,
spices, and condiments. By 2010, the company’s traditional growth
strategies had run their course. McCormick had already expanded into a full
range of food seasonings and established a foothold up and down its supply
chain, including operations in farming and food preparation. The company


was running out of growth options. CIO Jerry Wolfe heard about Nike’s
move into platform-building. Could McCormick do the same?
Wolfe reached out to Barry Wacksman, a partner at R/GA, a leading
New York design firm that had helped Nike design its platform. Together,
they hit on the idea of using recipes and taste profiles to build a food-based
platform. Wolfe and Wacksman used McCormick’s taste laboratories to
distill three dozen flavor archetypes—such as minty, citrus, floral, garlicky,
meaty—that can be used to describe almost any recipe. Based on personal
preferences, the system can predict new recipes an individual is likely to
savor. Members of the McCormick platform community can modify recipes
and upload the new versions, creating ever-expanding flavor options and
helping to identify new food trends, generating information that’s useful not
only to the platform’s users but also to managers of grocery stores, food
manufacturers, and restaurateurs.18
As these examples demonstrate, the ability to leverage platforms is no
longer restricted to the Internet upstarts of Silicon Valley. Nor is the
incumbent’s response to the forces of disruption restricted to merely
attempting to fight back against the rising tide of platform power—or
trying, usually in vain, to hurriedly build a copycat platform after their
industry has been colonized.
The leaders of incumbent companies who understand the new business
model can begin building tomorrow’s platforms in a way that not only
leverages their existing assets but strengthens and reinforces them.
So platforms are eating the world. The disruption they are driving is
reaching businesses one industry at a time and is likely to hit practically all
information-intensive industries at some point. We’ve already seen it play
out in the media and telecom industries. Retail, city transportation, and
hospitality are currently under assault. We expect banking, education, and
health care to start feeling the heat soon. These industries are highly
information-intensive but have so far resisted platform-driven disruption
thanks largely to protective regulatory regimes and the consumer
conservatism driven by greater risk sensitivity. When YouTube shows a user
a tasteless or pirated video, the damage is less serious than when a poorly
curated platform connects a borrower to a loan shark, an education platform


offers a college student inaccurate math or science information, or a
medical platform matches a patient with an incompetent physician.
Nonetheless, Lending Club, Udemy, and Jawbone are chipping away at
these markets and making early inroads.
In the end, of course, bringing platform disruption to these and other
industries is not primarily a technological challenge. The innovators who
hope to create the great new platforms of the future need to focus on the
core interactions in the marketplaces they hope to conquer, and analyze the
barriers that limit them. Overcoming those barriers will enable the building
of platform-based ecosystems in those markets. We’ll explore this topic in
greater detail in the final chapter of this book, where we’ll share our vision
of the future of the world of platforms.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER FOUR
    Platforms are able to outcompete pipelines because of their superior marginal economics
and because of the value produced by positive network effects. As a result, platforms are
growing faster than pipelines and taking leading positions in industries once dominated by
pipelines.
    The rise of platforms is also disrupting business in other ways. It is reconfiguring value
creation to tap new sources of supply; reconfiguring value consumption by enabling new
forms of consumer behavior; and reconfiguring quality control through community-driven
curation.
    The rise of platforms is also causing structural changes in many industries—specifically,
through the phenomena of re-intermediation, separation of ownership and control, and
market aggregation.
    Incumbent companies can fight back against platform-driven disruption by studying their
own industries through a platform lens and beginning to build their own value-
creating ecosystems, as Nike and GE are doing.
OceanofPDF.com


5
LAUNCH
Chicken or Egg? Eight Ways
to Launch a Successful Platform
The fall of 1998 was a heady time in the world of business. Fueled by the
astonishing growth of the Internet, technology-based businesses were being
launched by the hundreds, and many were enjoying acclaim and soaring
valuations out of all proportion to their actual revenues (often minimal) and
profits (often nonexistent). Inspired by the early experiences of companies
like AOL and Amazon, high-tech entrepreneurs and their cheerleaders in the
media decided that the key to long-term success was growth at all costs—
and many of them burned through millions of dollars in pursuit of that
growth. Countless ambitious nerds in their twenties and early thirties were
amassing giant fortunes—on paper, at least.
In this tumultuous atmosphere, a pair of young entrepreneurs entered the
exploding Internet arena. Thirty-one-year-old Peter Thiel was born in
Germany and raised in California, where he became one of the country’s
highest-ranked young chess players and went on to study philosophy and
law at Stanford University. An avowed libertarian, Thiel helped found the
Stanford Review, a conservative newspaper that challenged the university’s
dominant liberal culture.
Max Levchin, twenty-three years old, was born in Ukraine and granted
political asylum when he moved to the U.S. with his family. Levchin grew
up in Chicago and studied computer science at the University of Illinois at
Champaign–Urbana, where he developed a passion for cryptography—the
science of making and breaking codes. By 1998, he was ready to apply his
