# 5. Launch: Chicken or Egg? Eight Ways to Launch a Successful Platform

genius for crafting secure forms of computerized communications to the
world of business.
Thiel and Levchin (along with a third partner, John Bernard Powers, who
soon departed) launched Confinity, a startup aimed at enabling money
transfers on Palm Pilots and other personal digital assistants (PDAs)
equipped with infrared ports. At the time, the Palm Pilot was an
exceptionally popular mobile device whose adoption rate was expected to
grow, and launching a payment system on a mobile device that people
carried with them everywhere made sense. The business logic behind
Confinity seemed indisputable. The notion of a payment mechanism that
could potentially liberate millions of people from reliance on government-
sponsored currency also appealed to the idealistic Thiel’s libertarian streak,
much as another ambitious online payment platform—Bitcoin—would fire
the imagination of libertarians a decade later.
Nonetheless, Confinity attracted few users. After two years, having
gained only 10,000 signups, Levchin and Thiel shut Confinity down.
Along the way, however, they unlocked a much more promising business
prospect. Back in October 1999, a Confinity engineer had cobbled together
an online demo to accept payments via email. This side project represented
a significant potential improvement in payments processing; unlike
previous systems for online payments, it allowed anyone in the world to
receive an online payment from anyone else without needing to use the
unwieldy system for transferring funds from one bank account to another.
Levchin and Thiel recognized that it might be possible to turn this new form
of online payment into a significant business on its own—one that could
serve millions of consumers and the online businesses they patronized.
They came up with a name for the service—PayPal—and set out to build
a company around it. It was, at that point, an inauspicious moment in the
business cycle to launch such a service; the possibility of a collapse of the
so-called Internet bubble was looming over the high-tech industry, and
within a few months a precipitous decline in the NASDAQ index would
make the dot-com bust official. Adding to the pressure was the fact that
Thiel and Levchin knew they would have to make PayPal successful fast—
they were spending some $10 million per month on the business, a large
amount in the platform world, where huge capital expenditures are normally
not required.1


They also realized they would have to overcome one of the toughest
challenges associated with creating a business designed to serve two sides
of a market—the chicken-or-egg problem. When trying to build a two-sided
market in which both sides are equally essential, which comes first? And
how do you attract one without the other?
In the case of a new payments mechanism, the chicken-or-egg problem
is particularly obvious and acute. Without sellers who are willing to accept
the new form of payment, buyers won’t adopt it. But if buyers don’t adopt
the new form of payment, sellers won’t invest time, effort, and money in
accepting it. So how do you launch a new payments platform from a base of
zero, starting with neither sellers nor buyers—when neither group has a
reason to join until the other side joins first?
In terms of simple logic, the chicken-or-egg problem might seem
insoluble. PayPal solved the problem through a series of ingenious
strategies.
To start with, PayPal reduced the friction involved in accepting online
payments. All a user needed was an email address and a credit card. This
simplicity was in stark contrast to previous online payment mechanisms,
which demanded multiple rounds of verification before an account could be
set up, thereby discouraging early users. PayPal’s user-friendly, almost
frictionless system attracted a significant initial base of consumers—though
not enough, in itself, to make the platform attractive to the universe of
online sellers.
In a lecture he later gave at Stanford, Peter Thiel explained what
happened next:
PayPal’s big challenge was to get new customers. They tried advertising. It was too expensive.
They tried BD [business development] deals with big banks. Bureaucratic hilarity ensued. … the
PayPal team reached an important conclusion: BD didn’t work. They needed organic, viral
growth. They needed to give people money.
So that’s what they did. New customers got $10 for signing up, and existing ones got $10 for
referrals. Growth went exponential, and PayPal wound up paying $20 for each new customer. It
felt like things were working and not working at the same time; 7 to 10 percent daily growth and
100 million users was good. No revenues and an exponentially growing cost structure were not.
Things felt a little unstable. PayPal needed buzz so it could raise more capital and continue on.
(Ultimately, this worked out. That does not mean it’s the best way to run a company. Indeed, it
probably isn’t.)2
Thiel’s account captures both the desperation of those early days and the
almost random experimentation the company resorted to in an effort to get


PayPal off the ground. But in the end, the strategy worked. PayPal
dramatically increased its base of consumers by incentivizing new sign-ups.
Most important, the PayPal team realized that getting users to sign up
wasn’t enough; they needed them to try the payment service, recognize its
value to them, and become regular users. In other words, user commitment
was more important than user acquisition. So PayPal designed the
incentives to tip new customers into the ranks of active users. Not only did
the incentive payments make joining PayPal feel riskless and attractive,
they also virtually guaranteed that new users would start participating in
transactions—if only to spend the $10 they’d been gifted in their accounts.
PayPal’s explosive growth triggered a number of positive feedback
loops. Once users experienced the convenience of PayPal, they often
insisted on paying by this method when shopping online, thereby
encouraging sellers to sign up. New users spread the word further,
recommending PayPal to their friends. Sellers, in turn, began displaying
PayPal logos on their product pages to inform buyers that they were
prepared to honor this method of online payment. The sight of those logos
informed more buyers of PayPal’s existence and encouraged them to sign
up. PayPal also introduced a referral fee for sellers, incentivizing them to
bring in still more sellers and buyers. Through these feedback loops, the
PayPal network went to work on its own behalf—it served the needs of
users (buyers and sellers) while spurring its own growth.
However, the company leaders didn’t sit back and rely on the positive
feedback loops to do all the growth work on their own. They looked for
opportunities to jack up the growth rate still further.
In early 2000, they noted the growing popularity of PayPal on eBay, the
most popular online auction site. It was a natural place for PayPal, since
most of the sellers on eBay aren’t full-time merchants but ordinary people
without facilities for accepting credit cards or other forms of online
payment.
PayPal’s marketing team opportunistically refocused its efforts toward
enabling payments on eBay. Among other techniques, they simulated
consumer demand on eBay by creating a bot (an automated software tool)
that bought goods on the site and then insisted on paying for these
transactions using PayPal. Noting this apparent growth in demand, many
eBay sellers signed up for the PayPal service—which in turn made PayPal
even more visible and attractive to consumers. The sellers began posting


PayPal icons on their sites, enabling buyers to access the payment system
with just a single click of the mouse, reducing friction still further.3
Within three months, PayPal’s user base grew from 100,000 to one
million.
The leaders of eBay noticed how PayPal had built its own platform
business partly on eBay’s back. Concerned about the potential competitive
threat posed by a company that was building an independent connection
with eBay customers (and siphoning off a fraction of the revenues from
eBay transactions to boot), eBay tried to fight back. It launched its own
payment system, Billpoint, in partnership with Wells Fargo Bank. It
promoted Billpoint aggressively, at one point requiring eBay merchants
who accepted both Billpoint and PayPal to post larger icons for Billpoint on
their sale pages. Despite these efforts, Billpoint failed to get traction among
eBay users, partly because of its belated launch, partly because of ill-
advised business moves by eBay—for example, the decision to squelch
deals that would have promoted Billpoint’s use by non-eBay merchants.
PayPal continued to grow. By the time Confinity shut down its Palm
Pilot business in late 2000, its offspring PayPal had already garnered three
million accounts—three hundred times the number achieved by its parent
company. Not since the launch of the first credit card, Diners Club, has the
world seen such rapid global adoption of a new payment instrument. In
February 2002, PayPal went public.
In October 2002, eBay finally gave up on Billpoint and acquired PayPal
in exchange for $1.4 billion in stock—a modest sum by today’s standards
but a significant one at the time. At the time of the sale, 70 percent of all
eBay auctions accepted PayPal, and roughly 25 percent of closed auction
purchases were transacted using the payment service. Today, PayPal
produces a major portion of eBay’s revenues and profits while enabling
hundreds of thousands of small merchants to conduct business online more
easily, efficiently, and profitably than ever before.
THE HEART OF PLATFORM MARKETING: DESIGNING
FOR VIRAL GROWTH


As the PayPal story suggests, building a platform business differs from
traditional product or pipeline marketing in a number of ways. For starters,
in the world of platform marketing, pull strategies rather than push
strategies are most effective and important.
The industrial world of pipelines relies heavily on push. Consumers are
accessed through specific marketing and communication channels that the
business owns or pays for. In a world of scarcity, options were limited, and
getting heard often sufficed to get marketers and their messages in front of
consumers. In this environment, the traditional advertising and public
relations industries focused almost solely on awareness creation—the
classic technique for “pushing” a product or service into the consciousness
of a potential customer.
This model of marketing breaks down in the networked world, where
access to marketing and communication channels is democratized—as
illustrated, for example, by the viral global popularity of YouTube videos
such as PSY’s “Gangnam Style” and Rebecca Black’s “Friday.” In this
world of abundance—where both products and the messages about them are
virtually unlimited—people are more distracted, as an endless array of
competing options is only a click or a swipe away. Thus, creating awareness
alone doesn’t drive adoption and usage, and pushing goods and services
toward customers is no longer the key to success. Instead, those goods and
services must be designed to be so attractive that they naturally pull
customers into their orbit.
Furthermore, for a platform business, user commitment and active usage,
not sign-ups or acquisitions, are the true indicators of customer adoption.
That’s why platforms must attract users by structuring incentives for
participation—preferably incentives that are organically connected to the
interactions made possible by the platform. Traditionally, the marketing
function was divorced from the product. In network businesses, marketing
needs to be baked into the platform.
This new way of thinking about marketing is reflected in the strategies
that the leaders of PayPal used to make their platform successful. Rather
than pushing PayPal into the consciousness of users through, for example,
television commercials, print advertisements, or email blasts, they created
incentives that gave the platform itself a pull appeal—including both the
ultra-simplicity of PayPal’s service and the payments that rewarded those
who delivered new sign-ups. They pulled sellers onto the platform by both


creating demand for PayPal’s service among buyers and simulating demand
through the eBay shopping bot. As more users signed up, PayPal’s
attractiveness continued to intensify. In the end, competing payment
services were swept away—testament to the power of pull.
Traditional push strategies continue to be relevant in the world of
platforms. For example, Instagram received tens of thousands of downloads
on the day of its launch when it was featured as the number one app on
Apple’s iTunes store—the kind of push strategy that pipeline companies
have used for decades. And, as we’ll discuss later, Twitter achieved liftoff
largely because of a massively successful public relations event—another
push type of strategy.
But in the world of platforms, rapid, scalable, and sustainable user
growth is most often achieved through pull processes.
THE INCUMBENTS’ ADVANTAGE:
REALITY OR ILLUSION?
The chicken-or-egg problem and the difficulties of attracting a large user
base may cause you to wonder: why shouldn’t incumbent companies with
huge existing customer bases take over the world of platforms? Perhaps it’s
just a matter of time before companies like Walmart, Samsung, and GE
leverage their head starts to crush the competition.
Large enterprises do have some advantages when launching platform
businesses. They have existing value chains, powerful alliances and
partnerships with other companies, pools of talent to draw upon, and vast
arsenals of resources—including loyal customer bases.
However, these advantages can create complacency. In the traditional
business world dominated by products and pipelines, there is usually time
to observe the rise of outside competition and to make adjustments. Most
big companies have evolved metabolisms that reflect this relatively slow
pace of change: their processes for strategic planning, goal-setting, self-
evaluation, and course correction operate on leisurely schedules with annual
or, at best, quarterly checkpoints. However, in the world of platforms,
dominated by networks that interact rapidly and unpredictably, the market


can change quickly and customer expectations can change even faster.
Management systems need to change accordingly.
As incumbent companies reinvent themselves for the world of platforms,
they will find themselves on the same playing field as lithe, fast-moving
startup companies. In a world of democratized network access and pull
marketing, the advantages once produced by size, experience, and resources
have become less important.
So if you’re an entrepreneur or a would-be entrepreneur, or if you help to
run a small or midsized company that has its eye on a platform business
opportunity, don’t be intimidated by the prospect of a giant competitor
encroaching on your space. The rules of the growth game have changed,
and if you understand and master the new rules, you have as good a chance
of surviving and thriving as anyone.
THERE ARE MANY WAYS
TO LAUNCH A PLATFORM
It’s tempting to assume that the launch strategy that works for Platform A
will work for Platform B. But history shows it isn’t so. In fact, even
platforms that are direct competitors may need to adopt different launch
strategies in order to carve out powerful and unique positions in the
marketplace. The stories of three competing online video platforms—
YouTube, Megaupload, and Vimeo—illustrate this point vividly.
YouTube was the first democratic (anyone can upload) video hosting
platform to gain mainstream traction. It did this by focusing entirely on
content creators. During its initial days, YouTube conducted contests
incentivizing content creators to upload videos. Additionally, it allowed
content creators to embed their videos off-platform, which rapidly spread
the word about YouTube. Certain potential users found the new venue
highly attractive. For example, much of the engagement on the then-popular
social network Myspace was built around indie bands. YouTube improved
on Myspace by creating the Flash-based, one-click video experience,
making it easy for bands to upload videos of their music. This created an
initial corpus of content for YouTube and simultaneously leveraged
producers to bring in consumers, some of whom eventually converted to
producers as well. Strengthening its focus on producers, YouTube even


elevated top content creators to a partner status that entitled them to a share
of ad revenue.
YouTube’s unrelenting focus on producers helped in four ways. First, it
seeded the platform with content. Second, it created a curation dynamic on
the platform to identify quality content by letting viewers vote up or down
on the videos they watched. Third, it leveraged producers to bring in
consumers. Fourth, and most important, it created a set of content creators
who had an investment in the platform, had a user following, and would not
be easily incentivized to invest in another one.
Megaupload was faced with the late-mover problem. By 2005, when
Megaupload launched, most content creators were already active on
YouTube, and there was no incentive for them to participate in a new
platform with a smaller market of viewers. As the second mover,
Megaupload couldn’t compete head-on following the same user acquisition
strategy as the market pioneer. So it employed an alternative launch
strategy. It focused exclusively on consumers (viewers) by seeding the
platform with content internally, specifically creating content in categories
that were increasingly being policed on YouTube, including pirated videos
and pornography. Megaupload gained significant traction by addressing
these seemingly underserved needs. However, in the process it exposed
itself to lawsuits and negative publicity.
Our third player, Vimeo, was another late entrant (it was launched in
November 2004)—but it succeeded with a producer-first strategy that
competed directly with YouTube. The key was creating a set of higher-
quality tools that appealed to a particular set of users who felt neglected by
YouTube.
In its initial days, YouTube’s hosting and bandwidth infrastructure,
coupled with its embeddable player, constituted a compelling value
proposition to producers. However, as YouTube gained traction among
producers, the focus of the platform moved from improving video hosting
infrastructure (as a value proposition to producers) to improving
matchmaking of videos with consumers (focusing on video search, and a
video feed).
Vimeo responded to YouTube’s shift by focusing its platform on the
producers and providing them with superior infrastructure, including built-
in support for high-definition video playback and a better embeddable
player for installation on blogs. This enabled it to compete successfully with


YouTube in pursuit of producers who would create a sustainable flow of
videos.
As these varying examples illustrate, if you’re launching a platform,
knowing the value propositions offered by your competitors can help you
structure your own, allowing you to claim a relatively untouched market
niche—even if your basic value unit may appear similar on the surface.
EIGHT STRATEGIES FOR BEATING THE CHICKEN-OR-
EGG DILEMMA
Understanding the importance of pull strategies in a platform market, as
well as the need to analyze and respond to your rivals’ business designs, are
significant elements of launch strategy. But the dilemma we call the
chicken-or-egg problem still looms for virtually all platform founders. How
to begin building a user base for a two-sided market when each side of the
market depends on the prior existence of the other side?
One way to address this conundrum is to avoid the chicken-or-egg
problem altogether by building a platform business on the foundation of an
existing pipeline or product business. This approach is known as:
1.  The follow-the-rabbit strategy. Use a non-platform demonstration
project to model success, thereby attracting both users and producers to a
new platform erected on your project’s proven infrastructure.
Consider Amazon. It never faced the chicken-or-egg problem because, as
a successful online retailer, it operated an effective pipeline business that
used online product listings to attract consumers. With a thriving consumer
base, Amazon converted itself into a platform business simply by opening
its system to external producers. The result is Amazon Marketplace, which
enables thousands of merchants to sell their products to millions of
consumers—with Amazon enjoying a small slice of revenue from every
transaction.
In the B2B space, Intel faced the same challenge in demonstrating the
value of wireless technology. No one wants a wireless laptop if no hosts
provide wireless service; no hosts will spend on wireless routers if no users
demand them. Intel partnered with the Japanese telecom company NTT to


demonstrate that a market existed. Once NTT showed that money could be
made by catering to this market, dozens of other firms followed suit. Intel,
in fact, originated the term “follow the rabbit” to define this strategy.
It’s not always possible to use the follow-the-rabbit strategy. Sometimes
you have to start your platform from scratch, which means that finding a
way to attract a base of users on both sides of your market is an unavoidable
challenge.4 There are a number of specific, effective strategies that have
been developed and demonstrated for overcoming the chicken-or-egg
problem. In general, these strategies involve three techniques:
1.  Staging value creation. The platform managers arrange for the creation of value units that
will attract one or more sets of users and demonstrate the potential benefits of participating in
the platform.5 Those initial users create more value units, attract still other users, and set up a
positive feedback loop that leads to continuing growth.6 The Huffington Post followed this
strategy by hiring writers to create an initial array of high-quality blog posts for the site,
thereby attracting readers. Some of these readers began contributing blog posts of their own,
leading to the gradual development of a wider network of content creators and attracting even
more readers.
2.    Designing the platform to attract one set of users. The platform is designed to provide
tools, products, services, or other benefits that will attract one set of users—either consumers
or producers. The existence of a critical mass of users on one side of a marketplace attracts
users on the other side, leading to a positive feedback loop. As we’ll detail below, the
restaurant reservation platform OpenTable used this strategy by creating useful electronic tools
for restaurateurs. Once a large number of restaurants were on board, consumers began to
discover the site and started using it to make their dining plans.
3.  Simultaneous on-boarding. To start, the platform creates conditions such that value units can
be created that are relevant to users even when the overall size of the network is small. It then
strives to stimulate a burst of activity that will simultaneously attract consumers and producers
in sufficient numbers to create larger numbers of value units and value-producing interactions,
so that network effects can begin to kick in. Later in this chapter, we’ll show how Facebook
employed this strategy to make its fledgling social network attractive to users even when the
universe of potential members was very small—limited, in fact, to students at a single
university.
These three techniques can be used individually or together, and a
variety of combinations can work effectively under the right circumstances.
What follows are some of the specific variations that we’ve identified. If
you’re in the process of developing a new platform or hoping to launch one,
you may find one of these an inspiring model for your own chicken-or-egg
strategy.
2.  The piggyback strategy. Connect with an existing user base from a
different platform and stage the creation of value units in order to recruit


those users to participate in your platform.
This is a classic strategy used in many successful platform launches. As
we’ve seen, PayPal used this strategy when it piggybacked on eBay’s online
auction platform.
Justdial is India’s largest local commerce marketplace, facilitating
consumer transactions with more than four million small businesses. It
seeded the initial database by borrowing listings from existing yellow pages
as well as by employing feet-on-street soldiers who went door to door
collecting business information. Using this data, Justdial was launched as a
phone directory service. A consumer would call in looking for service
providers—for example, caterers for a wedding banquet. Justdial would
pass on the lead to the producers—in this case, appropriate caterers in the
town where the consumer was located. Grateful for the lead, some of these
service providers would become subscribers to Justdial. To encourage more
active participation by local merchants, many of whom weren’t previously
listed anywhere online, Justdial made it easy for them to join the platform
through human interfaces, telephone connections, and text messaging.
After a successful IPO in May 2013, Justdial continues to be the
dominant platform in the local commerce space in India. Its humble origin
was in a collection of business listings “borrowed” from an existing
platform, the local telephone directory.
In the U.S., startups have used a similar strategy by piggybacking on
Craigslist. The new platform starts by “scraping” Craigslist, using
automated data-gathering software tools to obtain information about
merchants and service providers. It then posts this information on its
platform, giving consumers the impression that these merchants are actually
participating on the platform. When a consumer requests a certain service
provider, the platform passes on the lead while inviting the merchant to join
the platform.
As described earlier in this chapter, another compelling example of the
piggyback strategy is the way YouTube rode the Myspace growth wave by
offering its powerful video tools to attract indie bands that were members of
the social network. Once YouTube was exposed to millions of Myspace
members, its adoption rate grew virally. By 2006, YouTube’s reach outgrew
Myspace’s, and the adoption graphs have only diverged further since then.


3.  The seeding strategy. Create value units that will be relevant to at
least one set of potential users. When these users are attracted to the
platform, other sets of users who want to engage in interactions with them
will follow.
In many cases, the platform company takes the task of value creation
upon itself by acting as the first producer. In addition to kickstarting the
platform, this strategy allows the platform owner to define the kind and
quality of value units they want to see on the platform, thereby encouraging
a culture of high-quality contributions among subsequent producers.7
When Google launched its Android smartphone operating system to
compete with Apple’s, it seeded the market by offering $5 million in prizes
to developers who came up with the best apps in each of ten categories,
including gaming, productivity, social networking, and entertainment.
Winners not only got the prize money but became market leaders in their
categories, attracting large numbers of customers as a result.
In other cases, the value units may be “borrowed” from another source
rather than created by the platform developer from scratch. Adobe launched
its now-ubiquitous PDF document-reading tool in part by arranging to make
all federal government tax forms available online. The size of this instant
market was huge, encompassing any individual or business that might need
to pay U.S. taxes. Adobe induced the IRS to cooperate by suggesting that
millions of dollars in printing and postage costs could be saved. Taxpayers,
in turn, got fast, convenient access to documents that everyone needs, at
least once a year. Impressed by the value provided, many adopted Adobe as
their document platform of choice.
In still other cases, seeding is done through simulated (“fake”) value
units. As we’ve seen, PayPal employed this strategy when it created bots
that made purchases on eBay, thereby attracting sellers to the PayPal
platform. This was especially clever, since a bot could then turn around and
list for sale the item it had just bought, thereby covering both sides of the
two-sided market—and precluding PayPal from ever having to warehouse
and ship the item itself.
Dating services often simulate initial traction by creating fake profiles
and conversations. Many skew their profiles to showcase attractive women,
in a bid to attract men to the platform. Users who visit the site see the
activity and are enticed to stay on.


Reddit is a highly popular link-sharing community that circulates vast
amounts of Internet content. When it first launched, the site was seeded
with fake profiles posting links to the kind of content the founders wanted
to see on the site over time. It worked. The initial content attracted people
who were interested in similar content and created a culture of high-quality
contributions to the community. Over time, its members have learned to
rely on one another for guidance as to what’s worth scrutinizing and what is
not. (The success of Reddit’s launch and expansion have not shielded it
from controversy, of course, as the 2015 battles over allegedly racist and
bigoted content on the site made clear.)
Similarly, when Quora first started, the editors would ask questions and
then answer the questions themselves, to simulate activity on the platform.
Once users started asking questions, editors continued to answer them,
thereby demonstrating how the platform was intended to work. Eventually,
users themselves took over the process, and the “pump-priming” by Quora
personnel could cease.
4.  The marquee strategy. Provide incentives to attract members of a
key user set onto your platform.
In many cases, there’s a single group of users who are so important that
their participation can make or break the success of the platform. It may,
therefore, make sense for the platform manager to incentivize their
participation, either through a cash payment or through other special
benefits.
In the world of electronic gaming, companies like Microsoft (Xbox),
Sony (PlayStation), and Nintendo (Wii) create devices that serve as
platforms that connect consumers with content produced by game
developers. The dominant sports game developer is Electronic Arts (EA),
whose licensed games that simulate NFL football, NBA basketball, NHL
hockey, and other sports (such as its Tiger Woods pro golf tour game) are
annually updated and outsell all competitors. No producer of a gaming
device can hope to survive without having an attractive array of games from
EA available for its platform. Thus, Microsoft, Sony, and Nintendo have all
been willing to provide especially sweet partnership deals to entice EA to
develop or adapt games so as to be ready for release at the moment their
new platforms are released.


In a variation on this strategy, a platform company may choose to
purchase a marquee participant in order to obtain exclusive access to the
seeds it produces. For a number of years, software producer Bungie
specialized in games, like the popular Marathon, for use on Apple
computers. In 2000, with the Xbox nearing launch, Microsoft bought out
Bungie and repurposed a game then in development under the title Halo:
Combat Evolved as an Xbox exclusive. Halo became the marquee app that
sold hundreds of thousands of Xbox devices, as well as a billion-dollar
franchise in its own right.
Sometimes, the marquee players whose participation is vital to platform
success are consumers rather than producers. That was the case with
PayPal, which is why the company gave cash incentives to entice shoppers
to adopt their online payment mechanism.
In 2009, the Swiss postal service made the decision to transform itself
into a digital message-delivery platform using scanning-and-archiving
technology provided by Seattle-based Earth Class Mail.8 Swiss Post soon
recognized the importance of capturing and converting thousands of
customers who were more comfortable with traditional mail delivery. To
attract those holdouts, Swiss Post gave away thousands of iPads to
households in remote neighborhoods. In the process, it encouraged these
rural Swiss families to switch from physical mail to electronic messaging,
thus greatly reducing the resources it had to dedicate to hand-delivering the
mail. It also, not so incidentally, positioned Swiss Post to become the
country’s largest retailer of Apple products—a significant secondary benefit
for the company.9
5.    The single-side strategy. Create a business around products or
services that benefit a single set of users; later, convert the business into a
platform business by attracting a second set of users who want to engage in
interactions with the first set.
Launching a service booking platform like  OpenTable, the restaurant
reservation system, poses a classic chicken-or-egg problem. Without a large
base of participating restaurants, why would patrons visit the OpenTable
site? But without a large base of patrons, why would restaurants choose to
participate? OpenTable solved the problem by first distributing booking
management software that restaurants could use to manage their seating
inventory. Once OpenTable had enough restaurants on board, they built out


the consumer side, which allowed them to start booking tables and
collecting a lead generation fee from the restaurants.
The Indian bus reservation platform redBus gained traction in a similar
manner. It provided bus operators with a seating inventory management
system, then opened the platform to consumers once bus operators had
started using the software.
Delicious is a social networking site that allows users to share lists of
web bookmarks—links to Internet content that individuals love and that
they want to revisit again and again. Delicious gained initial traction by
allowing early users to produce valuable content in stand-alone mode, using
Delicious to store browser bookmark lists in the cloud for their personal
consumption. Once the user base hit critical mass, the social bookmarking
features started getting used, and the value of the network expanded rapidly
as the number of users increased. Now Delicious has become a popular tool
for spreading Internet memes and trends as people share their bookmark
lists.
6.  The producer evangelism strategy: Design your platform to attract
producers, who can induce their customers to become users of the platform.
Platforms that provide businesses with tools for customer relationship
management (CRM) can often solve the chicken-or-egg problem simply by
attracting one set of users—producers—who then take on the task of
bringing along the other set—consumers—from their own customer base.
The platform helps the producers cater to their existing set of consumers,
and over time, the producers benefit from data-driven cross-pollination as
other consumers on the network become interested in their products and
services.
Crowdfunding platforms such as Indiegogo and Kickstarter thrive by
targeting creators who need funding and providing them with the
infrastructure to host and manage the funding campaign, making it easier
for them to connect effectively with their customer base. Education
platforms such as Skillshare and Udemy also grow through producer
evangelism. They sign up influential teachers, allowing them to easily host
online courses and prompting them to get their students on board.
In a similar fashion, expert marketplaces can build their consumer base
by starting with customer lists provided by their producer members. For
example, Clarity, which bills itself as an online marketplace that provides


expert advice for entrepreneurs, enables bloggers and other experts to
monetize their following through a Clarity widget that lets readers book
paid calls with them. With every call, the producer helps Clarity sign up a
new consumer who can then be directed to other producers.
Mercateo, a German B2B platform for business and industrial supplies,
employs a producer evangelism strategy with a novel twist. It shrewdly
offers producers this invitation: “Bring us your customers, and you will
have the last word in any bidding competition … but only for the customers
you bring.” Thus, suppliers are incentivized to invite their customers to join
Mercateo, and to do so promptly, before a competing company can claim
them and enjoy the advantage of final-offer bidding.
7.  The big-bang adoption strategy. Use one or more traditional push
marketing strategies to attract a high volume of interest and attention to
your platform. This triggers a simultaneous on-boarding effect, creating an
almost fully-developed network virtually instantaneously.
As we’ve noted, in today’s crowded, networked, and ultra-competitive
arena, push strategies have become increasingly ineffective at enabling
companies to achieve rapid, large-scale growth. But there are occasional
exceptions. Twitter’s breakout moment occurred at the 2007 South by
Southwest (SXSW) Interactive film, music, and tech festival. Twitter had
launched nine months earlier, but wasn’t getting heavy adoption. Jack
Dorsey and Twitter’s other founders needed a way to get a critical mass of
users on the platform. Given the real-time nature of activity on Twitter, they
realized they needed to build concentration in time as well as in space.
Twitter invested $11,000 to install a pair of giant flat-panel screens in the
main hallways at SXSW. A user could text “Join sxsw” to Twitter’s SMS
shortcode number (40404) and find his or her tweets instantly appearing on
the screens. Seeing the feedback on large screens in real time and watching
as thousands of new users jumped into the fray created enormous
excitement around Twitter and helped make it the hottest networking site in
cyberspace. Twitter received the festival’s Web Award for the year’s best
online innovation, and by the end of SXSW, Twitter usage had tripled, from
20,000 tweets per day to 60,000.
Other networks have modeled their breakout strategies on Twitter’s. Two
years later, blogging platform Foursquare achieved a comparable
breakthrough at the 2009 SXSW festival. In 2012, Tinder, a location-based


dating app, achieved its breakout by launching during a frat party at the
University of Southern California—a hotbed of young men and women
who were already looking for ways to hook up. Tinder made the task easier
and, in the process, achieved critical mass during a live party in a small,
contained location.
Not every platform can take advantage of the big bang strategy, as
Twitter, Foursquare, and Tinder did. As South by Southwest has grown, the
number of companies trying to use it as a platform launch vehicle has
reached a point where there’s virtually no way to be heard above the roar of
the crowd.10 And there isn’t always a relevant opportunity for an explosion
of real-time publicity interest that is capable of attracting thousands of
potential users.
Nonetheless, when such an opportunity exists—as it did for Tinder—the
smart platform manager will grab it.
8.    The micromarket strategy. Start by targeting a tiny market that
comprises members who are already engaging in interactions. This enables
the platform to provide the effective matchmaking characteristic of a large
market even in the earliest stages of growth.
The odds were heavily stacked against Facebook. Friendster had
gathered more than three million users within a few months of its 2002
launch, and Myspace was growing fast. Of all platform businesses, social
networks are probably the least forgiving of late market entrants. Users
won’t readily move to a new social network unless it offers something
remarkably different. That’s the power of the network effect.
What’s more, because the value of a social network is so heavily based
on network effects, achieving critical mass is especially important. If
Facebook had launched worldwide and quickly achieved a few hundred
signups—or even a few thousand—it wouldn’t have taken off, since those
widely dispersed, random users coming in wouldn’t have interacted.
So Facebook’s decision to launch in the closed community of Harvard
University wasn’t simply a matter of convenience. It was a masterstroke
that enabled Facebook to solve the chicken-or-egg problem. Attracting an
initial five hundred users in the geographically and socially concentrated
community of Harvard University ensured the creation of an active
community at launch. Facebook leveraged Harvard as an existing
micromarket and gained traction by improving the quality of interactions


among its members. Focusing on a micromarket reduces the critical mass
required to start interactions and makes matchmaking much easier.
When it expanded beyond Harvard, Facebook had to build a user base in
every new campus it opened up to, often competing with existing intra-
campus networks. Initially, these campuses were unconnected nodes on the
Facebook network. Growth took off when Facebook started allowing cross-
campus friend connections. This eliminated the need to solve the chicken-
or-egg problem afresh in every new campus. Users coming onto the
network at a new campus had an existing list of connections across other
campuses to keep them engaged while they waited for others from their
own campus to join.
Geographic focus isn’t the only way to define a micromarket. Stack
Overflow 
started 
out 
as 
a 
question-and-answer 
community 
for
programming topics (category focus). Later it expanded into a second
category that users requested—cooking. Now Stack Overflow has a voting
mechanism that allows the community to choose topics they are interested
in. 
VIRAL GROWTH:
THE USER-TO-USER LAUNCH MECHANISM
One of the most powerful ways to accelerate the growth of a platform is by
achieving viral growth. The viral growth strategy complements any of the
launch strategies we’ve discussed in this chapter.
Viral growth is a pull-based process based on encouraging users to
spread the word about the platform to other potential users. When users
themselves encourage others to join the network, the network becomes the
driver of its own growth.
The term “viral growth,” of course, contains a built-in metaphor: it
analogizes the growth of the platform to the spread of an infectious disease.
In nature, a disease spreads when four elements interact: a host, germs, a
medium, and a recipient. An infected host sneezes or otherwise spreads
germs that carry infection out into the environment. These germs are then
spread through a medium, such as the atmosphere. Then, a recipient inhales,
ingests, or otherwise absorbs the germs and becomes infected in turn. Now


the recipient becomes the host, and the cycle repeats. If it happens often
enough, an epidemic results.
Similarly, four key elements are necessary to begin the process of viral
growth for a platform business—the sender, the value unit, the external
network, and the recipient. Let’s consider the viral growth of Instagram:
•    The sender. A user on Instagram shares a picture that he has just created. This launches the
cycle that will eventually bring in a new user.
•    The value unit. On Instagram, the value unit is the picture that the user shares with friends.
•    The external network. For Instagram, Facebook serves as a very effective external network,
allowing value units (photos) to spread and be exposed to potential users.
•        The recipient. Finally, a user from Facebook gets intrigued by the picture and visits
Instagram. This user may create her own photo and start the cycle all over again. Now the
recipient is acting as the sender.
Everyone has heard of Instagram’s rapid growth—over 100 million
active users in less than two years—which led to its billion-dollar
acquisition in April 2012 by Facebook. What is less well known is that
Instagram achieved this rapid growth without employing a single traditional
marketing manager. It happened because the company’s platform was
carefully designed to make viral growth organic and practically inevitable.
Unlike its competitor Hipstamatic, Instagram didn’t simply allow users
to save, organize, and filter pictures. It encouraged them to share their
photos on external networks like Facebook, converting a single-user
activity into a social, multi-user activity. Every time users engaged the app,
they shared their creations. Every point of app usage became an instance of
app marketing. In essence, Instagram converted all its users into marketers.
The same cycle of viral growth—a form of growth impossible in the
industrial economy of pipelines and products—helps to explain the success
of many other platform startups. Airbnb encouraged users with rooms to
rent (hosts) to list their offerings (value units) on Craigslist (external
network). Those who saw the room listings (recipients) and were motivated
to rent those rooms became Airbnb users—and many subsequently began
renting out rooms of their own, fueling the growth of the platform.
OpenTable similarly encourages diners (hosts) to share their dinner
reservations (value units) over email or Facebook (external networks) with
their friends and colleagues (recipients) who are joining them for dinner.
If you’re a platform manager hoping to achieve the same kind of viral
growth as Instagram, Airbnb, and OpenTable, you need to design rules and


tools that will jumpstart the cycle. Your goal is to design an ecosystem
where senders want to transfer value units through an external network to a
large number of recipients, ultimately leading many of those recipients to
become users of your platform.
Let’s look at these four design elements in greater detail.
The sender. Getting senders to spread value units is not the same as
word of mouth, which is a familiar tactic in traditional marketing. Word of
mouth happens when users like your platform so much, they can’t stop
talking about it. When users become senders and spread value units, they
aren’t talking about your platform—they are spreading their own creations,
and indirectly generating awareness of and interest in your platform.
In general, users spread self-created value units to get social feedback,
which in turn may bring them fun, fame, fulfillment, or fortune—or some
combination of these rewards. Channel owners on YouTube spread the word
about their videos on multiple external networks in order to gain an
audience; survey developers on SurveyMonkey spread their surveys via
email, blogs, and social networks to get responses, which provide insight
into the question the survey developers are trying to answer; creators
seeking funding on Kickstarter spread their project page on their social
networks in order to attract the money they need to complete their works as
well as the audience they hope will appreciate the finished product.
These examples illustrate how well-designed platforms create natural
incentives for users to share. As a rule, platform designers must avoid
discouraging the spread of value units. The act of sending these units onto
an external network like Facebook should not distract a creator from using
the platform; instead, it should fit integrally into the workflow of the
platform. The more closely this is aligned to the main use of the platform,
the more likely the platform is to go viral.
A platform may also provide inorganic (artificial) incentives to
encourage value-spreading behavior, but these need to be carefully
structured. A monetary incentive, for example, can become a cash drain if
the platform achieves viral growth. Dropbox, the popular cloud-based
service for storing and sharing data files, does a good job of structuring
inorganic incentives; it offers free storage space to the sender as well as the
recipient when the recipient signs up to become a Dropbox user. Thus, the
perk for spreading the word about Dropbox is not a cash payment that


would only serve to empty the company’s coffers, but rather an opportunity
to use Dropbox’s service even more, thereby stimulating further growth and
encouraging users to make ever greater use of the Dropbox platform.
The value unit. This is the fundamental unit of virality—an embodiment
of platform usage that can spread on an external network and demonstrate
the platform’s value. But not every value unit that exists on a platform is
spreadable. For example, the users of a business platform designed to
enable the exchange of proprietary documents among company partners
will not want to spread their confidential information the way Instagram
users share their snapshots. So designing spreadable value units is a crucial
step toward virality.
A spreadable value unit may be one that helps to start an interaction on
an external network, the way Instagram photos create conversations on
Facebook among users intrigued by the images they’ve seen. Or it may
create the opportunity to complete an incomplete interaction, the way an
unanswered question on Quora demands social feedback in the form of an
answer, or a fresh survey on Survey-Monkey invites responses. Making it
easy for users to create and disseminate spreadable value units helps you
build a platform that has high growth as well as high engagement.
Of course, as the example of a business platform for exchanging
confidential documents indicates, not every value unit is spreadable.
Platforms that don’t lend themselves to the creation of spreadable value
units are unlikely to go viral. Managers of such platforms will have to use
other approaches to achieve growth.
The external network. Many platforms grow on top of other networks.
Instagram, Twitter, Zynga, Slide, and other platforms have achieved viral
growth by leveraging Facebook as an underlying network. Airbnb spread on
Craigslist; OpenTable spreads on email.
However, leveraging an external network is not as simple as introducing
a “Share on Facebook” button and waiting for users by the million to show
up. External networks often introduce restrictions when more and more
applications use them for growth—for example, Facebook has enforced
limitations on the gaming apps that outside companies offer its users. In
other cases, users overwhelmed by a constant flow of invitations sent by
outside producers urging them to sample their goods or services become


jaded over time and stop responding. To avoid this result, the managers of
startup platforms need to be strategic about identifying the external
networks they can use to build their growth and finding creative, value-
adding ways to connect with their users.
When LinkedIn was launched in 2003, most social networks gained
traction by integrating with a new user’s Hotmail or Yahoo contact list and
prompting him or her to send invites to the platform over email. Originally
devised by Michael Birch (best known as cofounder of the short-lived
social network Bebo), this simple hack helped generate growth for many
early social networks. LinkedIn chose instead to engineer a more
technologically challenging integration with Microsoft Outlook, the
software that housed most of the business connections that LinkedIn wanted
to access. The integration was time- and cost-intensive, but it helped
LinkedIn establish itself as the premier social network for business.
The recipient. When the user of a platform sends a value unit to a friend
or acquaintance, the recipient will respond if he or she finds the value unit
relevant, interesting, useful, entertaining, or otherwise valuable. When the
value units are intriguing enough, the recipients spread them further,
sometimes giving rise to new interactions on another network. Media
companies like Upworthy and BuzzFeed have grown almost entirely on the
strength of consumer-initiated viral spread.
Unfortunately, since value units are created by users, managers of
platforms have limited control over them. Instagram doesn’t select photos
or retouch them to make them more attractive, YouTube doesn’t direct or
edit user videos, and Facebook doesn’t curate member posts to eliminate
boring ones. However, sometimes a platform can nudge users in directions
that will make seeds more attractive to recipients. For example, Instagram
provides photo editing tools to help users enhance the attractiveness of the
images they post, and it encourages users to label their photos with hashtags
that are specific and relevant—#vwbus for a photo of a Volkswagen van
rather than the more generic #van or (worse yet) the self-explanatory
#photo.11
In addition, platform managers can connect the value unit to a call to
action—a message that ensures the recipient recognizes the platform from
which the value unit has been delivered and understands the opportunity to
join. When the communications platform Hotmail first went viral, it affixed


to the bottom of every email the message, “P.S. I love you. Get your FREE
email at Hotmail.” Free email for consumers was a new and compelling
offer at the time, and this simple message attracted thousands of user
adoptions.
Not every budding platform has an opportunity to achieve viral growth.
But if it does, it can help turn slow but steady expansion into the kind of
skyrocket growth that makes a platform into a national or global
phenomenon with the potential to dominate its market for years to come.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER FIVE
    One difference between platform businesses and traditional pipeline businesses is that, in
the world of platforms, pull strategies designed to encourage virality are more important
than the push strategies (such as advertising and public relations) used in conventional
marketing.
    Successful platforms use one of eight proven strategies for solving the chicken-or-egg
problem: the follow-the-rabbit strategy; the piggyback strategy; the seeding strategy; the
marquee strategy; the single-side strategy; the producer evangelism strategy; the big bang
adoption strategy; and the micromarket strategy.
    The speed of a platform’s expansion can be accelerated through viral growth. This depends
on four key elements: the sender, the value unit, the external network, and the recipient.
OceanofPDF.com


6
MONETIZATION
Capturing the Value
Created by Network Effects
Not long ago, one of the authors of this book—Marshall Van Alstyne—
was approached by a pair of company founders on their way to a meeting
with a group of venture capitalists. They’d created a new platform business
that, for the purposes of this story, we’ll give the fictitious name of Ad
World. They were hoping to impress the assembled VCs with an astute
business plan and thereby win a significant offer for funding.
“Here’s the idea,” one of the founders explained to Marshall. “Our new
platform Ad World will provide a listing service for firms to find ad
agencies. We’ll make it easy for companies that are ready to begin new
advertising campaigns to post requests for bids, and for ad agencies to post
proposals and offers that companies can look at and respond to. It’s just like
99designs, which lets graphic artists link up with consumers who want help
with artistic projects, only in the B2B space instead of the B2C space.”
“Okay,” Marshall said. “I get the idea. What’s your question?”
“Here’s what we want to know,” the founder replied. “We’re pretty sure
Ad World is going to provide value to our users and attract a fair amount of
interest. But we’re wondering how to generate revenues from it. Should we
charge the ad agencies to join the platform and put up their profiles? Should
we charge the firms that are seeking services? Or should we charge for
individual project listings? Or maybe for all three?”
“And we need an answer fast,” interjected his partner. “We need to
figure out our strategy so we can run the numbers and make our business
