# 6. Monetization: Capturing the Value Created by Network Effects

case to the VCs.”
The aspiring platform moguls gazed at Marshall with such sincerity that
he almost hated to burst their bubble. But he had to do it. As gently as he
could, Marshall replied, “You’ve listed three possible ways to monetize Ad
World, and you’ve asked me to pick one of them—or maybe all three. My
answer is, none of the above.”
The two founders in this story were smart, talented, thoughtful business
leaders. They’d done a lot of homework on the nature of platform
ecosystems. They did understand, in a general way, how platform
businesses work and the challenges of attracting both sides of the market to
make a robust set of interactions possible. But when it came to
monetization, they were asking the wrong questions.
These founders shouldn’t charge either side to be listed on their
platform. Doing so would put terrible friction on entry into the ecosystem,
discouraging many potential participants from becoming users. To charge
for posting a deal simply means people post fewer deals. That’s bad. It
reduces potential interaction volume, not to mention realized interactions.
As a result, it also reduces the volume of data available to the platform—
data desperately needed to enable the platform to forge powerful matches
between consumers and producers.
In fact, rather than charging users to join the platform, the founders
should be subsidizing their participation—perhaps by providing tools and
services to make it easy, fast, and effective for them to complete their
profiles.
This wasn’t a complete surprise to the founders. They had partly intuited
this, as Marshall could tell by the fact that they’d used “scrapers”—
automated software tools for collecting data from the Internet—to produce
user profiles. They understood that building a base of users was their first
and biggest challenge, and that creating friction around the process by
charging money for it would be a serious mistake.
How, then, could the founders monetize their platform model? The
answer: They can charge users for the value they accrue from the
ecosystem, but the charge should be levied on deal completion, not at the
time of listing. They would make it possible for firms to post a deal risk-
free by charging a fee only once the firms get what they need. The fee
becomes performance-based, and it feels negligible because it simply skims
off a small fraction of a transaction that’s occurring anyway.


What’s more, the best strategy may be one the founders didn’t even
consider. Why not charge ad agencies for a service that helps them do a
postmortem to discover why they lost a deal? Not only would this fee create
no friction on a deal, but it would reflect the value of the feedback
provided; it would be recurring revenue rather than one-time revenue; and it
could help ad agencies improve the quality of their offerings, thereby
encouraging a rise in the value of interactions over time.
The story of this fledgling platform and the strategic challenge its
founders faced illustrates some of the complexity of platform businesses—
as well as the creative thinking platform managers need to practice if they
are going to realize the full value-creating potential of the ecosystems they
are building. Monetization, in fact, is one of the most difficult—and
fascinating—issues that any platform company must address.
VALUE CREATION AND THE CHALLENGE OF
MONETIZING NETWORK EFFECTS
As we’ve explained, the inherent value of a platform business lies chiefly in
the network effects it creates. But monetizing network effects poses a
unique challenge. Network effects make a platform attractive by creating
self-reinforcing feedback loops that grow the user base, often with minimal
effort or investment by the platform manager. Higher value creation by
producers on the platform attracts more consumers, who, in turn, attract
more producers and further value creation.
Yet, ironically, this powerfully positive growth dynamic makes
monetization very tricky. Any charge levied on users is likely to discourage
them from participating on the platform. Charging for access may lead
people to avoid the platform altogether; charging for usage may inhibit
frequent participation; charging for production reduces value creation,
making the platform less attractive to consumers; and charging for
consumption reduces consumption, making the platform less attractive to
producers. This was the precise dilemma that the founders of Ad World
were grappling with.
How, then, do you monetize a platform without damaging or even
destroying the network effects you’ve worked so hard to create?


Some students of platform businesses leap to the assumption that the
collaborative nature of value creation on the Internet means that the natural
price for goods and services distributed online must be free. But of course a
business that charges nothing for the benefits it offers is unlikely to survive
for very long, since it will not produce the resources needed to maintain or
enhance it, and investors will have no incentive to provide the capital
needed for its growth.
Some element of free pricing can be useful in building network effects
for a platform business. But it’s important to understand the different
models in which partially free pricing can power growth. As every business
student learns, the model behind the safety razor business that entrepreneur
King Gillette founded in 1901 involved distributing the razors for free—or
at a very low, subsidized cost—while charging for the blades.
As it happens, research by Randal C. Picker of the University of Chicago
Law School has called into question the traditional story of Gillette and the
razors-and-blades pricing strategy. Picker found that the timing of price
changes for Gillette razors and blades, as well as the expiration date on the
patent covering Gillette’s unique razor design, seems to undermine the
notion that the company was employing the razors-and-blades strategy as
commonly understood.1 Nonetheless, the familiar story remains a handy
symbol for a strategy that has been used in a number of markets, including,
for example, the printer market, where sales of high-priced toner cartridges
generate profits that the relatively cheap printers themselves don’t produce.
Another version of this strategy is the freemium model, in which a free
layer of service attracts users who eventually pay for an enhanced version.
Many online service platforms, including Dropbox and MailChimp, work
this way. Both the razors-and-blades model and the freemium model
monetize the same user base, or portions thereof.
Platforms may also offer free or subsidized pricing to one user base
while charging full price to an entirely different user base. This makes the
design of monetization models more complex, since the platform must
ensure that the value it gives away to one side can be used to capture value
on the other side. Significant scholarly work has been done in this area.
Two of this book’s authors (Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne) were
among the first scholars to lay out the theory of two-sided market pricing.2
And the theory was mentioned as part of the 2014 Nobel Prize awarded to
one of the other originators of two-sided market economics, Jean Tirole.3


Achieving the right balance among the complex factors involved in two-
sided market pricing isn’t easy. Netscape, one of the pioneers of the Internet
era, gave away browsers for free in hopes of selling web servers.
Unfortunately, there was no proprietary connection between browsers and
servers that Netscape could reliably control. Anyone could just as easily use
Microsoft’s web server or the free Apache web server, which meant that
Netscape was never able to monetize the other side of its free browser
business. As this example illustrates, platform businesses that intend to use
free pricing as part of their strategy need to ensure that the value they create
and hope to ultimately monetize is fully controlled by the platform.
Meeting the monetization challenge must begin with an analysis of the
value created on the platform. Traditional non-platform businesses—
pipelines—deliver value to their customers in the form of a product or
service. They may charge for ownership of the product, as Whirlpool does
when it sells a dishwasher, or for utilization of the product, as GE Aviation
charges for installation and regular servicing of its aircraft engines.
Like Whirlpool and GE, platform companies are engaged in designing
and building technology. But rather than putting the technology in the hands
of customers in exchange for a fee, they invite users to join the platform—
and then they seek to monetize the platform by charging for the value that
the platform technology creates for those users. This value falls into four
broad categories:
•    For consumers: Access to value created on the platform. Video viewers find the videos on
YouTube valuable; Android users find value in the various activities made possible by the
apps; students on Skillshare find value in the courses made available through the site.
•    For producers or third-party providers: Access to a community or market. Airbnb is
valuable for hosts because it provides access to a global market of travelers. Company
recruiters find LinkedIn valuable because it enables them to connect to potential job-seekers.
Merchants find Alibaba valuable because it enables them to sell their products to customers
around the world.
•        For both consumers and producers: Access to tools and services that facilitate
interaction. Platforms create value by reducing the friction and barriers that prevent
producers and consumers from interacting. Kickstarter helps creative entrepreneurs raise
money for new projects. eBay, combined with PayPal, allows anyone to start an online store
that serves customers anywhere in the world. YouTube allows musicians to provide their fans
with performance videos, without having to produce physical products (CDs or DVDs) and
without having to sell through intermediary retailers.
•    For both consumers and producers: Access to curation mechanisms that enhance the
quality of interactions. Consumers value access to high-quality goods and services that
address their specific needs and interests, while producers value access to consumers who
want their offerings and are willing to pay a fair price for them. Well-run platforms build and


maintain curation systems that connect the right consumers with the right producers quickly
and easily.
These four forms of value wouldn’t exist without the platform, and so
they may be described as sources of excess value that the platform
generates. Most well-designed platforms create far more value than they
directly capture—which is why they attract large numbers of users, who are
happy to enjoy the benefits of all the “free” value provided by the platform.
A smart monetization strategy begins by considering all four forms of
value, then determines which sources of excess value can be exploited by
the platform without inhibiting the continued growth of network effects.
NUMBERS ARE NOT ENOUGH: FINDING THE VALUE IN
NETWORK EFFECTS
Founded in 2005 by Ethan Stock, Zvents was originally an online guide to
local events in the Bay Area. It grew rapidly, expanding beyond California
and becoming the largest site of its kind, serving hundreds of markets and
attracting over 14 million visitors every month. It was a hit with both
producers—the local event organizers who posted their concerts, shows,
fairs, festivals, and other activities on the site—and consumers, who logged
on to Zvents to find something fun to do after work and on the weekend.
Stock seemed to be living the Silicon Valley dream. Having built a
platform that millions of people had come to rely on, his only remaining
challenge was to monetize it. But that proved to be far from simple.
“Once we reached critical mass,” Stock recalls, “and it was clear we
were becoming the market leader, we expected event organizers would start
paying. … But there is a fatal flaw in some businesses that can hogtie their
ability to make money—the expectation of completeness.”
The problem was that consumers who visited Zvents expected to find a
comprehensive listing of local events. If only a few of the available options
were included, the interest of users would quickly evaporate. Which meant
that Zvents didn’t have much leverage over the event organizers they hoped
to charge. If they’d threatened organizers with having their listings pulled,
the threats would have no teeth, since the whole value of Zvents lay in the


completeness of its listings. Charging producers for access to the platform
wasn’t going to work.
Zvents experimented with another monetization technique that we’ll
discuss later in this chapter—charging producers for enhanced access. They
did manage to get a few organizers to pay for more prominent listings, but
the value of the enhancements in terms of improved attendance or ticket
sales proved small. Zvents ended up with a tiny trickle of revenue rather
than the gusher they’d hoped for. In June 2013, with his hopes of building a
lucrative platform empire to rival Google or Facebook dashed, Stock sold
his company to eBay, which now uses Zvents as a bulletin board for arts
and entertainment events in conjunction with its StubHub ticket resale
platform.
The lesson? Network effects as measured by numbers of visitors alone
don’t necessarily reflect the monetary value of a platform. The interactions
facilitated must generate a significant amount of excess value that can be
captured by the platform without producing a negative impact on network
effects. When that’s not the case, monetization may not be possible.
The paradoxical relationship between network size and monetization
potential doesn’t stop there. In some cases, the ability to monetize a
platform may actually increase dramatically when the number of users
declines—reflecting the power of negative network effects to impact the
value of a platform.
Meetup was launched in 2002 as a way for groups to organize offline
meetings (“meetups”) by connecting online. Its cofounder, Scott Heiferman,
said he was inspired by the way people in New York came together as a
community following the 9/11 terror attacks.
Meetup gained traction as a free platform, but the dot-com bust of the
late 1990s served as a constant reminder to its managers of the need to
develop a credible monetization model. They first tried to generate income
by using lead generation, charging fees to offline venues such as restaurants
and bars for the number of users that came in during a meetup. However, in
a pre-smartphone world, this monetization model didn’t work very well.
The number of people who actually showed up for events was different
from the number who signed up, and Meetup had no way of counting heads
to determine an appropriate fee.
Meetup abandoned the lead generation model and experimented with
other ways of monetizing its service. It tested advertising, but failed to


attract significant numbers of advertisers. It tried offering a premium
product called Meetup Plus, but the additional value provided generated
little interest. (Perhaps understandably: years later, when asked in an
interview to explain the extra service included with Meetup Plus,
Heiferman responded with a laugh, “God, I don’t even remember what it
got you. It got you some kind of features where you would be able to … I
don’t know. I can’t remember.”) Meetup even tested charging fees to
political organizations, which were a growing portion of the platform’s user
base, but this, too, produced only modest revenue. Meetup’s options were
running out.
Meanwhile, Meetup found itself confronted with another problem—one
that, paradoxically, would help save the company. This was the growth of
negative network effects. As the platform grew, with low barriers to
planning a meetup, many meetups were being started without a clear
purpose or adequate planning. There was a lot of noise on the platform,
leading to disappointing experiences for users, who would sign up for a
meetup only to discover that attendance was small and activity minimal.
Meetup’s leaders made a risky decision. They decided to start charging
meetup organizers, despite the potential for drastically diminishing the scale
of the platform and weakening its network effects. They reasoned that
charging organizers would help them solve their monetization problem
while weeding out organizers who weren’t serious about their goals. A letter
went out to all organizers informing them that they would henceforth be
asked to pay $19 per month for the right to keep using Meetup’s service.
The backlash was huge. After Businessweek ran an article on Meetup’s
new strategy, the magazine received emails from countless platform users
predicting the service’s demise. One user from London wrote, “I think it’s
fair to say most organisers were shocked, and most of the ones I’ve spoken
to will simply cease organising for their groups … There isn’t anything
Meetup is doing these days that users can’t simply do on their own and
more effectively, and there’s plenty of open source software to make use of
and create your own website.”4
But despite the backlash, the strategy worked. The number of meetups
promoted on the site fell drastically, but their quality, and therefore the
quality of the interactions generated, improved significantly. As Heiferman
explained in an interview five years later, “The big headline, by the way, in
going from free to fee for us is: Yeah, we lost 95% of our activity but now


we have much, much, more going on than we ever did before and half the
Meetups are successful, as opposed to 1–2% being successful.”5
As we’ve discussed, a platform’s goal is not simply to pump up the
numbers of participants and interactions. It must also take steps to
encourage desirable interactions and discourage undesirable ones. Meetup’s
monetization model helped it achieve exactly that. By discouraging
organizers who weren’t serious about their objectives, the pricing
mechanism created a culture of quality on the platform.
It’s a mistake to assume that network effects can always be optimized by
simply refraining from charging users. A better approach to analyzing the
monetization challenge is to ask these questions: How can we generate
revenues without reducing our positive network effects? Can we devise a
pricing strategy that strengthens our positive network effects while reducing
our negative network effects? Can we create a strategy that encourages
desirable interactions and discourages undesirable ones?
WAYS TO MONETIZE (1):
CHARGING A TRANSACTION FEE
To begin exploring some of the ways that an effective monetization strategy
can be developed, let’s look back at the four forms of excess value created
by platforms—access to value creation, access to the market, access to
tools, and curation. All four culminate in some kind of interaction. In many
cases, this interaction involves an exchange of money, as when an Uber
customer pays a driver for a ride, an eBay buyer pays a seller for a product,
or a company using Upwork pays a freelancer for a completed project.
Platforms that facilitate such monetary transactions can monetize the value
created by charging a transaction fee, which may be calculated as either a
percentage of the transaction price or a fixed fee per transaction. The latter
system, which is simpler to administer, is particularly appealing when a
high frequency of transactions is expected without a significant variation in
the transaction size.
Charging a transaction fee is a powerful way of monetizing the value
created by the platform without hampering the growth of network effects.
Because buyers and sellers are charged only when an actual transaction
occurs, they are not discouraged from joining the platform and becoming


part of the network. Of course, if the transaction fee is excessive, it may
discourage transactions. Platform managers may need to experiment with
various levels of fee to find the rate that captures a fair percentage of the
value created without driving users away.
A more serious and persistent challenge is to capture on the platform
itself all the interactions facilitated by the platform. Buyers and sellers who
find each other on the platform are naturally incentivized to take the
interaction off the platform if they can, in order to avoid paying the
transaction fee.
This problem is especially rampant with platforms that connect service
providers with service consumers. With the rise of the freelancer economy
and the spread of the online sharing economy, platform businesses from
Airbnb and Uber to TaskRabbit and Upwork have sprung up to facilitate
service interactions. However, most of them are faced with the challenge of
capturing the interaction on-platform. In most cases, the interaction can’t
occur until the producer (in this case, the service provider) and the
consumer (the purchaser of the service) agree on the terms of the service,
which usually requires the two to interact directly. Furthermore, the actual
exchange of money often follows the delivery of the service, which also
requires the two participants to interact directly. These direct interactions
weaken the platform’s ability to capture value by creating an opportunity
for the parties to make a deal off-platform. As a result of avoiding the
transaction fee, the consumer can obtain a discount on the service, while the
provider gets to keep more of the total service charge. The only loser is the
platform company itself.
Platforms like Fiverr, Groupon, and Airbnb solve this problem by
temporarily preventing participants from connecting. These platforms try to
provide all the information a consumer needs to make an interaction
decision, 
without 
connecting 
the 
consumer 
directly 
with 
the
producer.  Groupon does this by featuring services that are largely
standardized, while the less-standardized Airbnb and Fiverr provide rating
mechanisms and other social metrics that indicate the reliability of a service
provider, making direct contact between the parties less necessary.
Sometimes strategies like these are insufficient. This is especially the
case with platforms that create a market for professional services, which
often require discussions, exchanges, and workflow management before
and during the provision of services. As a result, it may not be possible for


the platform to retain control of all communications between the producer
and the consumer, and charging the consumer ahead of the interaction may
not be an option.
In cases like these, the platform must extend its role as an interaction
facilitator to include more value-creating activities. For example, Upwork
provides tools for monitoring the service provider remotely. This enables
consumers of professional services to monitor projects and make payments
based on actual delivery of work.
The Clarity platform for connecting advice seekers with experts retains
control of the interaction through a similar mechanism. In the past, expert-
matching platforms connected the two sides, charged a lead generation fee,
and allowed the transaction to occur off-platform. Clarity provides
additional call management and invoicing capabilities that serve to capture
the interaction on the platform. To benefit producers, Clarity offers
integrated payments and invoicing, making it simple for advice givers to
generate income through small, one-off engagements. To benefit
consumers, the call management software provides per-minute billing,
which gives them the option to opt out of a call that isn’t proving useful.
Both sides receive enough additional value to keep them connected to
Clarity, with minimal incentive to take their interaction off-platform.
As these examples illustrate, service provider platforms that want to
capture and monetize interactions must create tools and services that benefit
both parties by removing friction, mitigate risk, and otherwise facilitate
interactions.
However, additional benefits like these may not be sufficient to enable
all service provider platforms to thrive. Local service platforms that connect
consumers with relatively simple services like plumbing and house painting
continue to struggle with the challenge of owning the interaction. The risks
involved in such interactions are lower than when hiring a professional
freelancer: the two sides get to meet in person, the work is simpler, its
quality is less variable, and, since the work itself happens off-platform,
usually under the direct supervision of the consumer, the consumer can
monitor the service provider without having to rely on software tools. Some
of these local service platforms may need to move to the enhanced access
monetization model, which we’ll describe in a later section of this chapter.


WAYS TO MONETIZE (2):
CHARGING FOR ACCESS
In some cases, it’s possible to monetize a platform by charging producers
for access to a community of users who have joined the platform not in
order to interact with producers but for other, unrelated reasons.
Dribbble has rapidly gained prominence in the design community as a
high-quality platform for designers—artists, illustrators, logo creators,
graphic designers, typographers, and others—to show off their work,
thereby gaining exposure, credibility, and valuable feedback from their
peers. Adapting the jargon of basketball, Dribbble users call new images
“shots,” image groups “buckets,” and reposts of favorite images
“rebounds.” This unique lingo has helped foster a highly engaged
community that includes many of today’s best designers.
Dribbble’s managers are eager to protect the long-term value of this
specialized community. For this reason, they do not charge members for
access to the platform, which could weaken network effects. They’ve also
opted not to permit sponsored images that provide enhanced access to the
community (for example, by popping up, uninvited, on users’ home pages),
since these could reduce the prestige of the site and its perceived value to its
users. (We’ll describe the enhanced access strategy in more detail a bit later
in this chapter.) So to monetize the site, Dribbble has invited third parties to
pay for access to the community. In this case, companies looking for
designers are charged to post employment listings on the site’s jobs board.
This form of monetization creates interactions that benefit both parties.
Designers are motivated to put up their best work on Dribbble, since these
may generate leads to new gigs, while companies get access to top-flight
designers whose portfolios have already been curated by the creative
community.
Dribbble’s monetization method can be described by the simple
shorthand term “advertising.” But notice that, unlike most advertising,
Dribbble’s highly targeted job listings generate value for the community,
enhance the core interaction, and strengthen network effects rather than
adding noise and depleting value.
In a similar fashion, LinkedIn allows recruiters to present job
opportunities to its members and offers companies the ability to compare


and target professionals based on their résumés and professional brands.
LinkedIn’s power as a recruiting platform encourages users to update their
profiles more often, thereby keeping the platform active and healthy.
As we’ve observed throughout this chapter, a monetization model is
sustainable only when it strengthens network effects (rather than weakening
them). Charging third-party producers for community access is effective if
and only if the newly added contents—such as the job listings on Dribbble
—enhance the value of the platform to its users.
WAYS TO MONETIZE (3):
CHARGING FOR ENHANCED ACCESS
Sometimes a platform that facilitates a monetary transaction may be unable
to own, and hence to monetize, the transaction. Such platforms may instead
charge producers for enhanced access to consumers. This refers to the
provision of tools that enable a producer to stand out above the crowd and
be noticed on a two-sided platform, despite an abundance of rival producers
and the resulting intense competition to attract consumer attention.
Platforms that charge producers fees for better targeted messages, more
attractive presentations, or interactions with particularly valuable users are
using enhanced access as a monetization technique.
The system of monetizing enhanced access generally doesn’t harm
network effects, since all producers and consumers are permitted to
participate in the platform on an open, non-enhanced basis. But those for
whom the additional value of enhanced access is particularly great can pay
for that extra value—allowing a portion of that value to be captured by the
platform business.
The traditional classified advertisement model, for example, supported
local newspapers for decades through paid placement of commercial
messages. Today, online platforms use a similar model, asking producers to
pay for more prominent placement of their messages. Yelp, for example,
offers restaurants enhanced visibility and better branding on its platform by
charging for a premium listing in search results. Restaurants pay for this
service, since it makes it easier for them to break through the noise and
attract the attention of the most valuable potential consumers.


Google search may also be seen through a similar lens. Every website
publisher can achieve higher placement for its site through search engine
optimization, a self-managed website design and coding process that
produces no revenue for Google. However, some publishers choose to buy
premium placement through Google Adwords. In a similar fashion, Tumblr,
a micro-blogging platform acquired by Yahoo in 2013, allows users to
promote their posts to a larger audience for a fee. Twitter, too, promotes
sponsored content at the top of its feed.
Another way of monetizing enhanced access is by charging users for
lowering barriers that otherwise exist between users. Dating websites, for
example, often allow men to see profiles of women without revealing
identifying details. Users who pay a subscription fee are allowed access to
additional information that enables them to connect directly with other
users who interest them.
Monetizing enhanced access to users needs to be done with care. If not
done right, it can increase the noise level on the platform and decrease the
relevance of content for consumers, leading to negative network effects, as
described in chapter 2.
One important principle is to ensure that consumers can easily
distinguish between content that has been elevated or highlighted as part of
a paid access program and content whose high ranking or prominence is
organic. Premium listings on Yelp and ads associated with Google’s search
results look different from organic results, creating a sense of transparency
that enhances user trust. Most search engines before Google that failed to
follow this principle ended up confusing and annoying users and damaging
the value of their platforms. So-called native advertising techniques, where
paid content on the Internet is designed to resemble unpaid content, run the
risk of appearing deceptive and alienating users.
Platform managers must also be careful not to allow monetization of
enhanced access to create the impression that user access is being restricted.
As the world’s largest social network, Facebook creates tremendous value
for brands that want to engage with current and potential customers. Some
consumer brands have grown massive followings on Facebook. However,
during 2014 and 2015, Facebook was widely criticized for making curation
changes that limit the reach of brands on the platform—except for those
that pay extra for access to a wider audience. The perception was that
Facebook was reducing services available to platform participants in order


to facilitate a revenue grab. Facebook’s massive size and the powerful
network effects it generates have enabled it to shrug off these complaints—
at least, so far. But few other platforms would be able to get away with
actions like these.
Finally, platform managers must ensure that their usual curation
principles are applied rigorously to content from producers who pay for
enhanced access. Facebook’s value is based on the relevance of its news
feed, and a torrent of sponsored posts that lack such relevance could
eventually drive consumers away from the platform.
WAYS TO MONETIZE (4):
CHARGING FOR ENHANCED CURATION
When we think of network effects, we often assume that more is better.
However, as we noted in chapters 2 and 3, positive network effects are
driven not simply by quantity but also by quality. When the quantity of
content on a platform becomes overwhelmingly great, consumers may find
it increasingly difficult to find the high-quality content they want, thereby
reducing the platform’s value for them. When this happens, consumers may
be willing to pay for access to guaranteed quality—in other words, for
enhanced curation.
Sittercity, a platform we’ve mentioned elsewhere in this book, charges
parents to access the platform. To ensure quality and choice, it performs
rigorous curation and screening of the babysitters who get access to the
platform—a source of significant additional value to parents who worry
about the well-being of their children. This extra value allows Sittercity to
charge a subscription fee to parents instead of the transaction fee usually
associated with a service provider platform.
As an advisor at Skillshare, an education platform, Sangeet Choudary
has helped the platform transition from a transaction-fee-only model to a
model that provides enhanced value upon payment of a subscription charge.
Skillshare allows students to pay separately for each course taken. But once
the platform managers had curated a sizeable amount of high-quality
courses, Skillshare began to allow students access to multiple courses via a
monthly subscription fee. Teachers are paid “royalties” based on the
number of subscription-paying students who sign up for their classes. The


growing number of students who choose this model get better value per
course consumed, while generating recurring revenues for the platform.
WHOM SHOULD YOU CHARGE?
A typical platform supports multiple types of users performing multiple
roles. Given the differences among the users, their economic status, their
motivations, their objectives, their incentives, and the differing forms and
amounts of value they derive from the platform, decisions about whom you
should charge and whom you should not can be complex—especially since
every decision you make about one user category impacts others in ways
that may not be obvious.
However, the general goal of encouraging positive interactions that will
create value for all participants—together with observations from the
histories of successful platform businesses—enables us to develop a few
useful heuristics about when particular pricing choices are appropriate and
when they are not.
•    Charging all users. As we’ve noted, platform businesses rarely charge all their users the way
pipeline businesses generally do. Charging all users would, in most cases, discourage
participation, thereby reducing or destroying network effects. However, in a few cases,
charging all users actually enhances network effects. In the offline world, for instance,
prestigious membership organizations like country clubs charge all members. High
membership dues (along with vetting processes such as requiring recommendations from
existing members) serve as curating techniques to guarantee member quality. Some online
platforms use this model—for example, Carbon NYC, a platform for multimillionaire
residents of New York City. However, in many social and business settings, “willingness to
pay” and “quality” are far from synonymous, so this pricing system must be used very
carefully and selectively.
•    Charging one side while subsidizing another. Some platforms are able to charge members
of one category of users (call them A) provided they allow members of another category of
users (B) to participate for free—or even subsidize or incentivize them. This works when
users from category A highly value the opportunity to make contact with users from category
B—but the feeling is not equally reciprocated. As we’ve noted, bars and pubs in the offline
world have long used this strategy by offering women free or discounted drinks on Ladies’
Nights. Many online dating websites follow a similar strategy, incentivizing memberships for
women as a way of attracting male members who will pay full freight.
•        Charging most users full price while subsidizing stars. Certain platforms choose to
subsidize or incentivize stars—super-users whose presence attracts large numbers of other
users. In offline business, malls have been known to offer attractive lease terms to popular
large retailers like Target, whose presence guarantees the customer traffic that other mall
occupants will readily pay a premium for. In a similar way, online platforms like Skillshare


and Indiegogo go to great lengths to court celebrity teachers and campaign creators, whose
star power attracts other producers as well as large numbers of curious consumers. Microsoft
learned this lesson when creating its Xbox gaming platform. Its initial monetization strategy
paid game developers (producers) a one-time purchase fee while channeling ongoing user fees
to Microsoft. But superstar game developer Electronic Arts refused to work on these terms and
threatened to develop for Sony instead. Microsoft eventually had to succumb and agree to
special terms for EA, though the details have not been publicly disclosed.
•        Charging some users full price while subsidizing users who are price-sensitive. The
category of users that is most sensitive to pricing is more likely to abandon the platform when
charged, killing the network effect. Thus, it generally makes sense to discount or subsidize
users who are price-sensitive while charging others the full freight. Real-world experience
shows that it can be difficult to predict which side of a platform market is likely to be more
price-sensitive. During the 1990s, the Denver real estate market experienced a glut of
properties, making property owners desperate for rentals. Real estate agents charged owners
broker fees, while tenants paid nothing. By contrast, during the same period, Boston had a
scarcity of available properties, making would-be renters desperate to find places to stay; real
estate agents charged potential tenants, while allowing owners to list their properties without
paying a fee.
As you can see, deciding whom to charge is a delicate balancing act. The
need to monetize the platform must be carefully weighed against the
friction invariably produced by imposing a cost. Deciding precisely where
the system can afford to create some friction—and how much friction can
be tolerated without crippling the growth of network effects—is no easy
matter.
Sometimes, a less-than-optimal monetization strategy can be made
workable through ingenuity. During its early years, Alibaba, the e-
commerce platform company that has been called China’s eBay and
Amazon rolled into one, was unable to charge transaction fees simply
because its primitive software had trouble tracking the flow of online deals.
CEO Jack Ma was forced to charge membership fees instead—an option he
would have preferred to avoid because of the entry friction it creates.
Alibaba managed to overcome this problem by offering sizeable
commissions to salespeople who convinced others to sign on to the
platform. When word got around that some Alibaba sales agents were
earning commissions in excess of a million Chinese yuan, equivalent to
well over $100,000, the drive to enlist members shifted into high gear
despite the friction caused by the entry fees. To this day, Alibaba charges no
transaction fees, having managed to monetize the platform through
advertising—as if a company that facilitated transactions, like Amazon and
eBay, were to generate its profits by selling ads like Google.


FROM FREE TO FEE: HOW DESIGN DECISIONS IMPACT
THE TRANSITION TO MONETIZATION
As many of the cases mentioned in this chapter suggest—and as plenty of
familiar real-world examples illustrate—the imperative to create and grow
network effects often leads platform founders to begin by offering their
services for free. Creating value for users while asking nothing in return is
often a great way to attract members and encourage participation. “Users
first, monetization later,” as the slogan goes. Or, in a variant that we heard
from the executive in charge of platform strategy for Haier Group, a
Chinese manufacturing company, “You never take first money.” In other
words, only after a value unit has been created and exchanged with results
that are satisfactory to both the producer and the consumer should the
platform business itself seek to capture a share of that value.
A number of highly promising platforms have foundered because they
ignored this rule and instead rushed to monetize their offerings prematurely.
Sean Percival, the former vice president of online marketing for the failed
social network Myspace, recalls the dire effect of financial pressures
following the acquisition of the platform by Rupert Murdoch’s News
Corporation. The “last nail in the coffin,” Percival says, was when Murdoch
promised stock analysts in an earnings call that Myspace would generate a
billion dollars in revenue that year—at a time when the true revenue figure
was a tenth of that. As a result, Myspace managers began scrambling to sign
up any program or service that someone was willing to sponsor—no matter
how inane or annoying it might be. This was one of the factors that
ultimately led users to abandon Myspace in favor of Facebook.6
As we’ve observed, there are a number of ways to shift later to a
monetization model that lets the platform business capture some fraction of
the value created. However, the transition is often fraught with difficulty.
These key principles of platform design help ensure that the transition to
monetization—from free to fee, as Meetup’s Heiferman put it—can be
managed successfully.
•        If possible, avoid charging for value that users previously received for free. People
naturally resent being told that they have to pay for a good or service they’ve previously
received for free—as we saw in the case of Meetup. And not all platform businesses have been
as successful as Meetup at navigating such a transition. Some, like Zvents, either died or were
forced to dramatically alter the nature of their offering.


•    Also, avoid reducing access to value that users have become accustomed to receiving. As
we noted, Facebook was offering tremendous value for free and actually needed to cut down
on that organic value when it decided to provide premium content promotion to paying
producers. This led to complaints from both producers and consumers. Facebook’s enormous
network effects enabled it to survive this course correction, but for many lesser platforms it
might have been fatal.
•    Instead, when transitioning from free to fee, strive to create new, additional value that
justifies the charge. Of course, you must ensure that, if you charge for enhanced quality, you
control for it and guarantee it. Critics have assailed Uber for charging a Safe Rides fee to pay
for drivers’ background checks and other safety measures while apparently cutting corners on
those same steps.
•    Consider potential monetization strategies when making your initial platform design
choices. From the time of launch, a platform should be architected in a manner that affords it
control over possible sources of monetization. This directly impacts how open or closed the
platform is. For example, if platform managers hope to monetize through a transaction fee,
they need to ensure that the platform design makes it possible for them to capture control of
transactions. If platform managers hope to monetize by charging for access to their user base,
the platform should be designed to control the avenues through which content reaches the
users as well as the flow of data about users.
As this chapter has shown, monetization is a complicated challenge—
and a crucial one that may determine the ultimate viability of a platform.
Those seeking to launch a successful platform can’t afford to ignore the
issues surrounding monetization or defer thinking about them until after
network effects have been established. Instead, platform managers should
be thinking about potential monetization strategies from day one, and plan
their design decisions so as to keep as many monetization options as
possible open for as long as possible.


TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER SIX
    A well-managed platform can create excess value in four ways: access to value creation,
access to the market, access to tools, and curation. Monetization is about capturing a
portion of the excess value created.
    Techniques for monetizing a platform include charging a transaction fee, charging users for
enhanced access, charging third-party producers for access to a community, and charging a
subscription fee for enhanced curation.
    One of the most crucial monetization choices is deciding whom to charge, since the
difference in roles played by various platform users means that charging them can have
widely differing network effects.
    Given the complexity of the monetization challenge, platform managers should take
potential monetization strategies into account in every decision they make regarding
platform design.
OceanofPDF.com


7
OPENNESS
Defining What Platform Users
and Partners Can and Cannot Do
Wikipedia is a marvel of the world of platforms—an open-sourced
encyclopedia that, within a few years, eclipsed traditional purveyors of
information to become the most popular reference site in the world.
Millions of people have come to rely upon Wikipedia as a useful,
universally accessible, virtually unlimited source of data that is generally
highly reliable.
Except when it isn’t. And when it isn’t, the results can be horrific.
Many users of Wikipedia will be able to point to their own favorite tale
of bizarre misinformation popping up on the site. Perhaps the most famous
is the entry titled “Murder of Meredith Kercher”—better known by the
names of the two people widely suspected of the crime, the American
student Amanda Knox and her Italian boyfriend Raffaele Sollecito. Under
Wikipedia’s policy of largely open editing by any interested party, this entry
has now been edited over 8,000 times by over 1,000 people—almost
entirely by people who have been convinced of the guilt of Knox and
Sollecito ever since the crime was committed back in 2007. Throughout
their complicated legal ordeal, including one conviction, its overturning by
a second court, and another conviction, these self-appointed editors
continually revised the page to eliminate any potentially exculpating
evidence and to emphasize the likelihood of guilt.
The controversy over the entry grew so intense that Wikipedia founder
Jimmy Wales got involved. Wales studied the matter and issued a statement:
