# 7. Openness: Defining What Platform Users and Partners Can and Cannot Do

“I just read the entire article from top to bottom, and I have concerns that
most serious criticism of the trial from reliable sources has been excluded
or presented in a negative fashion.” Shortly thereafter, he wrote, “I am
concerned that, since I raised the issue, even I have been attacked as being
something like a ‘conspiracy theorist.’” Perhaps most disturbing, some of
the editors involved in slanting the Kercher page were found to be
contributors to other websites dedicated to “hating” Amanda Knox, thereby
shattering any illusion of objectivity.1
The problems Wikipedia faces in maintaining high quality while
maximizing its accessibility to all the users who want to contribute to its
content illustrate the challenges inherent in managing an open platform
model. Yet the obvious solution—to close down the model and institute
strict controls over participation—has a huge downside. Increasing the
friction involved in actively using any platform inevitably reduces
participation and can even destroy the value-creation potential of the
platform altogether.
HOW OPEN? HOW CLOSED?:
WALKING THE TIGHTROPE
In one of the first discussions of platform openness back in 2009, two of the
authors of this book (Geoffrey Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, in
collaboration with Thomas Eisenmann) provided a basic definition of
openness:
A platform is “open” to the extent that (1) no restrictions are placed on participation in its
development, commercialization, or use; or (2) any restrictions—for example, requirements to
conform with technical standards or pay licensing fees—are reasonable and non-discriminatory,
that is, they are applied uniformly to all potential platform participants.2
Being closed isn’t simply a matter of absolutely forbidding outside
participants on the platform. It may also involve creating such onerous
participation rules that would-be users are discouraged, or charging such
excessive fees (or “rents”) that the profit margins of potential participants
are reduced below sustainable levels.3 The choice between open and closed
isn’t a choice between black and white; there is a spectrum between the two
extremes.


Calibrating the right level of openness is undoubtedly one of the most
complex as well as one of the most critical decisions that a platform
business must make.4 The decision affects usage, developer participation,
monetization, and regulation. It’s a challenge that Steve Jobs struggled with
throughout his career. In the 1980s, he got it wrong by choosing to keep the
Apple Macintosh a closed system. Competitor Microsoft opened its less
elegant operating system to outside developers and licensed it to a host of
computer manufacturers. The resulting flood of innovation enabled
Windows to claim a share of the personal computer market that dwarfed
Apple’s. In the 2000s, Jobs got the balance right: he opened the iPhone’s
operating system, made iTunes available on Windows, and captured the
lion’s share of the smartphone market from rivals like Nokia and
Blackberry.5
Jobs liked to recast the open/closed dilemma as a choice between
“fragmented” and “integrated,” terms that subtly skewed the debate in favor
of a closed, controlled system. He wasn’t completely wrong: it’s true that,
the more open a system becomes, the more fragmented it becomes. An open
system is also more difficult for its creator to monetize, and the intellectual
property that defines it is more difficult to control. Yet openness also
encourages innovation.
It’s a difficult tradeoff to master. And the consequences of choosing the
wrong level of openness in either direction can be severe, as the rise and
fall of the social network Myspace suggests.
Although the history is now sometimes forgotten, Myspace was the
dominant social network before Facebook was launched in 2004, and
remained so until 2008. Even in its early days, it had much of the
functionality that would be familiar to users of today’s social networks. Its
internal staff created a wide variety of features, such as instant messaging,
classified ads, video playback, karaoke, “self-serve advertising” easily
purchased through the use of simple online menus, and more.
However, because of limited engineering resources, these features were
often buggy, leading to a poor user experience.6 And an ill-considered
decision to keep the site closed to outside developers made solving the
problem practically impossible. Chris DeWolfe, cofounder of Myspace,
recalled the company’s flawed thinking in a 2011 interview: “We tried to
create every feature in the world and said, ‘O.K., we can do it, why should
we [open up to] let a third party do it?’ We should have picked 5 to 10 key


features that we totally focused on and let other people innovate on
everything else.”
Facebook didn’t make the same mistake. Like Myspace, it was initially
closed to outside innovators. It opened to dot-com users in 2006. This
helped Facebook begin a slow climb toward competitiveness with Myspace.
The trend is reflected in Figure 7.1, which shows the average daily reach of
the two platforms in terms of percentage of Internet users during 2006 and
early 2007, when Myspace was still king.
When Facebook launched Facebook Platform to help developers create
apps in May 2007, the big shift began. An ecosystem of partners willing to
extend the capabilities of Facebook quickly took root.7 By November 2007,
there were 7,000 outside applications on the site.8 Recognizing how this
flood of new apps was enhancing its rival’s appeal, Myspace responded by
opening to developers in February 2008. But the tide had already turned, as
shown in Figure 7.2. Facebook overtook Myspace in April 2008, and today
it enjoys unquestioned supremacy in the social networking space.
FIGURE 7.1. The market dominance of Myspace over Facebook during 2006 and early 2007. ©
2015, Alexa Internet (www.alexa.com).


FIGURE 7.2. Facebook rapidly overtakes Myspace after opening its platform to developers in
May 2007. © 2015, Alexa Internet (www.alexa.com).
Had Myspace opened itself earlier to contributions from a wider
community of outside developers—especially those who had world-class
technology for specific functions that Myspace wanted to build out, such as
classified advertising, an effective spam filter, and user-friendly
communication tools—they might have had a more robust product offering.
Perhaps today Myspace and Facebook would still be competing on an
almost equal footing.
At first glance, then, it would appear that Myspace’s problems arose
from precisely the opposite direction as Wikipedia’s: the collaborative
encyclopedia is struggling with the consequences of too much openness,
while Myspace foundered as a result of too little. That’s true to some extent
—but the story is more complicated than that. Along some other important
dimensions, Myspace was actually too open.
For example, Myspace’s self-serve advertising feature created an all-too-
accessible pathway for a significant amount of inappropriate content,
including pornography available to platform users of any age. The lack of
control over such material made Myspace less attractive to many users and
even triggered investigations by a number of state attorneys general. In
combination with Myspace’s slowness to accommodate outside app


developers, this failure to adequately curate its content helped accelerate the
platform’s competitive collapse.
It might seem impossible for a platform to be both too closed and too
open simultaneously, but Myspace managed the feat.
THE PLATFORM ECOSYSTEM AND THE VARIETIES OF
OPENNESS
How can we make sense of the openness decisions that platform managers
must make? It’s helpful to start by recalling the key elements of a platform
as discussed in chapter 3. As we explained there, a platform is
fundamentally an infrastructure designed to facilitate interactions among
producers and consumers of value. These two basic types of participants use
the platform to connect with each other and to engage in exchanges—first,
an exchange of information; then, if desired, an exchange of goods or
services in return for some form of currency. These participants come
together on the platform to engage in a core interaction that is at the heart of
the platform’s value-creating mission. In time, other kinds of interactions
may be layered onto the platform, increasing its usefulness and attracting
other participants.
Given this basic design, it’s axiomatic that a vibrant and healthy platform
is dependent on the value created by partners who are outside of the
platform itself. If a platform is too closed, then partners cannot or will not
contribute the value required to make mutually rewarding exchanges
possible.9
Consider Google’s YouTube. Because the system is highly open, it has
become a viable outlet for commercial as well as amateur videos, delivering
a wide array of content, ranging from the silly to the practical to the
political and the inspirational. Without its vast array of user-supplied
content, YouTube would be dependent on one or a few corporate sources of
video material. Over time, it would likely evolve into more of a distribution
system—similar to Hulu, for instance—than a true platform.
However, as we’ve noted, and as the examples of Wikipedia and
Myspace illustrate, openness is not a black-or-white area. Decisions about
degrees and kinds of openness are critical and often challenging.


There are three kinds of openness decisions that platform designers and
managers need to grapple with. These are:
•    Decisions regarding manager and sponsor participation
•    Decisions regarding developer participation
•    Decisions regarding user participation
Each type of decision has unique ramifications and implications. Let’s
consider them in turn.
MANAGER AND SPONSOR PARTICIPATION
Behind any platform, with responsibility for its structure and operation, are
two entities: the firm that manages the platform and directly touches users,
and the firm that sponsors the platform and retains legal control over the
technology. In many cases, these two entities are one and the same.
Companies like Facebook, Uber, eBay, Airbnb, Alibaba, and many others
are both platform managers and platform sponsors. In this situation, control
of the platform, including decisions about openness, rests completely with
the manager/sponsor firm.
In other cases, however, the platform manager and the platform sponsor
are not identical. In general terms, the platform manager organizes and
controls producer/consumer interactions, while the platform sponsor
controls the overall architecture of the platform, the intellectual property
that underlies the platform (such as the software code that controls its
operations), and the allocation of other rights. When the manager and the
sponsor are separate, the manager is closest to the customer/producer
relationship as well as to outside developers who may contribute to the
platform. This gives the manager considerable influence over the daily
operations of the platform. But, in general, the sponsor has greater legal and
economic control over the platform and therefore a larger measure of power
over its long-term strategy.
In some cases, both the platform manager and the platform sponsor can
be either a single company or a group of companies—with further
implications for issues of control and openness.10
Figure 7.3 illustrates four models for managing and sponsoring
platforms. In some cases, a single firm both manages and sponsors the


platform. We call this the proprietary model. For example, the hardware,
software, and underlying technical standards for the Macintosh operating
system and mobile iOS are all controlled by Apple.
Sometimes a group of firms manages the platform while one firm
sponsors it. This is the licensing model. Google, for example, sponsors the
“stock” Android operating system, but it encourages a number of hardware
firms to supply devices that connect consumers to the platform. These
device makers, including Samsung, Sony, LG, Motorola, Huawei, and
Amazon, are licensed by Google to manage the interface between producers
and consumers.


FIGURE 7.3. Four models for managing and sponsoring platforms. Adapted from “Opening
Platforms: How, When and Why,” by Thomas Eisenmann, Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall Van
Alstyne.11
In still other cases, a single firm manages the platform while a group of
firms sponsors it—the joint venture model. The Orbitz travel reservations
platform was launched in 2001 as a joint venture sponsored by a collection
of major airlines in order to compete with upstart Travelocity. Similarly, the
job search platform CareerBuilder was created jointly in 1995 (under the
original name of NetStart) by three newspaper groups as a platform for
help-wanted advertising.
Finally, in some cases, a group of firms manages the platform while
another group sponsors it—the shared model. For example, there are both
many sponsors and many managers of the open source Linux operating
system, which, like the Mac and iOS systems, serves as a platform
connecting app developers and other producers to millions of consumers.
Corporate sponsors of Linux include IBM, Intel, HP, Fujitsu, NEC, Oracle,
Samsung, and many other companies, while the manager companies include
dozens of device makers—TiVo, Roomba, Ubuntu, Qualcomm, and many
others.
Sometimes, a particular platform may migrate from one model to
another as business demands and the structure of the marketplace evolve.
Consider, for example, the Visa credit card operation, which is a platform
that permits merchants and consumers to engage in payment transactions
with one another. It originated in 1958 as a proprietary platform under the
name of BankAmericard, sponsored and managed by the Bank of America.
In the 1970s, it took on the Visa brand name and morphed into a joint
venture, independently managed while being sponsored by a number of
banks. In 2007, Visa became a freestanding corporate entity and reverted to
the proprietary model. It is now self-sponsoring rather than being supported
by an outside institution.
As you can see, these four models of manager and sponsor participation
are, in effect, variant patterns of openness. The proprietary model provides
the greatest control and facilitates the most closed system of operation, as
exemplified by Apple’s management of the Mac operating system. The
licensing and joint venture models are, in effect, open at one end and closed
on the other, while the shared model, exemplified by Linux, leads to a


platform that is open to both a wide array of sponsors and a wide array of
managers.
Who wins? Who loses? Which of these four models is most
advantageous to platform sponsors? Which works best for platform
managers? Which model generates the greatest flow of predictable,
controllable profits? It would be nice to offer definitive, one-size-fits-all
answers to these questions—but, as is usually the case in business, the
answer is, “It depends.”
The proprietary model, used with enormous success by Apple, might
seem to be every platform company’s dream. After all, it allows you to
capture an entire market and to realize all the profits it generates. The
logical way to accomplish this is by developing a new technology standard
and maintaining sole control of it. And this is not impossible—but in the
real world, it doesn’t always produce lasting economic returns.
A classic illustration is the so-called VCR war of the 1970s and 1980s,
which pitted two technology platforms against each other: the Betamax
videotape standard sponsored by Sony, and the VHS standard sponsored by
JVC. Unlike most platforms of today, these standards from the pre-Internet
era did not create an online venue in which producers and consumers could
meet to conduct interactions together. However, they qualified as platforms
because they established technology systems that would allow multiple
producers (chiefly movie and TV studios) to sell products to consumers.
Thus, they faced many of the same kinds of strategic challenges that today’s
Internet-based platforms must confront.
From a technical quality standpoint, the Betamax platform was slightly
better, providing sharper images and longer recording times. But the
outcome of the war was decided by the varying sponsorship/management
strategies chosen by the rivals.
Sony chose the proprietary platform model, retaining control of the
Betamax standard on the theory that, in the long run, its better quality
would win out in the marketplace. But that never happened. JVC followed
the licensing model, enlisting many manufacturers to produce VHS
recorders and players. As manufacturing volume increased, prices fell,
making VHS devices more attractive to consumers. With more device
makers supporting the VHS standard and with more consumers owning
VHS players, movie studios and other content providers issued more


products in VHS format than in Betamax. A feedback loop set in that gave
VHS a large, steadily growing advantage over Betamax. By the mid-1980s,
manufacturers that embraced the VHS standard came to dominate the VCR
arena. Ironically, however, JVC itself enjoyed only modest profits from this
victory; its development of the original VHS standard didn’t lead to a large
or lasting stream of income.
Years later, Sony became embroiled in a new format war with a different
outcome—though one that proved to be no more satisfactory in the long run
to the Japanese giant. In the mid-2000s, when videotape gave way to digital
video discs (DVDs), Sony’s Blu-ray high-definition video standard
competed against the HD-DVD standard pioneered by Toshiba. Sony
decided to pursue the same sole proprietorship model it had chosen for
Betamax. In this case, Sony won the battle, thanks largely to its successful
introduction of the PlayStation 3 gaming device, which included Blu-ray
video and made it instantly available to millions of consumers.
Unfortunately for Sony, this victory proved short-lived. Today, a few
years after the triumph of Blu-ray, the migration of consumers away from
DVD to streaming video is well under way, making Bluray’s dominance
increasingly irrelevant. The lesson? If, like Sony, you choose to fight a
standards battle in quest of proprietary control of a market, you’d better win
it—and win it fast, before the next big thing supersedes the very technology
you seek to dominate.
The story of Visa—another platform that originated in the pre-digital era
—illustrates some of the other challenges faced by different management
and sponsorship models. During its years of sponsorship by a consortium of
big banks, Visa achieved significant success as a leading credit card
company. But over time, this management model proved cumbersome.
When a platform is sponsored—and therefore owned—by a number of
companies, key decisions must be approved by a committee of owners with
varying goals and preferences, which is an inherently inefficient
management system. This is why Visa’s owners ultimately agreed to spin
off the business as a self-contained entity, granting it the capability to make
competitive moves more nimbly.
The inherent awkwardness of multi-sponsor decision-making can affect
the elegance, simplicity, and ease of use of technology. The long history of
the personal computer wars between Apple’s proprietary model and
Microsoft’s so-called Wintel standard clearly illustrates the fact that a


standard controlled by a single company with a unified esthetic and
technical vision can produce more attractive, intuitive tools and services
than a collection of competing companies, each with its own design
approach. Apple has also become far more profitable and valuable than any
single company in the Wintel universe—despite the fact that its market
share of computer sales has never approached that of the PC.
Similarly, Apple’s iPhone is generally considered more elegant and user-
friendly than any smartphone created using Google’s less tightly controlled
Android standard. This is particularly so today, with the Android Open
Source Platform (AOSP) permitting experimentation and change by any
interested company. AOSP is the platform used by Amazon in its Kindle
Fire and by China’s Xiaomi in its mobile phones.
This doesn’t mean that Apple’s proprietary iPhone strategy is necessarily
“better” than Google’s more open strategy. In fact, the story is a
complicated one. Even though Apple’s iPhone continues to be a more
elegant device than competing Android phones, by 2014, open innovation
by multiple phone manufacturers had earned Android about 80 percent of
the smartphone market, as compared with just 15 percent for Apple.12
A big win for Google? Not really. The AOSP operating system doesn’t
automatically channel user traffic to Google’s online services—which
means that Google, despite being the progenitor of Android, receives no
revenue or data flow from AOSP devices. In response, Google has reversed
course and closed Android in an effort to reassert its control over the
system.13 (We’ll return to this story later in the chapter.)
In the end, of course, the choice of a sponsorship/management model
comes down to the purposes for which the platform is being developed and
the goals of those designing it. The wireless radio frequency identification
(RFID) technology is used to create smart tags that can be attached by the
millions to products for inventory control. In effect, the RFID system is an
inventory management platform that retailers can access to interact with the
goods they distribute.
The RFID platform was sponsored by a huge consortium of retailers, and
the tags themselves are now manufactured by many companies which
compete on the basis of price as well as design. The shared model of
sponsorship and management means that the RFID technology itself doesn’t
generate enormous profits for anyone—the tags sell for just a few cents


apiece. But this suits the sponsors perfectly, since their goal all along was to
make the technology as simple, accessible, and affordable as possible.
DEVELOPER PARTICIPATION
As you’ve seen, designing and building a platform generally starts with a
core interaction. But over time, many platforms expand to include other
kinds of interactions that create additional value for users and attract new
kinds of participants. These new interactions are created by developers who
may be afforded more or less open access to the platform and its
infrastructure. We refer to the three kinds of developers as core developers,
extension developers, and data aggregators.
Core developers create the core platform functions that provide value to
platform participants. These developers are generally employed by the
platform management company itself. Their main job is to get the platform
into the hands of users and to deliver value through tools and rules that
make the core interaction easy and mutually satisfying.
Core developers are responsible for basic platform capabilities. Airbnb
provides an infrastructure that allows guests and hosts to interact with each
other using system resources, including the search capabilities and data
services that allow guests to find attractive properties as well as the
payment mechanisms necessary to conclude a transaction. In addition,
Airbnb manages behind-the-scenes functions that reduce transaction costs
for guests and hosts. For example, the platform provides default insurance
contracts for both parties, protecting guests in the event of accident or crime
and protecting hosts from negligent guest behavior (though, as we’ll discuss
in chapter 11, this insurance coverage is not without its shortcomings). It
also verifies the identity of participants in order to make its reputation
system a meaningful measure of user behavior. Designing, fine-tuning,
maintaining, and continually improving systems like these are all elements
of the work of Airbnb’s core developers.
Extension developers add features and value to the platform and enhance
its functionality. They are normally outside parties, not employed by the
platform management firm, who find ways to extract a portion of the value
they create and thereby profit from the benefits they offer. A familiar group
of extension developers is the individuals and companies that produce apps


sold via the iTunes store—games, information and productivity tools,
activity enhancers, and so on. One of the crucial decisions a platform
manager must make—and often reconsider as the market evolves—is the
extent to which the platform will be open to extension developers.
A number of extension developers have enhanced the value of the
Airbnb platform. For example, Airbnb’s own research reveals that
properties listed with professional-quality photographs are viewed by
prospective renters twice as often as those with lower-quality images. In
response, an extension developer now offers professional support under the
rubric of “Airbnb photography service” to create compelling images that
should make an Airbnb host more successful.
Extension developer Pillow (formerly known as Airenvy) supports hosts
on the platform by providing tools to simplify property listing, guest
checkin, and cleaning and linen delivery. Other developers, including Urban
Bellhop and Guesthop, make travel arrangements for guests, such as dining
reservations and babysitting services. With the assistance of outside firms,
an Airbnb host can offer a suite of services that compares to those provided
by a full-service hotel.
In order to facilitate this extension of its platform’s functionality, Airbnb
must open its business to participation by these extension developers. But
calibrating its degree of openness is a challenge for Airbnb. If the platform
is too closed—if it is too onerous for extension developers to hawk their
wares on the site—it will lose the opportunity to provide valuable extra
services to platform users, perhaps alienating participants in the process.
But if the platform is too open—if it is too easy for extension developers to
appear on the site—then it’s likely that poor-quality service providers will
join the platform, tarnishing the reputation of the other developers as well
as that of Airbnb itself. Furthermore, excessive openness may lead to too
many providers of the same type of service, which will reduce the profit
earned by any one provider and reduce the incentive to extension
developers to customize services for Airbnb users.
Platforms that choose to encourage extension developers by granting a
high degree of openness will usually create an application programming
interface. This is one of the control points that a platform manager can use
to manage open access to its system. An application programming interface
(API) is a standardized set of routines, protocols, and tools for building


software applications that makes it easy for an outside programmer to write
code that will connect seamlessly with the platform infrastructure.
Currently, although Airbnb has developed an API, it is not generally
available to all developers that wish to connect to the platform—an
indication of the middle way the platform managers want to tread when it
comes to developer participation.
Some companies erect steep barriers against extension developers not
just to protect the quality of platform content but also in an effort to retain
control of the revenue streams their platforms generate. We’ve already seen
how this strategy backfired on Myspace. Today, a similar fate may be
hitting Keurig, the popular maker of coffee machines—which, for this
purpose, may be viewed as a platform dedicated to brewing hot beverages.
We’ll consider Keurig’s story in chapter 8.
The Guardian, a British daily newspaper, has gone in the opposite
direction. The paper’s website enjoys significant international readership
and has always been open to users, who are free to read its content, as
written and edited by the newspaper’s staff. However, the site was formerly
closed to extension developers. Recognizing the value of the Guardian’s
vast trove of information and ideas, and the potential benefit to be derived
from transforming the paper’s website into an open platform, the company’s
management went through a months-long strategic exercise in which they
discussed and analyzed the implications of such a shift. Having studied both
the possible risks and the likely rewards, the Guardian’s managers decided
both to “open in” the website, by bringing in more data and applications
from the outside, and to “open out” the site, by enabling partners to create
products using Guardian content and services on other digital platforms.
To work toward the “open out” goal, the Guardian created a set of APIs
that made its content easily available to external parties. These interfaces
include three different levels of access. The lowest access tier, which the
paper calls Keyless, allows anyone to use Guardian headlines, metadata,
and information architecture (that is, the software and design elements that
structure Guardian data and make it easier to access, analyze, and use)
without requesting permission and without any requirement to share
revenues that might be generated. The second access tier, Approved, allows
registered developers to reprint entire Guardian articles, with certain time
and usage restrictions. Advertising revenues are shared between the
newspaper and the developers. The third and highest access tier, Bespoke, is


a customized support package that provides unlimited use of Guardian
content—for a fee.
Some of the first products released under the Guardian’s new open
platform model include a Content API, which provides access to over a
million articles; a Politics API, which provides election results and
candidate information; a Data Store, which provides access to data sets and
visualizations, ranging from a table of country-by-country laws and
practices regarding the death penalty to a colorful graph depicting all of the
time-travel journeys of TV sci-fi hero Doctor Who; and an App Framework,
which facilitates app development, aimed at making the system easy to
experiment with and build applications for. In response, over 2,000
extension developers signed up in the first twelve months.
The power of APIs to attract extension developers and the value they can
create is enormous. Compare the financial results experienced by two major
retailers: traditional giant Walmart and online platform Amazon. Amazon
has some thirty-three open APIs as well as over 300 API “mashups” (i.e.,
combination tools that span two or more APIs), enabling e-commerce,
cloud computing, messaging, search engine optimization, and payments. By
contrast, Walmart has just one API, an e-commerce tool.14 Partly as a result
of this difference, Amazon’s stock market capitalization exceeded that of
Walmart for the first time in June 2015, reflecting Wall Street’s bullish view
of Amazon’s future growth prospects.15
Other platform businesses have reaped similar benefits from their APIs.
Cloud computing and computer services platform Salesforce generates 50
percent of its revenues through APIs, while for travel platform Expedia, the
figure is 90 percent.16
The third category of developers who add value to the interactions on a
platform are data aggregators. Data aggregators enhance the matching
function of the platform by adding data from multiple sources. Under
license from the platform manager, they “vacuum up” data about platform
users and the interactions they engage in, which they generally resell to
other companies for purposes such as advertising placement. The platform
that is the source of the data shares a portion of the profits generated.
When the services provided by data aggregators are well designed, they
can match platform users with producers whose goods and services are
interesting and potentially valuable to them. For example, if a Facebook
user has been posting information about plans for a vacation in France, a


data aggregator might sell that data to an advertising agency that, in turn,
would generate messages about Paris hotels, tour guides, discount airfares,
and other topics likely to be of interest.
Data aggregation is now practiced by many kinds of businesses, both on
and off digital platforms. When it works well, it produces results that
consumers experience as seamless and even delightful: “How did they
know I’ve been looking for kitchen tiles in exactly that shade of blue!” But
when it is ham-fisted—as is too often the case—the results feel intrusive
and sometimes creepy.
A story—possibly apocryphal—recounted by Charles Duhigg in the New
York Times describes the angry father of a teenage girl marching into a
Target store to ask why his daughter had been receiving coupons for baby
products. “Are you trying to encourage her to get pregnant?” he demanded.
The store manager apologized, but when he called the family to discuss the
matter a few days later, the father was embarrassed and apologetic. “I had a
talk with my daughter,” he said. “She’s due in August.”
How did Target “know” about the girl’s pregnancy before her family
did? Duhigg describes Target’s system for analyzing customer behaviors in
an effort to anticipate future needs and purchasing activities. Thus, when a
(hypothetical) female consumer visits her local Target store and buys cocoa
butter lotion, a diaper bag–sized purse, zinc and magnesium supplements,
and a bright blue rug, Target’s algorithm calculates an 83 percent chance
that she is pregnant. Cue the coupons for baby clothes.17
Perhaps for obvious reasons, data aggregation systems such as these are
little discussed by the platform businesses that provide them access.
Knowing the degree to which their personal behavior is being monitored
makes many consumers queasy. Because data aggregation is a large and
growing source of revenue for platform companies, managing it
appropriately poses an enormous ethical, legal, and business challenge.
We’ll delve into this topic in more detail in chapters 8 and 11, which deal
with platform governance and regulation.
WHAT TO OPEN AND WHAT TO OWN
As we’ve seen, innovations that are valuable to platform users can come
from many sources. Some are created by core developers and therefore are


owned and controlled by the platform company itself. Others are created by
extension developers and therefore are owned and controlled by outside
businesses. This raises the question: when does the power of an outside
developer threaten that of the platform itself? And when this happens, how
should the platform manager respond?
The answer to these questions depends on the amount of value created
by a particular extension app. If you are a platform manager, you don’t want
to let an outside firm control a primary source of user value on your
platform. When this happens, you need to move to take control of the value-
creating app—most often by buying the app or the company that created it.
On the other hand, when an extension app adds a modest amount of
additional value, then it’s perfectly safe and generally very efficient to allow
the outside developer to retain control of it.
Consider, for example, the ownership and control decisions Apple has
made in regard to its mobile phone operating system. Apple has been
careful to own most of the applications that come preloaded with the
iPhone, such as music playing, photography, and voice recording. It bought
SRI International, the company that developed the technology behind the
iPhone’s “virtual personal assistant,” Siri.18 All of these are all-high-value-
adding features with significant impact on the market for the iPhone, which
is why Apple is eager to own and control them.
By contrast, YouTube is content to own its video distribution and playing
technology while leaving control of the millions of video clips available on
the platform in the hands of the people and organizations that uploaded
them. One might assume that globally popular videos like the Korean pop
hit “Gangnam Style” generate significant value for YouTube consumers.
But that value is ephemeral (this year’s favorite video is quickly displaced
by next year’s) and represents just a tiny fraction of the total value of
YouTube’s video content. In a case like this, the platform owner has no
need to own or control the individual element of value.
There are two other principles that platform managers should consider
when weighing whether an extension app represents a threat to their
economic power.
First, if a particular app has the potential to become a powerful platform
in its own right, the manager of the platform that hosts the app should seek
to own it—or to replace it with an app controlled by the platform itself.


In 2012, Google Maps had become the premier provider of mapping
services and location data for mobile phone users. It was a popular feature
on Apple’s iPhone. However, with more consumer activity moving to
mobile devices and becoming increasingly integrated with location data,
Apple realized that Google Maps was becoming a significant threat to the
long-term profitability of its mobile platform. There was a real possibility
that Google could make its mapping technology into a separate platform,
offering valuable customer connections and geographic data to merchants,
and siphoning this potential revenue source away from Apple.
Apple’s decision to create its own mapping app to compete with Google
Maps made sound strategic sense—despite the fact that the initial service
was so poorly designed that it caused Apple significant public
embarrassment. The new app misclassified nurseries as airports and cities
as hospitals, suggested driving routes that passed over open water (your car
had better float!), and even stranded unwary travelers in an Australian
desert a full seventy kilometers from the town they expected to find there.
iPhone users erupted in howls of protest, the media had a field day
lampooning Apple’s misstep, and CEO Tim Cook had to issue a public
apology.19 Apple accepted the bad publicity, likely reasoning that it could
quickly improve its mapping service to an acceptable quality level—and
this is essentially what has happened. The iPhone platform is no longer
dependent on Google for mapping technology, and Apple has control over
the mapping application as a source of significant value.
Second, if particular functionality is reinvented by a number of extension
developers and gains widespread acceptance by platform users, the manager
of the platform should acquire the functionality and make it available
through an open API. Widely useful functions such as video and audio
playback, photo editing, text cutting-and-pasting, and voice commands have
often been invented by extension developers. Recognizing their broad
applicability, platform managers have moved to standardize these functions
and incorporate them into APIs that all developers can use. This accelerates
innovation and enables improvements in service for everyone who uses the
platform.
USER PARTICIPATION


The third kind of openness that platform managers need to control is user
participation—in particular, producer openness, which is the right to freely
add content to the platform. Remember, many platforms are designed to
facilitate side switching, which enables consumers to become producers,
and vice versa; so the same individual users who consume value units on
the platform can also create value units for others to consume. YouTube
users can both view others’ videos and upload videos of their own; Airbnb
guests can become hosts; Etsy customers can sell their own craft products
on the site.
The platform’s objective in opening to these users is to facilitate the
creation and provision of as much high-quality content as possible. Of
course, this stipulation—that the objective is the development of high-
quality content—is the reason most platforms reject absolute openness as a
strategy for managing user participation.
When it was launched, Wikipedia aspired to a condition of complete
openness. Maintenance of quality would be entrusted solely to the users of
the platform, who would take it upon themselves to monitor the content of
the site, fix errors, and challenge biases.
This was a utopian vision that assumed good intentions on the part of all
Wikipedia users; or, a trifle less idealistically, it assumed that the varying,
sometimes conflicting motivations and attitudes of users would eventually
balance one another, producing content that represented the combined
wisdom of the entire community, much as, in capitalist theory, the “invisible
hand” of the market is supposed to maximize the benefits for all through the
interaction of countless self-interested participants.
However, reality teaches us that democracy—like free markets—can be
messy, especially when intense passions and partisanship are involved.
Hence the episode we recounted at the start of this chapter, in which the
Wikipedia article about the death of Meredith Kercher was hijacked by
“haters” of Amanda Knox who were determined to make sure the page
should assert her guilt and were prepared to eradicate any signs of
dissension.
The Kercher killing is not the only instance in which Wikipedia is
embroiled in controversy—far from it. An article on the platform headed
“Wikipedia: List of controversial issues” lists over 800 topics that “are
constantly being re-edited in a circular manner, or are otherwise the focus of
edit warring or article sanctions.” Organized under headings that include


“Politics and economics,” “History,” “Science, biology, and health,”
“Philosophy,” and “Media and culture,” they include everything from
“Anarchism,” “Genocide denial,” “Occupy Wall Street,” and “Apollo moon
landing hoax accusations” to “Hare Krishna,” “Chiropractic,” “SeaWorld,”
and “Disco music.”
Limiting openness through artful curation. How can Wikipedia
establish high standards for the quality of the platform’s content when some
of its users are determined to manipulate it for their own purposes? That is
not easy. Those who manage the platform try hard to rely primarily on
community standards and social pressure. Guidelines are promulgated
through articles like “Wikipedia: five pillars,” which explains one of the
platform’s “fundamental principles” this way:
Wikipedia is written from a neutral point of view: We strive for articles that document and explain
the major points of view, giving due weight with respect to their prominence in an impartial tone.
We avoid advocacy and we characterize information and issues rather than debate them. In some
areas there may be just one well-recognized point of view; in others, we describe multiple points
of view, presenting each accurately and in context rather than as “the truth” or “the best view”. All
articles must strive for verifiable accuracy, citing reliable, authoritative sources, especially when
the topic is controversial or is on living persons. Editors’ personal experiences, interpretations, or
opinions do not belong.
Yet there are times when community pressure is not enough. When the
quality of particular articles is repeatedly degraded by biased or dishonest
content, other methods and tools for protecting Wikipedia’s integrity kick
in. These include VandalProof, a software program written especially for
Wikipedia that highlights articles edited by users with a track record of
unreliable work; tagging tools that draw attention to potentially problematic
articles so that other editors can review and, if necessary, improve them;
and a range of blocking and protection systems that can only be employed
by users who have earned special privileges through the general consensus
of the Wikipedia community.
This complex, largely self-organized set of interlocking systems for
ensuring the quality of Wikipedia content is a form of curation—the crucial
content protection process that must be fine-tuned to ensure the right degree
and kind of producer openness.
Curation usually takes the form of screening and feedback at critical
points of access to the platform. Screening decides who to let in, while


feedback encourages desirable behavior on the part of those who have been
granted entry. A user’s reputation, as shaped by past behavior both on and
off the platform, is usually a key factor in curation: users rated positively by
the rest of the community are more likely to pass through the screening
process and to receive favorable feedback than those with poor reputations.
Curation can be managed through human gatekeepers—moderators who
personally screen users, edit content, and provide feedback designed to
promote quality. Media platforms such as blogs and online magazines often
use this kind of system. But employing moderators who are trained and paid
by the platform company is time-consuming and costly. A better system—
though one that can be challenging to design and implement—relies on
users themselves to curate the platform, generally through software tools
that quickly gather and aggregate feedback and apply it to curation
decisions.
As we’ve seen, user-driven curation facilitated by software tools is the
method Wikipedia employs. Similarly, Facebook relies on users to flag
objectionable content such as hate speech, harassment, offensively graphic
images, and threats of violence. Service platforms like Uber and Airbnb
incorporate user ratings into their software tools so consumers and
producers can make informed choices about whom they choose to interact
with.
No system of curation is foolproof. When curation tools err on the side
of openness, potentially offensive or even dangerous content can slip
through. When the tools are overly restrictive, valuable users and
appropriate content may be screened out or discouraged—as when social
networking algorithms intended to eliminate pornography end up blocking
educational materials on topics like breast cancer awareness. Platform
managers need to devote significant time and resources—including human
eyeballs and informed judgment—to continually monitoring their
platforms’ boundaries between openness and closedness and ensuring they
are set appropriately.
SIMILAR PLATFORMS CAN COMPETE THROUGH
DIFFERING LEVELS OF OPENNESS


Platforms that operate in similar arenas may choose to differentiate
themselves by adapting different levels and kinds of openness. These
variant openness regimes will attract different kinds and numbers of
participants, generate distinct ecosystem cultures, and may ultimately
produce divergent business models.
As we’ve previously observed, two platforms that made very different
openness 
decisions 
are Apple’s 
Mac 
operating 
system/hardware
combination and Microsoft’s Windows operating system in the 1980s and
1990s. Although some critics describe Windows as a closed system, by
comparison to Apple it has been much more open. Apple made the decision
to charge extension developers a relatively high $10,000 for system
development kits (SDKs), thereby ensuring a small, select pool of outside
software developers. Microsoft, by contrast, basically gave the developer
SDKs away and consequently attracted a much larger developer pool.
Meanwhile, IBM lost control of the hardware standard, partly as the
result of regulatory action, making it possible for any manufacturer to enter
the PC market, which drove costs rapidly down. The combination of a large
developer pool with inexpensive hardware was compelling to consumers,
and the so-called Wintel platform dominated the market for nearly twenty
years—while the share of the industry enjoyed by the closed Apple system
steadily dwindled. In this case, it seems clear that the open path was far
more successful than the closed path.
More recently, as we’ve seen, Google and Apple made differing
openness decisions regarding their mobile platforms. Google allowed the
development of an open-source version of Android, which is freely
available to any manufacturer, while Apple sponsored the proprietary iOS
operating system and tightly controlled the hardware so that it is the sole
device provider and therefore the sole manager of the system.
At first, this might look like a repeat of the Microsoft/Apple PC
operating system battle. However, although Apple is much more closed than
Google—for example, retaining control of the vital device manufacturing
function rather than opening it to other companies—it is more open than it
was in the previous technological generation. Having opened its system just
enough to encourage developers, Apple now assists them with strong
developer toolkits and gives them access to its user base through the iTunes
store. A multitude of apps has appeared as a result.


Google, meanwhile, needed to be more open because it entered the
market after Apple. As a result, AOSP quickly grew beyond Google’s
control, prompting Google to seek to restrict access to its platform through
a variety of mechanisms. Because the underlying operating system is free to
all, Google cannot easily close AOSP, but almost the same goal can be
achieved by exerting control over critical functions. Journalist Ron Amadeo
has described how Google closed the Android applications for functions
such as search, music, calendar, keyboard, and camera, while also working
hard to encourage handset manufacturers to join its so-called open handset
alliance, dedicated to developing and maintaining open software and
hardware standards for mobile devices. Amadeo explains the impact of
Google’s move toward closing AOSP on extension developers:
If you use any Google APIs and try to run your app on a Kindle, or any other non-Google version
of AOSP: surprise! Your app is broken. Google’s Android is a very high percentage of the Android
market, and developers only really care about making their app easily, making it work well, and
reaching a wide audience. Google APIs accomplish all that, with the side effect that your app is
now dependent on the device having a Google Apps license.20
By requiring a license to access Google Play, the official app store for
AOSP, the firm is able to control access to the platform even though the
underlying technology is open source. In this way, Google can manage
potential competition as well as ensure a more orderly technology
environment for users and developers.
Stories like these illustrate the complicated competitive factors that
impact openness decisions—as well as the never-ending balancing act that
platform sponsors and managers need to practice to ensure that their
platforms remain relevant, vibrant, and valuable to a growing base of users.
OPENING OVER TIME:
THE BENEFITS AND THE RISKS
As we’ve seen, platforms can expand and develop stronger network effects
by opening out over time. More rarely, as in the case of Android, they can
choose to become more closed over time.
The choice to become more open or more closed depends on whether a
platform was originally structured as a proprietary or shared platform.


Naturally, a proprietary platform, which is sponsored, managed, and
completely controlled by a single company, can only become more open.
By contrast, a fully open, shared platform (Linux, for example) can only
become more closed.
As we noted in chapter 5, which deals with launching a platform, a new
platform will often choose to execute virtually all of its processes internally
simply because there are no partners willing to make the necessary
investment. In these cases, employees must provide both content and
curation. Over time, as the platform grows and outside developers are
attracted, the openness pattern may change, which means that curation
processes need to evolve as well.
A forward-looking platform management team must design ways to
continually evaluate the platform’s openness level. Preferably, the platform
will use a consistent strategic framework to make decisions for opening
over time. Eventually, as the maturing platform moves processes outside the
firm from employees to partners, it may need to develop algorithms to
automate curation or to decentralize curation to the entire base of users.
YouTube now depends upon its large user base to evaluate content, provide
feedback, and flag content that should not be on the platform.
As the platform’s openness policies evolve, the challenge is always to
find balance. If a platform is too closed—for example, if it extracts
excessive rents in the form of unreasonable and arbitrary fees—its partners
may refuse to make platform-specific investments. On the other hand,
platforms face trouble when extension developers begin to insert
themselves too aggressively between the platform and its users. If a
particular developer successfully displaces other competitors, a platform
manager should be careful to ensure that the developer does not seek to
displace the platform itself.
There are a number of examples of such struggles for control of a
particular platform’s user base. Consider SAP, the German-based
multinational giant that produces software for large enterprises to use in
managing their internal operations, customer relationships, and other
processes. SAP, which operates a large business processes platform, has
partnered with the U.S.-based firm ADP to provide payroll processing
services to its users, partly in order to take advantage of ADP’s superior
access to cloud computing capabilities. However, ADP has substantial
customer relationships of its own and can serve as the platform host linking


customers to a number of data/computing/storage partners. Thus, the
partnership creates an opportunity for ADP to displace SAP as the primary
manager of the customer relationship. This is an instance in which the
platform manager (SAP) is in danger of losing control of the customer
connection to an extension developer (ADP).
The unique power and value of the platform lies in its ability to facilitate
connections among participants from outside the platform itself. But
defining exactly who should have access to the platform and precisely how
they can participate is an enormously complex issue with ever-changing
strategic implications. That’s why the question of openness needs to be at
the top of every platform manager’s agenda—not just during the initial
design process, but throughout the life of the platform.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER SEVEN
    There are three kinds of openness decisions that managers face: those regarding
manager/sponsor participation, developer participation, and user participation.
    Management and sponsorship of a platform may be controlled by a single firm, by different
firms, or by groups of firms. The four possible combinations lead to differing patterns of
openness and control, with various advantages and disadvantages.
    The open/closed dichotomy isn’t black or white. There are shades of gray, and benefits and
drawbacks to every point on the spectrum. Sometimes, similar platforms choose to compete
on the basis of differing openness policies.
    Maturing platforms often evolve in the direction of greater openness. This demands
continually reevaluating and adjusting curation processes to ensure consistently high
quality of platform content and service value.
OceanofPDF.com


8
GOVERNANCE
Policies to Increase Value
and Enhance Growth
In the first quarter of 2015, Brian P. Kelley, the CEO of Keurig Green
Mountain coffee company, had some explaining to do. The company had
just launched the Keurig 2.0, a next-generation coffee brewer touted as the
future king of brewing. The reigning king, the Keurig 1.0, had become
ubiquitous in homes, offices, and hotels, and Green Mountain’s expensive
coffee cartridges had helped fuel the growth of what had been a regional
brewer into a firm worth more than $18 billion.
Yet with the launch of Keurig 2.0, sales did not rise further. Instead, they
fell by 12 percent.
The problem had its origins back in 2012, when key patents on Keurig’s
coffee pod design expired. Taking advantage of this change, competing
coffee makers began selling pods that were compatible with Keurig’s
machines and significantly cheaper. These rivals were like extension
developers offering new sources of value to Keurig users. Of course, their
existence, and the competition they presented to the official Keurig pods,
caused an erosion of Keurig’s market share.
To fight back, Keurig included in its brewer version 2.0 a scanning
device that prevented the use of any pods not marked with a special
proprietary emblem. Consumers were furious. Many denounced Keurig on
shopping websites; thousands watched YouTube videos purporting to
demonstrate how to hack the system, tricking it into accepting coffee pods
unauthorized by Keurig. Buyers lamented the firm’s “ridiculous corporate
