# 8. Governance: Policies to Increase Value and Enhance Growth

greed” and bemoaned the fact that the Amazon rating system made it
impossible for them to give the new Keurig a zero star rating.1
By attempting to grab an even bigger share of the profits from its coffee-
making platform, Green Mountain had angered its community and forfeited
profits. The king of coffee had violated three fundamental rules of good
governance:
•    Always create value for the consumers you serve;
•    Don’t use your power to change the rules in your favor; and
•    Don’t take more than a fair share of the wealth.
Governance is the set of rules concerning who gets to participate in an
ecosystem, how to divide the value, and how to resolve conflicts.2 To
understand good community governance is to understand the set of rules for
orchestrating an ecosystem.3
Green Mountain failed at the task of ecosystem governance. The Keurig
in all its incarnations is simply a product platform, a single one-sided
market serving a community of coffee drinkers. It could be much more
successful as a beverage ecosystem with other value-adding options, a
range of vetted suppliers, and an array of other high-quality services that
customers would appreciate. Instead, Green Mountain chose to exclude
suppliers that its customers found valuable, eliminating variety and freedom
of choice in order to retain control. It overreached for a share of the value
produced by its system. And it unilaterally placed its interest ahead of all
others. Keurig users were the losers—and soon enough, so was Green
Mountain.
WHY GOVERNANCE MATTERS:
PLATFORMS AS STATES
The goal of good governance is to create wealth, fairly distributed among
all those who add value. As we saw in chapter 2, the new technology-driven
communities known as platform businesses are creating a vast amount of
new wealth outside the firm, and these external benefits must be designed
and managed fairly. Because these value-creating networks grow faster
outside the firm than inside, ruling the ecosystem wisely puts a premium on
not ruling it selfishly.


If navigating the rules for governance is hard for one-sided platforms
like the Keurig brewing system, it’s exponentially harder when platforms
are multisided. After all, multisided platforms involve numerous interests
that don’t always align. This makes it difficult for platform managers to
ensure that various participants create value for one another, and it makes it
likely that conflicts will emerge that governance rules must resolve as fairly
and efficiently as possible.
This is a juggling act that even giants and geniuses often get wrong.
Facebook, for example, has alienated users with its privacy policies.4
LinkedIn has angered its developers by turning off their access to APIs.5
And Twitter has expropriated technologies developed by other members of
its ecosystem while permitting Twitter users to harass one another. As
Twitter’s CEO Dick Costolo said, “We suck at dealing with abuse.”6
In the complexity of the governance issues they face, today’s biggest
platform businesses resemble nation-states. With more than 1.5 billion
users, Facebook oversees a “population” larger than China’s. Google
handles 64 percent of the online searches in the U.S. and 90 percent of
those in Europe, while Alibaba handles more than 1 trillion yuan ($162
billion) worth of transactions a year and accounts for 70 percent of all
commercial shipments in China.7 Platform businesses at this scale control
economic systems that are bigger than all but the biggest national
economies. No wonder Brad Burnham, one of the lead investors at Union
Square Ventures, responded to the introduction of Facebook Credits—a
short-lived system of virtual currency for use in playing online games—by
wondering what the move said about Facebook’s monetary policy.8 In a
similar vein, we might ask: In choosing to apply unilateral software
standards as opposed to multilateral standards (as we saw in chapter 7),
what kind of foreign policy is Apple pursuing? Is Twitter following an
industrial policy based on investment in “state-owned” services or one
relying on decentralized development by others? What does Google’s
approach to censorship in China tell us about the company’s human rights
policy?
Like it or not, firms like these already serve as the unofficial and
unelected regulators of millions of lives. For this reason, platforms have
much to learn from cities and states, which have had thousands of years to
evolve principles of good governance. Like the platform businesses of
today, cities and states have long had to wrestle with the question of how


best to create wealth and distribute it fairly. Increasing evidence suggests
that just governance is a crucially important factor in the ability of a state to
create wealth—even more important than such obviously valuable assets as
natural resources, navigable waterways, and favorable agricultural
conditions.
Consider the modern city-state of Singapore. In 1959, when Lee Kuan
Yew became prime minister, it had almost no natural resources. For defense
and clean water, it relied on the Federation of Malaya, the predecessor of
the nation of Malaysia (established in 1963). Corruption was rampant. Per
capita GDP hovered below $430.9 Ethnic strife between Malays and
Chinese, religious strife between Muslims and Buddhists, and political
strife between capitalists and communists hamstrung progress.
Lee Kuan Yew brought economic vitality to Singapore by changing its
system of governance. Having studied at the London School of Economics
and with a law degree from Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge, Yew
introduced the British system of justice and rule by law. Then he attacked
corruption. To make graft less attractive, he raised the salaries of civil
servants to match those of similar workers in the private sector. New public
servants had to wear white as a sign of purity when they assumed office.
The anti-corruption rules were enforced strictly: the minister of state for the
environment, a staunch supporter of Yew, committed suicide rather than
face prosecution on bribery charges.10 Fairer, more open government was
encouraged by the creation of multicultural councils empowered to give
voice to religious and ethnic groups willing to work within the system.
Singapore now boasts a government that ranks with those of New Zealand
and the Scandinavian countries as one of the least corrupt in the world. This
is significant, in part, because each 1 percent drop in corruption and misuse
of public power for private gain is associated with a 1.7 percent rise in
GDP.11
Although Yew has been criticized in the West for throttling political
dissent, the economic results produced by his good-governance campaign
are impressive. By 2015, Singapore’s per capita GDP was $55,182, higher
than that of the United States. During the fifty-five years from 1960 to
2015, Singapore’s annual growth rate was 6.69 percent, almost 2 percent
higher than that of Malaysia, from which it separated in 1965.12
Similar evidence of the importance of good governance to wealth
creation can be seen by comparing the GDP growth and innovation rates in


communist East Germany and North Korea with those in their near-twin
siblings, West Germany and South Korea.13 Good governance matters.
MARKET FAILURE AND ITS CAUSES
Good governance is important in both nation-states and platform businesses
because absolutely free markets, in which people and organizations interact
with no rules, restrictions, or safeguards, can’t always be relied upon to
produce results that are fair and satisfactory to those involved.
An example can be seen on eBay, where some participants inevitably
have greater knowledge, market savvy, and bargaining skill than others. In
most cases, the interactions that result are basically fair, even when a
particular interaction produces a “winner” and a “loser.” But sometimes,
outcomes that appear manipulative or even deceptive occur. For example, a
group of eBay members, noticing that some inexperienced sellers were
prone to misidentifying goods—for example, by misspelling Louis Vuitton
with one “T” or Abercrombie and Fitch as “Abercrombee” or “Fich”—
began taking advantage of these errors as middlemen. They would actively
seek out mislabeled items, which were usually languishing unnoticed on the
auction site, snatch them up at bargain prices, and then resell them for a
huge markup under their proper names.
In one celebrated example, the owner of an antique beer bottle that had
been kept in his family for fifty years decided to list it on eBay.
Unfortunately, the seller had no idea of the true value of his heirloom. The
beer had been produced in the 1850s as the result of a brewing contest
intended to provide “life-sustaining ale” to a crew navigating the Arctic in
hopes of discovering the fabled Northwest Passage from the Atlantic to the
Pacific. (At the time, it was believed—erroneously—that ale could prevent
scurvy.)14 The expedition failed, but a little of the original brew survived,
and by the time of the eBay sale, two bottles were known to exist, both
eagerly sought after by beer collectors and history buffs.
Unaware of all this—and careless to boot—the seller listed the precious
bottle on eBay under the heading “Allsop’s Arctic Ale—full and corked
with wax seal,” and proposed an opening bid of $299. The brand name
should have been spelled “Allsopp’s,” with an extra P—a tiny error, but one
big enough to confuse the serious collectors who would have been


interested in the item. A shrewd scavenger for mislabeled bargains spotted
the listing and jumped in as the sole bidder. He bought the bottle for $304
and relisted it on eBay three days after receiving it. When collectors heard
about it, the brew fetched bids exceeding $78,100.15
The Case of the Ambiguous Ale is an example of market failure—a
situation in which “good” interactions (fair and mutually satisfactory) fail to
occur, or “bad” interactions do. If you can’t find an item you want on eBay,
then a good interaction has failed to occur. If you did find an item you
wanted but got cheated, abused, or deceived, then a bad interaction has
occurred. In general, there are four main causes of market failures:
information asymmetry, externalities, monopoly power, and risk.
Information asymmetry arises whenever one party to an interaction
knows facts that other parties don’t and uses that knowledge for personal
advantage. Consider the problem of counterfeit goods, when the seller
knows that the goods are fake but does not inform the buyer. Fakes account
for Skullcandy headphones with lousy sound quality, Gucci handbags with
broken stitching, Duracell batteries that don’t hold a charge, OtterBox
mobile phone cases that are not drop-proof, and Viagra that provides no lift.
Estimated at more than $350 billion worldwide, the size of the counterfeit
goods market exceeds the trade in illegal drugs (estimated at $321 billion).16
Externalities occur when spillover costs or benefits accrue to anyone not
involved in a given interaction. Imagine that one of your friends provides
your private contact information to a gaming company in exchange for a
few digital points. This would be a bad interaction because it violates your
privacy rights, and so it is an example of a negative externality.
The concept of a positive externality is a bit more ambiguous. Consider
what happens when Netflix analyzes the movie-watching behavior of
someone whose tastes match yours and uses this data to give you a more
accurate movie recommendation. This would be a positive externality,
because it provides you with a benefit based on an interaction in which
you’re not directly involved. Individuals who benefit from positive
externalities aren’t likely to complain about them—but they are considered
problems from a business design standpoint, since they reflect value that is
not being fully captured by the platform. In an ideal world—at least,
according to economic theory—every value created would somehow be
accounted for and credited accurately to the entity responsible for it.


A concept closely related to the positive externality is the public good,
whose value is not fully captured by the party that created it. Individuals
generally create too few public goods unless some governing mechanism is
designed to recognize and reward them.
Monopoly power arises when one supplier in an ecosystem becomes too
powerful because of its control of the supply of a widely sought good, and
uses this power to demand higher prices or special favors. At the height of
its popularity (2009–10), game-maker Zynga became excessively powerful
on Facebook, leading to conflicts over issues such as the sharing of user
information, the split of gaming revenues, and the cost to Zynga of ads on
the social network. eBay has experienced similar problems dealing with so-
called power sellers.
Risk is the possibility that something unexpected and essentially
unpredictable may go wrong, turning a good interaction into a bad one.
Risk is a perennial problem in all markets, not just on platforms. A well-
designed market generally develops tools and systems that serve to mitigate
the effects of risk, thereby encouraging participants to engage in more
interactions.
TOOLS FOR GOVERNANCE: LAWS, NORMS,
ARCHITECTURE, AND MARKETS
The literature on corporate governance is vast, especially in the field of
finance. However, platform governance involves design principles that
traditional finance theory overlooks. The single most heavily cited article
on corporate governance is a literature survey that considers only “the ways
in which suppliers of finance to corporations assure themselves of getting a
return on their investment.”17 The focus here is on the information
asymmetry arising from the separation of ownership and control—a critical
element of governance design, but far from sufficient.18 Information
asymmetry between the community of users and the firm also matters, and
their interests too must be aligned.
Additionally, platform governance rules must pay special heed to
externalities. These are endemic in network markets, since, as we’ve seen
when examining network effects, the spillover benefits users generate are a
source of platform value. Understanding this forces a shift in corporate


governance from a narrow focus on shareholder value to a broader view of
stakeholder value.
Market designer and Nobel Prize-winning economist Alvin Roth
described a model of governance that uses four broad levers to address
market failures.19 According to Roth, a well-designed market increases the
safety of the market via transparency, quality, or insurance, thereby enabling
good interactions to occur. It provides thickness, which enables participants
from different sides of a multisided market to find one another more easily.
It minimizes congestion, which hampers successful searches when too
many people participate or low quality drives out high. And it minimizes
repugnant activity—which explains why platform designers forbid porn on
iTunes, human organ sales on Alibaba, and child labor on Upwork.
According to Roth, good governance occurs when market managers use
these levers to address market failures.
A broader view of platform governance uses insights borrowed from the
practices of nation-states as modeled by constitutional law scholar
Lawrence Lessig. In Lessig’s formulation, systems of control involve four
main sets of tools: laws, norms, architecture, and markets.20
A familiar example can be used to clarify these four kinds of tools.
Suppose leaders of a particular ecosystem want to reduce the harmful
effects of smoking. Laws could be passed to ban cigarette sales to minors or
forbid smoking in public spaces. Norms—informal codes of behavior
shaped by culture—could be applied by using social pressure or advertising
to stigmatize smoking and make it appear “uncool.” Architecture could be
used to develop physical designs that reduce the impact of smoking—for
example, air filters that clean the air, or smokeless devices that substitute
for cigarettes. And market mechanisms could be used by taxing tobacco
products or subsidizing “quit smoking” programs. Historically, those who
want to control social behavior—including platform managers—have
employed all four of these tools.
Let’s consider some of the ways in which these four kinds of tools can be
used by platform managers as part of a governance system.
Laws. Of course, many laws created and enforced by nation-states—
laws, in the traditional sense of the term—apply to platform businesses and
their participants. Sometimes, the application of such laws can be tricky.
For example, legal sanctions that punish bad actors offer one traditional


way of addressing the problem of risk. However, applying these sanctions
requires determining who is responsible for problems that arise and who
should bear the blame when they do—something that is not always simple
or straightforward.
When it comes to platform businesses, this is far from a purely
theoretical issue. We’ve mentioned some of the serious legal problems
faced by platforms earlier: individuals who listed properties on Airbnb had
their homes used for brothels and raves; people offering personal services
on Craigslist have been murdered.21 Case law does not generally hold
platforms accountable for misdeeds of platform users, even though the
owners of the platform may be reasonably well positioned to regulate and
control the behavior of the users. Thus, individual platform participants
usually have to bear the downside risk, at least as far as national and local
laws are concerned. (We’ll return to this topic in chapter 11, on regulation.)
Applying Lessig’s concept of “law” to governance within the platform
business takes us into a different arena. The “laws” of a platform are its
explicit rules—for example, the terms of service drafted by lawyers or the
rules of stakeholder behavior drafted by the platform’s designers. These
laws moderate behavior at both the user and the ecosystem level. For
example, at the user level, the Apple rule that allows a user to share digital
content among up to six devices or family members prevents unlimited
sharing while nonetheless providing economic incentives for the purchase
of Apple services and making a reasonable amount of sharing convenient.22
At the ecosystem level, the Apple rule compelling app developers to submit
all code for review, combined with the rule that releases Apple from any
duty of confidentiality, allows Apple to proliferate best practices.23
Platform laws should be, and usually are, transparent. Stack Overflow,
the most successful online community for answering programming
questions, offers an explicit list of rules for earning points as well as the
rights and privileges those points confer. One point confers the right to ask
and answer questions. Fifteen points confers the right to vote up someone
else’s content. At 125 points, you gain the right to vote down content—
which also costs one point. And at 200 points, you’ve added so much value
that you earn the privilege to see fewer ads. This system of explicit,
transparent laws solves a public goods problem by encouraging members to
share their best insights with everyone else on the platform.24


An exception to the principle of transparency applies to laws that might
facilitate bad behavior. Dating sites discovered this the hard way. When the
sites applied laws that gave stalkers a quick “hand slap” when they
misbehaved, the stalkers soon learned to avoid the specific trigger that
flagged them. If, instead, the platform delayed the negative feedback, the
stalker had a harder time learning how he’d been caught, which led to a
more powerful and lasting disincentive.
Similarly, when a troll on a user-generated content site has his account
deleted, he often returns under a new identity. Smart platform managers
started making nuisance posts invisible to everyone but the troll. Unable to
inflame community sentiment, the troll retreated.
The underlying principle: Give fast, open feedback when applying laws
that define good behavior, but give slow, opaque feedback when applying
laws that punish bad behavior.
Norms. One of the greatest assets any platform—indeed, any business—
can have is a dedicated community. This doesn’t happen by accident.
Vibrant communities are nurtured by skilled platform managers in order to
develop norms, cultures, and expectations that generate lasting sources of
value.
iStockphoto, today one of the world’s largest markets for crowdsourced
photographs, was originally founded by Bruce Livingstone to sell CD-ROM
collections of images by direct mail. As that business tanked, Bruce and his
partners hated the thought that their work might go to waste. So they began
giving away their images online.25 Within months, they were discovered by
thousands of people who not only downloaded images but asked to share
their own images as well. To maintain the quality Bruce prided himself on
and to eliminate spam, pornography, and copyright infringement, he made
sure that every image was scrutinized by an iStockphoto inspector. This was
a painstaking and costly process. Bruce found himself working sixteen-hour
days.26
Realizing that individual human inspection could not scale, Bruce turned
to crowd curation. He devised a system under which people who uploaded
quality content could earn their way to becoming inspectors and community
organizers. Groups emerged to handle specific categories of images—for
example, images linked to locations like “New York” or categories like
“Food.” Bruce himself worked relentlessly to praise, give feedback, and


build his community. Under the online name Bitter, he regularly posted
comments on the platform’s homepage promoting members and their work,
such as when he noted “great new stuff from Delirium, also tasty food
series from Izusek.”27
These efforts established a powerful set of norms that came to govern the
iStockphoto community. These norms included feedback, high-quality
content, open engagement, and a natural role progression to greater levels
of authority. Applying these norms, the community produced a remarkable
body of stock photos, a classic and valuable public good.
As the story of iStockphoto suggests, norms do not arise in a vacuum.
They reflect behaviors, which means that they can be constructed through
the intelligent application of the discipline of behavior design.
Nir Eyal, who has worked in both advertising and game development,
describes behavior design as a recurring sequence of trigger, action, reward,
and investment.28
The trigger is a platform-based signal, message, or alert such as an
email, a web link, a news item, or an app notification. This prompts the
platform member to take some action in response. The action, in turn,
produces a reward for the member, usually one with some variable or
unanticipated value, since variable reward mechanisms like slot machines
and lotteries are habit-forming. Finally, the platform asks the member to
make an investment of time, data, social capital, or money. The investment
deepens the participant’s commitment and reinforces the behavior pattern
platform managers want to see.
Here’s an example of how the process works. Barbara is a member of
Facebook. One day, an interesting photo shows up in Barbara’s news feed—
perhaps a picture of a gorgeous sunlit beach in Maui, Barbara’s favorite
vacation spot. This is the trigger. The action in response is designed to be as
easy as possible (frictionless), which encourages Barbara to take the next
step. In this case, the next step is clicking on the photo, which takes Barbara
to Pinterest, the photo-sharing platform, which happens to be entirely new
to Barbara. There she receives her reward: a variety of additional
tantalizing, carefully curated photos selected specifically to engage her
curiosity. (Imagine a photo collection titled “Ten Best Unknown Beaches of
the South Pacific.”) Finally, Pinterest asks Barbara, whom they just
rewarded, to make a small investment. She may be asked to invite friends,
state preferences, build virtual assets, or learn new Pinterest features.29 Any


of these actions will set up a new set of triggers for Barbara and others, and
the cycle starts over.
In the case of Pinterest, the norms fostered by this system of behavior
design have produced a body of content that is a valuable public good. Of
course, behavior design is not always used to benefit participants. It can
also be used as a tool of selling and manipulation—which is one reason
why users themselves should be aware of how such governance
mechanisms work.
As a rule, it’s desirable to have users participate in shaping the systems
that govern them. Elinor Ostrom, the first woman ever to receive the Nobel
Prize in Economics, observed that successful creation and policing of public
goods by communities follows several regular patterns. Clearly defined
boundaries delineate who is and who is not entitled to community benefits.
People affected by decisions regarding how community resources will be
appropriated have recognized channels they can use to influence the
decision-making processes. People who monitor community member
behavior are accountable to the community. Graduated sanctions apply to
those who violate community rules. Members have access to low-cost
dispute resolution systems. And, as community resources grow, governance
should be structured in nested tiers, with certain simple issues controlled by
small, local groups of users, and increasingly complex, global problems
managed by larger, more formally organized groups.30 Norms that emerge in
successful platform communities generally follow the patterns outlined by
Ostrom.
Jeff Jordan, former senior vice president at eBay, recounts the problems
the company encountered when it sought to add a fixed-price sale format to
the traditional auction format.31 The two main categories of market
participants reacted quite differently to the plan. Buyers liked the idea of
fixed prices, but the sellers who paid eBay’s marketplace fees feared that
fixed-price listings would effectively kill the golden goose of auction-
driven price escalation.
The process Jordan used to resolve the dispute paralleled several of
Ostrom’s ideas. eBay used focus groups and a “Voices” program to reflect
user perspectives and gauge the strength of their feelings. Jordan’s team
deployed thoughtful communications to alert buyers and sellers about
proposed rule changes. They tested programs on smaller groups and pulled
back if changes turned out badly. Ultimately, eBay’s leadership sided with


the buyers, reasoning that the sellers would ultimately remain loyal to the
platform because “merchants go where the consumers are.”32 The decision
succeeded. Today, “Buy it Now” fixed-price listings account for about 70
percent of eBay’s $83 billion in gross merchandise volume.
Architecture. In the world of platform businesses, “architecture” refers
basically to programming code. Well-designed software systems are self-
improving: they encourage and reward good behavior, thereby producing
more of the same.
Online banking platforms such as peer-to-peer lending businesses are
using software algorithms to displace traditional, labor-intensive, and
expensive loan officers. They calculate a borrower’s likelihood of repaying
using both conventional data such as credit scores and nontraditional data
such as a Yelp rating (for a restaurant), the stability of the borrower’s email
address, her connections on LinkedIn, and even how thoroughly she
interacts with the loan assessment tools before applying.33 As the platform
architecture becomes better at predicting borrower behavior, participation
risk declines, attracting more lenders. Meanwhile, the low overhead costs
allow the platform to offer lower rates, which attracts more borrowers.
Greater participation further improves the data flow, and the cycle repeats.
No wonder peer-to-peer lending platforms like the British firm Zopa
have been enjoying such notable success. When Zopa proudly announced
that it had provided more than $1 billion in loans, one of this book’s
authors, Sangeet Choudary, congratulated the company leaders and politely
asked, “Wouldn’t your loan default rate be a more significant measure of
success?” Zopa responded by publicizing the fact that its loan default rate
had fallen to 0.2 percent from 0.6 percent three years earlier.34 Such is the
power of well-designed platform architecture.
Architecture can also be used to prevent and correct market failures.
Recall the middlemen on eBay who took advantage of seller misspellings.
Although one might lament the lost opportunity for the hapless sellers to
complete the deal, these middlemen provided market liquidity (“thickness”
in Alvin Roth’s formulation) through the process known as arbitrage. If no
one bids on misspelled items, the interaction never happens—so
arbitrageurs can be viewed as providing a valuable service. Yet the
existence of arbitrage opportunities also highlights market inefficiencies.
eBay now uses automated systems to provide spelling assistance, so sellers


can have more confidence that they’ll receive what their items are worth. In
a case like this, wise governance may disenfranchise a specific group of
stakeholders, such as arbitrageurs, in order to increase the overall health of
the ecosystem.
High-speed trading on the New York Stock Exchange offers another
example. Firms like Goldman Sachs use supercomputers to determine when
an order placed in one market will spill over to another market. Then they
swoop in to intercept the deal, buying low, selling high, and skimming the
margin. This methodology gives a few market participants who can afford
massive computing power an unfair advantage over others.35 Such
asymmetric market power risks driving away players who feel cheated. To
solve this problem, competing exchanges, such as the alternative trading
system IEX, are using their own supercomputers to precisely time the order
of bids, thereby eliminating the advantages of a Goldman Sachs.36
Architecture can level the playing field, making markets more competitive
and fair for all.
One of the most innovative forms of architectural control ever invented
made its appearance in 2008, when an anonymous coding genius known as
Satoshi Nakamoto published a paper on the Cryptography mailing list
defining the Bitcoin digital currency and the so-called blockchain protocol
governing it. Although Bitcoin is notable as the world’s first unforgeable
digital currency that cannot be controlled by a government, bank, or
individual, the blockchain is truly revolutionary. It makes possible fully
decentralized, completely trustworthy interactions without any need for
escrow payments or other guarantees.
The blockchain is a distributed public ledger that enables storage of data
in a container (the block) affixed to other containers (the chain).37 The data
can be anything: dated proof of an invention, a title to a car, or digital coins.
Anyone can verify that you placed data in the container because it has your
public signature, but only your private key can open it to see or transfer the
contents. Like your home address, a blockchain container is publicly,
verifiably yours, but only people you authorize have a key that permits
entry.38
The blockchain protocol makes decentralized governance possible.
Normally, when you sign a contract, you must either trust the other party to
honor the terms or rely on a central authority such as the state, or on an
escrow service like eBay, to enforce the deal. Public blockchain ownership


empowers us to write self-enforcing smart contracts that automatically
reassign ownership once contract terms are triggered. Neither party can
back out because the code, running in a decentralized public fashion, is not
under anyone’s control. It simply executes. These smart, autonomous
contracts can even pay people for the output of their work—in effect,
machines hiring people, not the other way around.
For example, imagine a smart contract between a wedding photographer
and a couple planning their nuptials. The blockchain-stored contract could
specify that payment of the final installment of the photographer’s fee will
be made promptly when the edited photo files are delivered electronically to
the newlyweds. The automatic digital trigger ensures that the photographer
is incentivized to deliver the photos promptly, while it also relieves her of
any concern that her clients might fail to pay.
Nakamoto’s invention has given birth to a new kind of platform—one
with open architecture and a governance model but no central authority.
Having no need for gatekeepers, it will put serious pressure on existing
platforms that rely on costly gatekeepers. Financial services that claim 2–4
percent of transactions simply for passing them may in the future be hard
pressed to justify their rake.
Furthermore, while most platforms address the problem of the market
power of particular participants, Nakamoto’s platform addresses the
problem of monopoly power of the platform itself. Not even Nakamoto,
whose real identity remains a mystery, can remake the rules of the open
source code to favor one participant over another.
Markets. Markets can govern behavior through the use of mechanism
design and various incentives—not money alone, but the trifecta of human
motivations that may be summarized as fun, fame, and fortune. In fact, on
many platforms, money is far less important than the more intangible,
subjective form of value known as social currency.
The idea behind social currency is to give something in order to get
something. If you give fun in a photo, you can get people to share it. Social
currency, measured as the economic value of a relationship, includes
favorites and shares.39 It also includes the reputation a person builds up for
good interactions on eBay, good news posts on Reddit, or good answers on
Stack Overflow. It includes the number of followers a user attracts on
Twitter and the number of skill endorsements she garners on LinkedIn.


iStockphoto evolved a useful market mechanism based on social
currency to manage exchange of photos. Every photo download cost the
downloader one credit and earned one credit for the person who’d originally
uploaded the photo.40 Credits could also be purchased for 25 cents each, and
photographers received cash payment for accumulated credits valued at
$100 or more. This system created a fair social exchange that allowed
professional photographers and non-photographers to participate in the
same market. The mechanism simultaneously encouraged supply and
market “thickness,” giving birth to the micro stock photo industry.
Social currencies have a number of remarkable and underappreciated
properties. We can even use them to answer Brad Burnham’s interesting
question about the “monetary policy” of a platform.
The enterprise management platform company SAP uses a social
currency like that of iStockphoto or Stack Overflow to motivate developers
to answer one another’s questions. Points earned when the employee of a
development company answers a question are credited to a company
account; when the account reaches a specified level, SAP makes a generous
contribution to a charity of the company’s choice. The system has saved
SAP $6–8 million in tech support costs, generated numerous new product
and service ideas, and reduced average response time to thirty minutes from
the one business day that SAP promises.41 SAP estimates that knowledge
spillovers from these activities account for a half-million-dollar gain in
annual productivity for a typical enterprise software partner.42
Even more interesting, SAP has used the social currency supply to
stimulate its developer economy in the same way as the Federal Reserve
uses the money supply to stimulate the U.S. economy. When SAP
introduced a new customer relationship management (CRM) product, it
offered double points on any answer, code, or white paper relating to CRM.
During the two-month duration of this “monetary expansion” policy,
developers found gaps in the software and devised new features at a vastly
higher rate.43 Used as a money supply, the increased flow of social currency
caused overall economic output to rise. In effect, SAP employed an
expansionary monetary policy to stimulate growth—and it worked.
In addition to promoting economic growth, well-designed market
mechanisms can incentivize the creation and sharing of intellectual property
and reduce the riskiness of interactions on the platform.


Beautiful, useful ideas are public goods. Which raises the question: what
is the optimal intellectual property policy for a platform business? If a
developer working on a platform invents a valuable idea, who should own
it, the developer or the platform? It’s possible to imagine arguments on both
sides of the issue. Giving ownership to the developer provides incentives
for idea creation. Giving ownership to the platform facilitates
standardization and sharing, and enriches the platform ecosystem as a
whole. State-mandated laws regarding patents and other forms of
intellectual property protection are clumsy and expensive to enforce. A
more elegant platform-based solution is required.
SAP has tackled this problem through two practices. First, it publishes an
18–24-month advance road map indicating what new products and services
it intends to build to enhance its offerings to its corporate clients. This not
only tells SAP’s outside developers what digital real estate will be available
for their own innovations but also gives them up to two years before they
face competition. The two-year window thus serves as a metaphorical
patent period.44 Second, SAP has made a policy of partnering with
developers financially or buying them out at a fair price. This assures
developers that they will be fairly compensated for their work, reduces
partner risk, and encourages outside investment in the SAP platform.
The issue of risk reduction on a platform is a perennial one. History
shows that platform owners generally seek to avoid responsibility for the
risks faced by platform participants, especially in the early days of the
platform. For example, in the 1960s, credit card companies, which host the
two-sided merchant and cardholder platform, resisted insuring cardholders
against fraud on their cards. They argued that insurance would promote
fraud as consumers would become careless with their cards, and that banks
forced to absorb more risk would become more reluctant to extend credit,
hurting low-income consumers.
Over the vigorous objections of major banks, the Fair Credit Reporting
Act (1970) and a subsequent amendment required fraud insurance,
imposing a limit of $50 on consumer liability for fraudulent use of a credit
card. The disaster predicted by the credit card companies did not occur.
Freed from the fear of fraud, consumers used their cards so much more
often that the increase in interaction volume more than offset the increase in
fraud. The business benefit from fraud insurance is so powerful that, in


order to encourage adoption and use, many banks now waive the $50
charge if consumers report a lost or stolen card within twenty-four hours.45
In recent years, new platform businesses have made the same mistake as
credit card companies did in the 1960s. Initially, Airbnb refused to
indemnify hosts against bad guest behavior, and Uber refused to insure
riders against bad driver behavior.46 Eventually, both companies realized
that this refusal was hurting the growth of their platforms. Today, as we’ve
noted, Airbnb offers its host members $1 million in homeowners’
protection, and Uber is partnering with insurance firms to create new types
of policies to protect its drivers.47
Rather than seeking to minimize their own risk, platforms should use
market mechanisms such as risk pooling and insurance to reduce risk for
their participants and thereby maximize overall value creation. Good
governance means looking after the health of one’s ecosystem partners.
PRINCIPLES OF SMART SELF-GOVERNANCE
FOR PLATFORMS
Kings and conquerors like to make the rules; they don’t always like to abide
by them. Yet results improve when smart rules of governance are applied to
platform companies themselves as well as to platform partners and
participants.
The first big principle of smart self-governance for platforms is internal
transparency. In platform companies, as in virtually all organizations,
there’s a tendency for divisions or departments to become “siloed”—to
develop unique perspectives, languages, systems, processes, and tools that
are difficult for outsiders to understand, even those in another department of
the same company. This makes it extremely hard to solve complex, large-
scale problems that span two or more divisions, since it means that
members of different work teams lack a shared vocabulary and tool set. It
also makes it much harder for outsiders—including platform users and
developers—to work effectively with the platform management team.
To avoid this kind of dysfunction, platform managers should strive to
give all their business divisions a clear view across the entire platform.


Such transparency promotes consistency, helps others develop and use key
resources, and facilitates growth to scale.
The so-called Yegge Rant, executive Steve Yegge’s attempt to
summarize a mandate issued by Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, captures the spirit of
this principle very effectively. Bezos insisted that all members of the
Amazon team must learn to communicate with one another using “service
interfaces”—data communication tools specifically designed to be clear,
understandable, and useful to everyone in the organization as well as to
outside users and partners. The idea is to treat everyone you do business
with—including your colleagues in other departments and divisions of the
organization—as customers with legitimate and important information
needs that you are responsible to meet. Hence the seven rules presented in
the Yegge Rant:
1.  All teams will henceforth expose their data and functionality through service interfaces.
2.  Teams must communicate with each other through these interfaces.
3.  There will be no other form of interprocess communication allowed: no direct linking, no
direct reads of another team’s data store, no shared-memory model, no back-doors whatsoever.
The only communication allowed is via service interface calls over the network.
4.  It doesn’t matter what technology they use. HTTP, Corba, Pubsub, custom protocols—doesn’t
matter. Bezos doesn’t care.
5.    All service interfaces, without exception, must be designed from the ground up to be
externalizable. That is to say, the team must plan and design to be able to expose the interface
to developers in the outside world. No exceptions.
6.  Anyone who doesn’t do this will be fired.
7.  Thank you; have a nice day!
Astute application of this principle of transparency underlies the success
of Amazon Web Services (AWS), the platform’s giant cloud services
company. Andrew Jassy, Amazon’s vice president of technology, had
observed how different divisions of Amazon kept having to develop web
service operations to store, search, and communicate data.48 Jassy urged that
these varied projects should be combined into a single operation with one
clear, flexible, and universally comprehensible set of protocols. Doing this
would make all of Amazon’s vast body of data accessible and useful to
everyone in the organization.
Even more important, Jassy recognized that solving this problem for
Amazon could have broader external applications. He reasoned that if
multiple business units within Amazon had to solve this problem, then a
reliable data management service that had solved the problem effectively


might well be useful to outside firms with similar needs. AWS was born—
one of the first businesses to offer cloud-based information storage and
management services and expertise to companies with massive data
challenges. Thanks to Jassy’s vision, AWS today has more market capacity
than the next dozen cloud services combined.49
By contrast, companies that limit their own ability to see across business
units are likely to fail to establish viable platforms or to build their platform
businesses to scale.
Sony Corporation provides a sobering example. The Sony Walkman had
dominated portable music since the 1970s. In 2007, when the Apple iPhone
was introduced, Sony’s dominance of the world of electronic devices
seemed unshakeable. Sony had a world-class MP3 player, it had a
pioneering e-reader, and it made some of the best cameras. In the fall of that
year, Sony introduced the next-generation PlayStation Portable (PSP), the
best gaming device in the world. Sony even owned Time Warner movie and
television studios, giving it the opportunity to offer unique content. Yet
despite these piecemeal advantages, Sony never developed the vision to
offer a platform. Instead, the firm embraced separate product lines and
focused on individual systems.
Sony’s siloed business vision prevented it from creating a unified
platform ecosystem. Within a few years, Apple’s iPhone and the apps built
on its growing platform had swept the field. Two years after the crash of
2008, Sony’s stock price was still almost one-third below its prior value,
while Apple’s price had soared to historic highs.
The second big principle of platform self-governance is participation.
It’s crucial for platform managers to give external partners and stakeholders
a voice in internal decision processes equal to that of internal stakeholders.
Otherwise, the decisions made will inevitably tend to favor the platform
itself, which will eventually alienate outside partners and cause them to
abandon the platform.
In their book Platform Leadership, Annabelle Gawer and Michael A.
Cusumano offer a vivid example of how giving partners a voice can be
great platform governance. The ecosystem built around the universal serial
bus (USB), promoted by Intel, was one of the first standards to facilitate
data and power transfer between peripherals—keyboards, memory devices,
monitors, cameras, network connectors, and so on—and computers. Yet
peripherals were outside Intel’s core microchip business.50 This meant that


Intel faced a particularly acute version of the chicken-or-egg launch
problem that we discussed in chapter 5. No one wants to produce
peripherals for a computer standard no one else has adopted, but no one
wants to buy a computer for which no one else has made peripherals. And
potential hardware partners were reluctant to link with Intel since, as the
owner of the standard, Intel would have the option of making future
changes to the standard that could render competing products incompatible,
thereby capturing all the long-term value of partner investments.
Intel cracked the chicken-or-egg conundrum by entrusting USB to its
Intel Architecture Labs (IAL) division. As a new business unit, IAL did not
fall under the authority of any internal product line. Its job was to serve as a
neutral negotiator between ecosystem partners and internal business units,
which it could only achieve through independence. IAL earned the trust of
partners by advocating and enacting policies that advanced the health of the
ecosystem even at the occasional expense of Intel business units. Over the
course of a year, the IAL team visited over fifty companies, inviting them to
help define the standard and design licenses that made them comfortable.
Through IAL, Intel also committed not to trample partner markets. Intel
used both reputation and contracts to limit its own future behavior. (See the
sidebar here for a summary of IAL’s self-governance principles.)
These efforts paid off. A consortium of seven companies—Compaq,
DEC, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, NEC, and Nortel—united behind USB,
producing an ecosystem standard that has evolved successfully for more
than a decade.
This returns us to the deep design principle we introduced early in this
chapter: Just and fair governance can create wealth. We saw this principal
operate in the story of Singapore’s rise; we see it here in the story of IAL
and the launch of the USB standard.
SELF-GOVERNANCE RULES FOLLOWED BY INTEL ARCHITECTURE LABS IN
LAUNCHING THE USB STANDARD
  1. Give customers a voice in key decisions. Use a separate business unit, with a “Chinese
wall,” to handle conflicting agendas.
  2. For trusting relationships, open standards must remain open.
  3. Treat IP [intellectual property] fairly, yours and theirs.
  4. Communicate a clear road map and stick to it. Commitments to act or not act must be
credible.


  5. Reserve the right to enter strategically important markets with notice. Don’t surprise
people and don’t play favorites with news.
  6. In case of big investments, share risk and bet your own money.
  7. Do not promise to not change the platform. Do promise early notice. Have skin in the
game, so change bites the platform, not just the partner.
  8. It’s okay to offer differential benefits to partners with differentiated assets. Just make sure
everyone understands how to qualify.
  9. Promote the long-term financial health of partners, especially smaller ones.
10. As the business matures, decisions increasingly favor outward progression from core
platform, to complements, to new businesses that cannibalize the platform.51
Fairness helps create wealth in two ways.52 First, if you treat people
fairly, they are more likely to share their ideas. Having more ideas creates
more opportunity to mix, match, and remake them into new innovations.
Second, one of this book’s authors (Marshall Van Alstyne) has shown
formally that fair governance leads participants in a market to allocate their
resources more wisely and productively.53 Consider the USB standard. If
each of the seven firms involved in creating the standard is sure to get a fair
share of the value created, then each will willingly participate. By contrast,
if five of the firms could gang up to steal the value of the other two—and
those two know this could happen—the two may never join the coalition.
This fracturing caused by the possibility of unfairness could have split the
USB standard into competing standards, or, worse, prevented the
development of any standard at all.
This is not to say that fairness always creates wealth or that wealth can
never be created without it. Keurig, Apple, Facebook, and others have all, at
times, treated their communities badly yet thrived financially. But in the
long run, designing fair participation into ecosystem governance prompts
users to create more wealth than if the rules grant a platform owner the
ability to make arbitrary decisions without accountability. Many platform
managers choose governance principles that favor themselves over their
users. Yet platforms that respect their users more can expect more from
their users—with benefits ultimately accruing to all.
Governance will always be imperfect. Whatever the rules, partners will
find new forms of private advantage. There will always be information
asymmetries and externalities. Interactions lead to complications, which
lead to interventions, which lead to new complications. Indeed, if good
governance allows third parties to innovate, then, as they create new


sources of value, they will simultaneously create new struggles to control
that value.
When such conflicts arise, governance decisions should favor the
greatest sources of new value or the direction where the market is headed,
not where it used to be. Firms that choose only to guard their aging assets,
as Microsoft has done, stagnate. The governance mechanism must therefore
be self-healing and promote evolution. Sophisticated governance achieves
efficiency at the level of “design for self-design”—that is, it encourages
platform members to collaborate freely and experiment fearlessly in order
to update the rules as necessary. Governance should not be static. When
signs of change appear on the horizon—such as new behaviors by platform
users, unanticipated conflicts among them, or encroachments by new
competitors—information about the change should spread rapidly through
the organization, encouraging creative conversations about how the
governance system may need to evolve in response.
No matter what kind of business or social ecosystem your platform
inhabits, it will always include both fast-moving parts and slow-moving
parts. Smart governance systems are flexible enough to respond to both.54
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER EIGHT
    Governance is necessary because absolutely free markets are prone to failures.
    Market failures are generally caused by information asymmetry, externalities, monopoly
power, and risk. Good governance helps prevent and mitigate market failures.
    The basic tools for platform governance include laws, norms, architecture, and markets.
Each must be designed and implemented with care in order to encourage platform
participants to engage in positive behaviors, incentivize good interactions, and discourage
bad interactions.
    Self-governance is also crucial to effective platform management. Well-run platforms
govern their own activities following the principles of transparency and participation.
OceanofPDF.com


9
METRICS
How Platform Managers
Can Measure What Really Matters
Leaders have always needed to focus on a handful of key metrics to guide
them. This has been true for thousands of years in every domain of human
activity, from business to government to warfare. Consider Jonathan Roth’s
description of the key factors for Julius Caesar’s army in the Gallic
campaigns (58–50 BCE):
The Roman army took a vast array of materiel into the field: clothing, armor, edged weapons,
missiles, tents, portable fortifications, cooking gear, medical supplies, writing materials, and much
more … Yet, approximately ninety percent of the weight of the supplies needed by an ancient
army was made up of only three elements: food, fodder and firewood. All military decisions from
the basic strategic concept to the smallest tactical movements were affected by, and often
determined by, the need to provide these supplies to the army.1
Given a certain number of soldiers and animals, Caesar’s quartermaster
could quickly determine how far the army could march and how long it
could campaign before reprovisioning, simply by tabulating the quantity of
food for the men, fodder for the animals, and firewood for warmth and
cooking. These three key metrics shaped many of Caesar’s most
fundamental strategic choices.
Leaders of traditional for-profit companies that have linear value chains
(pipelines) have, similarly, achieved success by working with a relatively
limited set of standard metrics. For example, firms that manufacture goods
such as automobiles or washing machines must source raw materials or
subassemblies and then assemble these into complete products that are
