# 9. Metrics: How Platform Managers Can Measure What Really Matters

offered for sale to end customers through a variety of sales and marketing
channels. The details of the work may be very complex, but as long as the
revenue exceeds the total cost of compensating pipeline participants, along
with a margin to justify the risk and cover future development costs, all is
well. While line workers and middle managers all along the pipeline need to
be immersed in the fine points of design, manufacturing, production,
marketing, and delivery, leaders at the C-suite level, as well as board
members and outside investors, can focus on a few key numbers to get a
quick sense of the relative health of the business.
Traditional measures from pipeline businesses, which are familiar to
most managers, include cash flow, inventory turns, and operating income.
These work in combination to create a useful, broad-brush picture of a
business, and their simplicity and clarity helps company leaders stay
focused on the factors that are crucial to long-term success rather than
getting distracted by secondary details.
FROM PIPELINE TO PLATFORM: THE NEW
MEASUREMENT CHALLENGE
Unfortunately, the traditional metrics used in organizing and running
pipeline businesses quickly break down in the context of a platform—and
developing alternative metrics that effectively measure the true health and
growth prospects of a platform business is far from easy.
Consider the story of BranchOut. Launched in July 2010, BranchOut
was a professional networking platform based mainly on an app that
enabled users to make job-hunting connections via Facebook. Think of
BranchOut as a variant of LinkedIn piggybacked on the vast Facebook
network. In a world where the majority of jobs are filled not through help-
wanted ads or Internet postings but through friend-to-friend word of mouth,
BranchOut struck many people as a brilliant innovation. Its founder and
CEO Rick Marini managed to attract $49 million in three rounds of
investment.
The company’s rocket-propelled ride to the top of the professional
networking world was astonishing. BranchOut’s user base expanded from
fewer than a million to a whopping 33 million between the spring and
summer of 2012. But its implosion occurred as quickly. Before another four


months had passed, the number of members had plummeted to fewer than
two million. And by the following summer, the company was groping for an
entirely new business strategy, hoping to become a “workplace chat”
platform that teams of coworkers could use to stay in touch. Rich Marini
admitted to reporters that “active users aren’t very big right now,” while
saying that BranchOut was “not a failure, it’s still alive.”2
Postmortems pointed to a variety of reasons for BranchOut’s collapse.
Some blamed changes in Facebook’s app developer platform, which put a
crimp in BranchOut’s communications system. Others pointed out that the
whole notion of blending job search capabilities with Facebook’s social
networking ambience was misguided. “Looking for a job is stressful,” as
one observer put it. “It’s a lot of work. When I hang out with my friends,
the last thing I want to do is talk about my job search. I want to escape it.”3
These may have been factors in BranchOut’s failure. But the most
significant mistake BranchOut made appears to have been focusing on—and
measuring—the wrong things. Flush with investment capital and riding an
incredible upsurge in “active user” enrollments, during those fateful months
in the middle of 2012, BranchOut kept directing its efforts to boosting
membership numbers. It incentivized users to invite as many friends as
possible, and made it easy for Facebook members to invite everyone in their
network to join BranchOut. As hundreds of millions of invitations flooded
cyberspace, BranchOut’s enrollment figures skyrocketed.4
Having a person’s name and email address on a membership list doesn’t
promise success for a platform. What matters is activity—the number of
satisfying interactions that platform users experience. If BranchOut had
tracked the activity numbers as diligently as it tracked membership, it might
have realized that its millions of members weren’t finding much value in
the service—which led, of course, to plummeting membership rolls.
The BranchOut story illustrates a vital truth about the world of
platforms. Just as platforms transform traditional value chains, competitive
strategy, and management techniques, they also demand new forms of
internal measurement.
Let’s return for a moment to the metrics that are most commonly used by
pipeline managers: key numbers like cash flow, inventory turns, and
operating income, as well as ancillary metrics like gross margin, overhead,
and return on investment. These tools, in their varied ways, help to measure
the same thing: the efficiency with which value flows through the pipeline.


A successful pipeline business is one that produces goods and services with
minimal waste of resources and then delivers a large quantity of these goods
and services to customers through well-managed marketing, sales, and
distribution systems, thereby generating revenues that are more than
sufficient to recoup costs and produce profits to reward investors and
finance future growth.
Pipeline metrics are designed to gauge the efficiency of this value flow
from one end of the pipeline to the other. They help managers recognize
bottlenecks, logjams, and breakdowns in the flow that require improved
process efficiencies or system enhancements that will facilitate a larger,
faster, and more rewarding stream of value through the pipeline. Thus,
when a statistic like inventory turns unexpectedly plummets, it’s generally a
sign of overstocking, product obsolescence, or marketing failure, while an
excessively high rate of turnover may indicate understocking and
consequent loss of sales. Carefully monitoring this metric can help
managers make necessary adjustments to keep the business humming.
This kind of (admittedly simplified) analysis doesn’t work when we shift
our focus to a platform business. As we’ve seen, platforms create value
primarily through the impact of network effects. Platform managers in
search of metrics that reveal the true health of their business need to focus
on positive network effects and on the platform activities that drive them.
In specific, platform metrics need to measure the rate of interaction
success and the factors that contribute to it. Platforms exist to facilitate
positive interactions among users—particularly between producers and
consumers of value. The greater the number of positive interactions the
platform creates, the more users will be drawn to the platform, and the more
eager they will be to engage in activities and interactions of various kinds
on the platform. Thus, the most important metrics are those that quantify the
success of the platform in fostering sustainable repetition of desirable
interactions. The end result: positive network effects and the creation of
enormous value for everyone involved, including the users of the platform
as well as the sponsors and managers of the platform.
Note the difference between this core metric and the core metric of the
pipeline. Whereas a pipeline manager is concerned with the flow of value
from one end of the pipeline to the other, the platform manager is concerned
with the creation, sharing, and delivery of value throughout the ecosystem
—some occurring on the platform, some elsewhere. For a platform


manager, process efficiencies and system enhancements may be quite
important—but only insofar as they facilitate successful interactions among
users. The big goal on which platform managers must remain focused is the
creation of value for all users of the platform, which strengthens the
community, improves its long-term health and vibrancy, and encourages the
continual growth of positive network effects.
DESIGNING METRICS THAT TRACK
THE LIFE CYCLE OF THE PLATFORM
In this chapter, we’ll consider some of the key issues related to developing
and using appropriate metrics for platform businesses, following the life
cycle of a platform from startup to maturity. In the startup phase, it is
critical to have simple measures to guide decision-making around key
questions of platform design and launch, including the design of the core
interaction; the development of effective tools to pull users, facilitate
interactions, and match producers with consumers; the creation of effective
systems of curation; and decisions about how open the platform should be
to various kinds of participants.
In particular, firms in the startup phase must track the growth of their
most important asset: active producers and consumers who are participating
in a large volume of successful interactions. These users and the
interactions they engage in are the key to generating the positive network
effects that will ultimately make the platform successful. Notice that some
of the traditional metrics generally regarded as crucial in the early years of a
pipeline business—revenues, cash flow, profit margins, and the like—are
largely irrelevant when evaluating a platform during the startup phase.
Once the platform has reached critical mass and users are gaining
significant value from the platform, the focus of metrics can shift to
customer retention and the conversion of active users to paying customers.
This is the phase in which monetization becomes a crucial issue. As we
explained in chapter 6, decisions about how to monetize the platform are
fraught. Platform managers will need to devise metrics that focus on some
of the key issues related to monetization, for example: Which user groups
are enjoying the greatest value from platform activities? Which user groups
may need to be subsidized to ensure their continued participation? What


fraction of the value creation unleashed by the platform is occurring on the
platform rather than outside it? How much additional value can be created
through services such as enhanced curation? Which groups outside the
platform might find value in access to specific user groups on the platform?
And most important, how can the platform capture and retain a fair share of
the value being created on the platform without impeding the continued
growth of network effects? During the growth phase, thoughtfully designed
metrics can help platform managers develop accurate answers to questions
like these.
Finally, as the platform matures and a self-sustaining business model has
been developed, the challenge of user retention and growth requires the
platform to innovate. This is the best way to maintain and enhance the
business’s value proposition relative to competing platforms. Metrics then
must sensitively gauge the ongoing engagement of users and the degree to
which they continue to discover new ways to create value on the platform.
It’s crucial to measure and track the degree to which both producers and
consumers are repeatedly participating in the platform and increasing their
participation over time.
Other competitive concerns include attempts by adjacent platforms to
drain users and reduce the platform’s comparative advantage, as well as the
possibility that participants in the platform (such as extension developers)
may create platforms of their own that could eventually pull users away.
These, too, call for the development of metrics that will enable platform
leaders to recognize such threats and respond to them in time.
STAGE 1:
METRICS DURING THE STARTUP PHASE
At startup companies—whether they operate as pipelines or as platforms—
resources are usually stretched. With money, time, and talent at a premium,
people find themselves doing multiple jobs, often in domains far from their
expertise. In this kind of environment, deciding the categories of
information to which to dedicate resources in collection and processing can
be both critically important and challenging.
Furthermore, the kinds of metrics that work in a startup context may be
quite different from those that apply to a conventional, mature business.


Entrepreneur Derek Sivers describes the problem:
Most tools from general management are not designed to flourish in the harsh soil of extreme
uncertainty in which startups thrive. The future is unpredictable, customers face a growing array
of alternatives, and the pace of change is ever increasing. Yet most startups—in garages and
enterprises alike—still are managed by using standard forecasts, product milestones, and detailed
business plans.5
So what kinds of metrics are most valuable during the startup phase of a
platform business? Platform managers should focus on the core interaction
and the benefits it creates for both producers and consumers on the
platform. To define success or failure for a platform, and to identify how to
improve it, there are three main metrics: liquidity, matching quality, and
trust.
Liquidity in a platform marketplace is a state in which there are a
minimum number of producers and consumers and the percentage of
successful interactions is high. When liquidity is achieved, interaction
failure is minimized, and the intent of users to interact is consistently
satisfied within a reasonable period of time. Achieving liquidity is the first
and most important milestone in the life cycle of a platform. Therefore, the
most valuable metric in the early months of a platform is one that can help
you determine when liquidity is reached. Depending on the precise
workings of the platform and the nature of its user base, the formula for this
metric may vary.
One reasonable way to measure liquidity is by tracking the percentage of
listings that lead to interactions within a given time period. Of course, both
the definition of “interactions” and the appropriate time period will vary
depending on the market category. On an information and entertainment
platform, an interaction might be the click-through that takes a consumer
from a headline to a complete story; on a marketplace platform, it might be
the purchase of a product; on a professional networking platform, it might
be the offer of a recommendation, the swapping of contact information, or a
posted response to a question on a discussion page. Any of these
interactions would signify a greater degree of engagement by the user and
represent the moment when the user has recognized, used, and enjoyed a
value unit available on the platform.
On the negative side, it’s important to look for and track the occurrence
of illiquid situations. These are circumstances in which a desired transaction
is impossible—for example, when an Uber user opens the app and


discovers that no car is available. Illiquid situations discourage users from
participating in the platform and so must be kept to a minimum.
Note that user commitment and active usage of the platform are the vital
metrics of platform adoption, not sign-ups. That’s why our definition of
liquidity includes both user totals and the level of interactions occurring.
New reports and investor pitches that emphasize impressive raw numbers of
platform members can be very misleading and may be a sign that the
platform, far from flourishing, is struggling to convert curiosity-seekers into
active participants and value creators.
Also note that the most meaningful metrics are comparative ones, which
draw helpful distinctions between groups of users or over periods of time (a
useful recommendation from Alistair Croll and Benjamin Yoskovitz,
authors of Lean Analytics). A good example of an inherently comparative
measure is a ratio or rate, which is calculated by dividing one number by
another—for example, the ratio of active users, which is calculated by
dividing the number of active users by the number of total users, or the rate
of growth in active users, which is calculated by dividing the number of
new active users by the number of total active users.6
A second crucial category of metric for the startup platform is matching
quality. This refers to the accuracy of the search algorithm and the
intuitiveness of the navigation tools offered to users as they seek other users
with whom they can engage in value-creating interactions. Matching quality
is critical to delivering value and stimulating the long-term growth and
success of the platform. It is achieved through excellence in product or
service curation.
As the definition implies, matching quality is closely related to the
effectiveness with which products or service offerings on the platform are
curated. Users generally participate in a platform with highly interactional
intent; they want to find what they’re looking for as quickly as possible.
Precision in matching leads to lower search costs for users—that is, they
need to invest less time, energy, effort, and other resources in finding the
matches they want. Thus, if the platform does a great job of linking users to
one another quickly and accurately, those users are likely to become active
participants and long-term members of the platform; if matching quality is
poor, slow, and disappointing, users will soon dwindle in number,
interactions will slow to a trickle, and the platform may be doomed to an
early demise.


Of course, it’s necessary to translate the abstract term “matching quality”
into a concrete quantity with a clear operational definition in order to make
it the basis of a meaningful metric. One way to measure the efficiency of
the platform in successfully matching producers to consumers is by tracking
the sales conversion rate, which can be expressed as the percentage of
searches that lead to interactions.
Obviously, the higher the percentage, the better—but where does the
threshold between “poor” and “good” matching quality lie? There’s no
single answer that applies to every kind of platform. However, the manager
of a particular platform may be able to develop a useful rule of thumb by
correlating the interaction percentage for particular users with the long-term
rate of activity of those users—say, over a period of one to three months.
Calculations like these may enable you to determine, for example, that an
interaction percentage of 40 percent appears to represent a significant cutoff
point for users of your platform: the majority of users who experience
interaction percentage higher than 40 percent during their first week on the
platform remain active members for at least three months, while a majority
of those with an interaction percentage lower than 40 percent stop
participating in activities on the site.
Once you’ve calculated a number of this kind—whether it is 40 percent,
higher, or lower—you can use it as a working target that serves as one
measure of the health of your site. The daily interaction percentage can be
measured, its trend over time can be observed, and improvements to the
platform’s matching system can be developed, tested, and evaluated based
on changes in this metric.
The third crucial category of startup metric is trust. Trust refers to the
degree to which users of a platform feel comfortable with the level of risk
associated with engaging in interactions on the platform. It is achieved
through excellent curation of participants in the platform.
Building trust, of course, is central to marketplaces, especially those in
which interactions carry some level of risk—and in the world of online
platforms, where initial connections among users as well as many
interactions are conducted entirely in cyberspace, the perception of risk may
be even more significant. A well-run platform is one in which participants
on both sides have been successfully curated so that users are comfortable
with the level of risk involved in engaging in interactions on the platform.
As we’ve noted, Airbnb is an example of a player in a high-risk category


that has succeeded so far because of its ability to curate its participants
successfully. It allows hosts and guests to review each other and has one of
the highest review rates among platforms. It also takes additional measures
to build trust, including having photographers certify the accuracy of the
information contained in a host’s listing. By contrast, Airbnb’s competitor
Craigslist has earned relatively low scores on the trust metric and has
experienced a number of embarrassing scandals involving apparently sleazy
platform users engaged in disreputable, even illegal activities.
These three crucial categories of metrics—liquidity, matching quality,
and trust—combine to provide the managers of startup platforms with an
accurate picture of the platform’s rate of interaction success and the key
factors that contribute to it. As we’ve noted, this measurement is at the heart
of the platform’s purpose and plays a central role in determining its ability
to create positive network effects.
The specific formulas you use to define the metrics for a particular
platform business need to be carefully devised to be appropriate for the kind
of platform business involved—the nature of the platform, the types of
users, the forms of value being created and exchanged, the variety of
interactions performed, and so on.
There are a number of specialized metrics that are potentially valuable
for particular platform businesses. You might choose to measure
engagement per interaction, time between interactions, and percentage of
active users, all of which focus on the degree of user commitment to the
ecosystem.
Alternatively, you might choose to measure number of interactions, as,
for example, the graphics and design platform Fiverr does. Since Fiverr has
a fixed value per interaction—every “gig” traded on the site is priced at five
dollars—the sheer number of interactions is a perfectly adequate and
complete measurement of the current activity flow on the site.
Other platforms need to develop more sophisticated interaction metrics.
Airbnb, for example, tracks the number of nights booked, which is a better
indicator of value creation for this platform than simply recording the
number of interactions. The freelance work marketplace Upwork measures
interaction volume by counting the hours of work delivered by a particular
freelancer, which is a key measure of value creation in that ecosystem. In a
similar fashion, Clarity can track the duration of a consulting call between
an expert and the information seeker.


Platforms whose revenue is based on claiming a share of the value of
any interaction—a commission fee based on a percentage of the interaction,
for example—may choose to measure interaction capture, which will
reflect the value of interactions that occur on the platform. Amazon
Marketplace, for instance, uses this metric, tracking the gross value of
interactions processed by the platform as a key indicator of its activity level.
Platforms that focus on content creation require different metrics. For
example, some measure co-creation (the percentage of listings that are
consumed by users) or consumer relevance (the percentage of listings that
receive some minimum level of positive response from potential
consumers). These metrics focus on interaction quality and reflect the skill
with which production is being curated.
Finally, other platforms focus on market access—the effectiveness with
which users have been able to join the platform and find or connect with
one another, regardless of whether a complete interaction has occurred.
Some measure producer participation—that is, the rate at which producers
join the platform and the growth of this rate over time. Dating and
matrimonial sites often talk about number of women registered, since this
metric serves as a useful proxy for the value that other users of the site can
expect to receive. In a somewhat different fashion, OpenTable tracks
restaurant reservations. These are not the actual interactions, in which
restaurants are paid for meals served (information not readily available to
the platform), but they serve as a fairly accurate proxy for the value created.
The three key factors of liquidity, matching quality, and trust remain
crucial to measuring the health of virtually any kind of newly launched
platform. But as you can see, specific characteristics of a particular platform
may dictate the need for additional, more specialized measurement tools.
The variety and range of metrics that may be suitable during a platform’s
startup phase is limited only by your ingenuity and the nature of the
activities occurring in your burgeoning ecosystem.
STAGE 2:
METRICS DURING THE GROWTH PHASE
The metrics that best measure the number and quality of interactions in
your ecosystem will change over the life cycle of the platform, and it’s


critical to identify points at which these transitions occur. Companies often
make the mistake of clinging to metrics that their business has outgrown.
Identifying and vetting the core metrics that are most relevant to the
decisions you face today is important at every point in the platform’s
development.
For example, once the platform reaches a critical mass of users, new
issues arise. Managers must still ensure that the core interaction is creating
value and that the inflow of engaged users exceeds the outflow so that the
platform is still growing. However, as growth continues, the platform must
monitor the change in size of the user base over time. In particular, platform
managers will want to work to ensure balance on the two sides of its
market. This balance can be monitored by calculating the producer-to-
consumer ratio, with an adjustment to include only active platform users—
those who’ve engaged in interactions on the platform at a specific minimum
rate of frequency that you consider appropriate. Experience shows that this
ratio is a crucial factor in the rate of interaction success achieved by the
platform.
Consider the core interaction that the dating website OkCupid is
facilitating: introductions between men and women. As we noted in chapter
2, one of the critical things for this platform to manage is the access of
straight men (who may be considered “consumers” in this context) to
straight women (who play the role of “producers”).* As a result, OkCupid
tracks the ratio of straight women to straight men, and platform managers
work hard to adjust that ratio when it diverges from the level they deem
optimal. They manage these adjustments by asking users to rate the
attractiveness of those on the opposite side of the platform.7 The website
then introduces a filter to reduce the number of men who can participate in
the platform by seeing women’s profiles—especially women who are rated
as particularly attractive.8 In this way, the OkCupid platform is helping to
maintain positive network effects and fostering market liquidity by avoiding
an imbalance that might otherwise alienate a segment of its female users.
Continually measuring and monitoring the male–female ratio makes this
maintenance possible. In similar fashion, the freelance platform Upwork
focuses on keeping the number of freelancers proportional to the number of
job postings, since a surfeit on either side causes participants to leave.
For a traditional two-sided platform with producers on one side and
consumers on the other, it is best to find ways to calculate the value of each


user type. In Lean Analytics, the entrepreneur/author team of Alistair Croll
and Benjamin Yoskovitz provide a useful illustration of metrics for a two-
sided platform, which we adapt below.9
On the producer side, the platform should monitor figures that include
the frequency of producer participation, listings created, and outcomes
achieved. The platform should also monitor interaction failure—the
percentage of cases in which interactions, such as sales, are initiated but fall
through for some reason. This is a crucial metric that many platform
managers overlook. If users are being retained but the rate of successful
interaction is falling, there is a serious problem.
It’s especially important to monitor instances of producer fraud—for
example, the failure of a producer to describe a product offering accurately
or to deliver it in a timely fashion. Producer fraud is, of course, a
particularly egregious, painful, and costly form of interaction failure.
Examination of the characteristics of users and interactions repeatedly
linked to fraud may be used to create predictive models that can help the
platform prevent future fraud.
Combining all these forms of data, the value of a producer can be
calculated using traditional lifetime value (LTV) models used in many kinds
of businesses. These models capture the mechanism by which repeat
producers provide recurring platform revenues without incurring additional
acquisition costs—that is, expenses incurred by the platform in attracting
and engaging these producers. Because repeat producers are especially
profitable to a platform, well-managed platform firms will work hard to
create active repeat producers, just as subscriber-based services like
magazines and cell service providers work to keep the rates of subscriber
turnover (or churn) as low as possible.
On the consumer side, the growing platform should monitor the
frequency of consumption, searches, and rate of conversion to sale (the
percentage of click-throughs that result in completed interactions). This
information, along with the likelihood of repeat interactions, provides the
data necessary to calculate each consumer’s LTV. Once both producer and
consumer LTV measures have been created, the platform can run
experiments in an effort to impact the critical determinants of LTV—churn
rate, for example.10
Most of today’s successful platform businesses have programs designed
to encourage loyalty on the part of the most valuable active users and to


discourage those who are less valuable. If you’ve ever had a platform like
Facebook or LinkedIn ping you with an invitation to return to the platform
after a falloff in your usage, you’ve been targeted by such a program.
Similarly, Twitter has introduced the “popular in your network” feature to
alert you to content that might be particularly relevant even if you have not
subscribed to those authors’ feeds—another activity-building program that
is driven by metrics and designed to stimulate more interactions around
users with a proven track record of value-creating activity.11
A critical variable from the startup phase that remains highly relevant
during the growth phase is the interaction conversion rate—that is, the
percentage of searches or queries that result in interactions. Well designed
and consistently monitored metrics focusing on the sales conversion rate
can help platform managers develop smart strategies that will enhance the
platform’s continued growth—as when Airbnb introduced its professional
photography service after discovering that high-quality photos increase
property rental rates.12
Interestingly, Airbnb has also discovered that its best source of hosts is
people who have been guests. Consequently, it is now working hard to
convert consumers on its platform into producers. In this case, the side
switching rate—the rate at which people convert from one type of user to
another—offers an important metric that the platform can use to track the
health of its user base and to maintain balance across its network.
New metrics are continually being devised by platform managers based
on their specific objectives and interests as well as the unique
characteristics of their users. Haier Group is a rapidly growing
manufacturing company based in Qingdao, China. It is currently building a
platform to connect its customers with the design and production teams,
both inside and outside the organization, that create the products, which
include home appliances and electronics. Haier’s CEO, Ruimin Zhang,
spoke with the authors about a unique metric that the company is eager to
capture and use—namely, the distance between consumers and producers.13
In this case, the word “distance” is metaphorical, not literal; it refers to the
frequency of direct interaction and the size, reach, and influence of the
social networks that connect producers of Haier products to their users.
To measure this distance, Haier has devised metrics based on
interactions on WeChat, a social instant messaging and photo sharing tool
developed by the Chinese company Tencent. The goal: to minimize the


distance between Haier and its customers, thereby improving the fit
between products and consumer needs, enhancing the company’s innovative
capacities, and making its marketing and promotional efforts less costly and
more effective.
As CEO Zhang pointed out to us, the size of a company’s advertising
budget might be viewed as a reflection of the distance between the
company and its customers. For example, the annual brand value report
issued in 2013 by the consulting firm Interbrand noted that Google’s
advertising budget is just a tiny fraction of Coca-Cola’s. The likely reason:
Google is deeply integrated into people’s lives through its many
productivity and social applications, giving it constant user feedback that
Coca-Cola doesn’t receive.
Based on analogies like this, Haier’s leadership team hypothesizes that a
reduction in its user distance measure may improve its product design,
customer service, and marketing efficiency. Thus, a seemingly abstract
metric like user distance may have a highly practical, dollars-and-cents
impact on your bottom line.
STAGE 3:
METRICS DURING THE MATURITY PHASE
Once a platform business has moved past the phases of startup and early
growth, new challenges and issues emerge. Eric Ries, the writer and
entrepreneur known for pioneering the “lean startup” movement,
emphasizes that, for the mature company, incremental innovation and
metrics must be closely related to each other. “When making improvements
to your product,” Ries observes, “the only arbiter of whether or not it was
successful is the metrics. And, when you are implementing an improvement
to your product, you should be testing that improvement against a baseline.”
Somewhat in line with Ries’s thinking, Amrit Tiwana, a professor at the
University of Georgia, suggests that metrics suitable for information
technology platforms that have reached the maturity phase should meet
three major requirements: they should drive innovation, have a high signal-
to-noise ratio, and facilitate resource allocation.14


First, let’s focus on the role of metrics in driving innovation. In order to
remain vibrant, a platform must be able to adapt to the needs of its users
and to changes in the competitive and regulatory environment. One way for
a platform to identify necessary adaptations is by studying the extensions
provided by developers. These innovations may represent functionalities
missing from the core platform, which the platform may choose to absorb.
For example, during the era of the desktop computer, Microsoft Windows
absorbed a number of applications that were once provided by stand-alone
companies, such as disk defragmentation, file encryption, media playing,
and more.15
Cisco has followed the same absorption strategy in the router business,
where it operates a platform known as the Cisco Application Extension
Platform. The Cisco AXP (as it is called) is a Linux-based platform that
allows third-party developers to create applications that work on Cisco
routers, providing new capabilities that Cisco customers find useful—for
example, enhanced security measures and customized monitoring systems.
When we asked Cisco’s chief technology officer, Guido Jouret, how the
company decided which functions to bundle into the Cisco AXP, his answer
was illuminating:
The issue is to embed into the platform multiple independent solutions to the same problem. Then
this becomes common for everyone else. It’s a question of timing. If you do it right away, your
ecosystem is scared that you’ll cannibalize their cash cows. If one provider builds a particular
functionality, you don’t want to co-opt it. But if a whole slew of them have [developed the same
capability], then competition reduces benefits anyway, and you can fold it in.16
To enable this strategy, Cisco employs metrics that seek out instances in
which the same capability is provided across multiple industry verticals—
health care or the automotive business, for example. That is a sign that the
platform is missing important features that should be part of the next round
of continuous platform innovation.
A platform may also choose to innovate when features provided by third
parties become a large part of the overall value enjoyed by users. As we saw
in chapter 7, this helps to explain Apple’s 2012 introduction of Apple Maps
in response to the enormous popularity of Google Maps.
Some kinds of platforms need still other customized metrics during their
maturity phase. These include labor platforms such as Upwork, data
platforms such as Thomson Reuters, connection platforms such as Skype,
and platforms that connect machines such as GE’s Industrial Internet.


Although these are distinct platform types with disparate needs, they all
face the challenges of facilitating a core interaction, measuring the drivers
of value, and innovating to maintain the platform’s ability to produce
significant value for users.
ELEMENTS OF SMART METRICS DESIGN
The metrics dashboard you develop for your platform can be quite complex,
allowing you to get a real-time glimpse of activities at a very fine level.
However, simplicity is a virtue when developing metrics for your platform
business. Overcomplex metrics make management less effective by
introducing noise, discouraging frequent analysis, and distracting from the
handful of data points that are most significant.
At one time, oDesk (now known as Upwork) had so many metrics
(measuring job postings, registered workers, service variety, and many
other factors) that one board member complained, “You’re over-measured
and under-prioritized.” Having learned from this mistake, Gary Swart,
former CEO of oDesk, writes eloquently about the need for highly focused
metrics, especially in the critical early period of a startup:
As a business leader you need to figure out the metric that matters most for your company and
understand that the more you measure, the less prioritized you’ll be. Don’t fall into the trap of
trying to measure everything. What I’ve learned is that in the early days, what matters most is
having customers who love and use your product. Figure out the one or two best measures to
determine this.17
Lean startup guru Eric Ries echoes the need to be selective in the design
and use of metrics. In particular, he cautions against what he calls “vanity
metrics,” such as total sign-ups—a relatively meaningless statistic that often
increases even as the volume of interactions is flat or actually declining.
Vanity metrics fail to indicate accurately whether the business is really
achieving critical mass or the liquidity it needs.
Instead, Ries suggests, “you should make sure your metrics meet the ‘3
A’s test’ where your metrics are actionable, accessible, and auditable.” They
must be actionable in that they provide clear guidance for strategic and
managerial decisions, and in being clearly related to the success of the
business. They must be accessible in that they are comprehensible to the
people who gather and use the information. And they must be auditable in


the sense that they are real and meaningful—based on clean, accurate data,
precisely defined, and reflecting the reality of the business as perceived by
users.18
In the end, the most important metric is a simple one: the number of
happy customers on every side of the network who are repeatedly and
increasingly engaged in positive, value-creating interactions. The real
question, which you should never lose sight of, is: are people happy enough
with the ecosystem to continue participating in it actively? No matter how
you end up designing the metric dashboard for your specific platform
business, it should ultimately serve to accurately measure the answer to this
key question.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER NINE
    Since the value of a platform is derived primarily from network effects, platform metrics
should ultimately seek to measure the rate of interaction success and the factors that
contribute to it. Interaction success attracts active users and thereby enhances the
development of positive network effects.
    During the startup phase, platform companies should concentrate on metrics that track the
strength of characteristics that enable core interactions on the platform, including liquidity,
matching, and trust. These characteristics can be measured in a variety of specific ways,
depending on the nature of the platform.
    During the growth phase, platform companies should focus on metrics that are likely to
impact growth and enhanced value creation, such as the relative size of various portions of
the user base, the lifetime value of producers and consumers, and the sales conversion rate.
    During the maturity phase, platform companies should focus on metrics that drive
innovation by identifying new functionalities that can create value for users, as well as
metrics that can identify strategic threats from competitors to which the platform needs to
respond.
 
*We recognize the unpleasant implications of this language. It reflects the currently prevailing
dynamic of many male–female dating interactions in U.S. society at this time, including the fact that
most online dating sites find it easier to attract male participants than females. Thus, females are “in
demand” in a way that is analogous to the demand for highly-sought-after products on an auction site
like eBay. As social norms evolve in the direction of greater gender equality, we hope and expect that
this dynamic will also evolve, with implications for the effective management of dating platforms.
OceanofPDF.com


10
STRATEGY
How Platforms Change Competition
In the world of platforms, the nature of competition is being transformed.
Companies find themselves struggling to make sense of new competitive
threats posed by unexpected, often counterintuitive rivals.1 The educational
book publisher Houghton Mifflin Harcourt doesn’t fear McGraw-Hill as
much as it fears Amazon. Broadcaster NBC worries less about ABC than
about Netflix. Legal information purveyor Lexis feels less threatened by
Westlaw than by Google and by the online legal services purveyor
LegalZoom. Appliance maker Whirlpool fears GE and Siemens less than it
fears Nest, the maker of smart home monitoring and control devices that is
rapidly becoming a key element in the emerging “Internet of things.” And
the social network Facebook was less worried about a rebooted Myspace
than about Instagram and WhatsApp—which is why it bought them.
What has changed is not simply the types of competitors but the very
nature of the competitive battle. The result is a series of seismic upheavals
that 
are 
making 
one 
business 
landscape 
after 
another 
almost
unrecognizable. We’re not speaking only of the dramatic disruptions
produced by the advent of platform businesses in traditional marketplaces
(as described in chapter 4 and elsewhere in this book). We’re also referring
to the dramatic competitive battles being waged within the world of
platforms, between platform companies—with results that are often
startling, even shocking.2
It’s probably safe to say that the $25 billion initial public offering of
shares in Alibaba Group in September 2014—the largest IPO in history—
was one of the most unexpected business stories of the year. Many
