# 10. Strategy: How Platforms Change Competition

Westerners who had not obsessively followed the world of e-commerce had
never heard of the company. Those who had were mainly familiar with it
through its connection with the floundering Yahoo, which owned a
significant stake in Alibaba. Much U.S. coverage of the Alibaba story was
vaguely dismissive, treating the company’s amazing growth and impressive
size as fluky results of the sheer vastness and parochialism of the Chinese
market and the impact of government protectionism.
A 2010 story in the New York Times was typical. Reporter David
Barboza acknowledged Alibaba as one of several “fast-growing local firms
that are making huge profits” through online sales. But in the future,
Barboza wrote, “China’s Internet market could increasingly resemble a
lucrative, walled-off bazaar, experts say. Those homegrown successes …
could have trouble becoming global brands.” Barboza quotes one analyst as
predicting, “When the Chinese companies go outside of China, they will
find that they fail to understand their competitors as well as they did when
they were competing in China.”3
By the summer of 2014, with Alibaba’s U.S. stock debut just weeks
away, U.S. business analysts were singing a different tune. In Businessweek,
Brad Stone warned of “the Alibaba invasion” and explained how the
Chinese giant was suddenly posing the first ever significant threat to U.S.
domination of the Internet. Stone recounted how Alibaba had outcompeted
eBay in China, had become a huge source of Chinese goods for businesses
around the world, had successfully opened the Chinese consumer market
for global companies such as Nike and Apple, and was quickly building the
infrastructure to challenge Amazon and eBay in their own home market—
the U.S. Stone concluded, “China’s Web entrepreneurs are positioning
themselves to compete in—and win—the race to build the first truly global
online marketplace.”4
In most traditional industries, such a rapid emergence from relative
obscurity to global leadership would be virtually impossible. Glancing back
at business history, we see that it took American businesses in industries
like steel and heavy machinery decades to overtake once-dominant rivals in
Britain and Germany. After World War Two, Japanese upstarts required
three decades to seize leadership roles in auto making and electronics from
industry leaders in the U.S. But Alibaba today has the potential to outstrip
companies like eBay and Amazon a decade or so after entering the battle for
platform marketplace dominance.


How did it happen?
As with most big business stories, there are many contributing elements
in the Alibaba saga, including the strategic insights of CEO Jack Ma, the
explosive growth of China’s middle class, and, yes, government-imposed
restrictions on foreign companies operating in China, which gave Alibaba a
bit of space to grow without being crushed by American competitors. But
the swiftness of Alibaba’s ascent is largely a function of the new realities of
platform competition.5
Explosive network effects and strong economies of scale enabled this
relatively new company to expand so rapidly on the stage of international
commerce. Alibaba.com, one of five major businesses operating under the
corporate umbrella, allows companies around the world to source goods,
products, and parts from Chinese manufacturers. One California cosmetics
maker marvels that, through Alibaba.com, “I have access to hundreds of
suppliers at my fingertips.” Conversely, Tmall, another Alibaba subsidiary,
sells foreign goods to millions of Chinese consumers, bypassing the
country’s traditional broker system, which slowed imports and added layers
of paperwork and cost. One U.S. shoe retailer says Alibaba “has
compressed the whole middle layer of retail.” The result is near-frictionless
cross-border trading that connects thousands of merchants with millions of
customers—a phenomenon scarcely imaginable before the advent of the
platform.
Furthermore, Alibaba is shrewdly leveraging another enormous
competitive strength of platforms—the ability to seamlessly incorporate the
resources and connections of outside partners into the activities and
capabilities of the platform. For example, to expand its ability to offer U.S.
goods to Chinese consumers, Alibaba has now forged a partnership with
ShopRunner, a U.S.-based logistics company in which Alibaba owns a
stake. ShopRunner already has arrangements with U.S. brands including
Neiman Marcus and Toys“R”Us that enable Alibaba to ship American
products to customers in China in two days.6
Back in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it took decades and
vast investments in retailing, warehousing, product testing, management,
printing, shipping, service, and fulfillment systems for Sears, Roebuck to
make itself into America’s merchant. Today, a platform business like
Alibaba can assemble the capabilities of dozens of preexisting entities and
swiftly become a contender for the title of merchant to the world. And, of


course, Alibaba’s chief rivals for the crown are other platform companies
such as Amazon and eBay. Such is the world of competition that the rise of
platforms has brought.
But to fully understand how the rise of the platform is transforming the
nature of competition, we need to reexamine the traditional concepts of
competition that have dominated business thinking for decades—and that
many businesspeople still take for granted.
STRATEGY IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY:
A CAPSULE HISTORY
For three decades, the five forces model of competition outlined by Michael
Porter of Harvard Business School has dominated the world of strategic
thinking.7 As one measure of Porter’s influence, his writings have received
more than a quarter million citations, exceeding those of any Nobel Prize-
winning economist.
Porter’s model identifies five forces that affect the strategic position of a
particular business: the threat of new entrants to the market, the threat of
substitute products or services, the bargaining power of customers, the
bargaining power of suppliers, and the intensity of competitive rivalry in the
industry. The goal of strategy is to control these five forces in such a way as
to build a moat around the business and thereby render it unassailable.
Thus, when a firm can erect barriers to entry, it can keep competitors out,
and entrants with substitute products cannot storm the castle. When a firm
can subjugate suppliers, competition among them weakens their bargaining
power so the firm can keep its costs low. When a firm can subjugate buyers
by keeping them relatively small, disunited, and powerless, the firm can
keep its prices high.
In this model, the firm maximizes profits by avoiding ruinous
competition for itself but encouraging it for everyone else in the value
chain. Advantage is found in industry structures that create a protective
moat—one that enables the firm to segment markets, differentiate products,
control resources, avoid price wars, and defend its profit margins.
For decades, companies have studied the five forces model and used it to
guide their decisions about which markets to enter and exit, what mergers


or acquisitions to consider, what sorts of product innovation to pursue, and
what supply chain strategies to employ. Approaches like horizontal
integration (in which a firm controls most or all of a specific product or
service marketplace) and vertical integration (in which a firm controls an
entire value chain, from raw materials to manufacturing to marketing) have
been analyzed and implemented based on the strategic implications of the
five forces model. Under this model, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt competes
with McGraw-Hill by striving to control the best authors and content and by
using copyright to construct a moat around its fortress of value. Whirlpool
competes with GE by engineering differentiated products, squeezing the
supply chain, and continually improving its manufacturing efficiencies,
thereby constructing a moat that makes it hard for GE to poach Whirlpool’s
customers.
Later thinkers have added nuance and fresh insights to Porter’s approach.
In 1984, MIT’s Birger Wernerfelt first described in detail what he called the
resource-based view of the firm, a variation on strategic thinking with roots
in the work of several earlier scholars.8 The resource-based view highlights
the fact that a particularly effective barrier to entry is control of an
indispensable and inimitable resource. A firm with such a resource is safe
from new entrants who lack and cannot acquire means to produce it. A
simple example is De Beers, whose control of a worldwide diamond
marketing cartel enabled it to maintain a near-monopoly over the diamond
industry for the entire twentieth century. The De Beers cartel broke down
after 2000 when some diamond producers decided to market their product
outside the De Beers-controlled system, reducing the cartel’s share of the
market from 90 percent in the 1980s to about 33 percent in 2013.9 Until
then, however, De Beers’s control of an irreplaceable resource gave it a
sustainable advantage that yielded a hundred years’ worth of profits.
In the twenty-first century, a number of strategy scholars have
challenged the resource-based view, pointing out that nimble firms are
using new technologies to ford the moats established by control of scarce
resources. In separate works, Richard D’Aveni and Rita Gunther McGrath
have argued that, in an age of “hypercompetition” (D’Aveni’s term),
sustainable advantage is illusory. Technological advances drive shorter and
shorter cycle times on everything from “microchips to corn chips, software
to soft drinks, and packaged goods to package delivery services.”10
Connecting across the Internet also allows firms to redraw industrial and


geographic boundaries so that stable, slow-moving oligopolies fall to
nimbler competitors attacking with new tools and technologies.
McGrath describes how the Internet era has created radically new tools
and techniques with which to attack incumbent firms. Imagine a company
that wanted to compete with the Union Pacific Railroad in 1915—a firm
with a five-decade head start thanks to its authorization by Congress in
1862. The would-be competitor would have needed to make investments in
locomotives, rolling stock, depots, terminals, warehouses, and the legal
right-of-way required to build a nationwide rail network. The massive
investment in these and other fixed costs already spent by Union Pacific
provided a mile-wide moat that made the railroad incumbent virtually
impregnable.11
By contrast, imagine a firm that wants to compete with any of the Global
500 companies in 2015. Depending on the specific industry, such an upstart
could buy production resources from manufacturing firms around the
world, cloud and computing services from a range of suppliers, marketing
and distribution services from various intermediary companies, and
professional services from many online networks of freelancers—all at near
marginal cost. In today’s hypercompetitive environment enabled by
technology, ownership of infrastructure no longer provides a defensible
advantage. Instead, flexibility provides the crucial competitive edge,
competition is perpetual motion, and advantage is evanescent.
Other analysts have offered additional insights into the evolving nature
of competition. Author Steve Denning has highlighted the weakness of
Porter’s assumption that the purpose of strategy is to avoid competition.
Denning pointed instead to management guru Peter Drucker’s dictum that
the purpose of business is “to create a customer.” According to Denning, in
a world where sustainable advantage is an illusion, a company’s
relationships with customers are its only lasting source of value.12
It would be an exaggeration to say that events of the last decade have
demolished the five forces model—but they suggest that the nature of
competition has become more complicated and dynamic than Porter’s
model might imply.


THREE-DIMENSIONAL CHESS:
THE NEW COMPLEXITIES OF COMPETITION
IN THE WORLD OF PLATFORMS
Enter platforms. Many of the insights embodied in the five forces, resource-
based, and hypercompetition models remain valid, but two new realities are
now shaking up the world of strategy.
First, firms that understand how platforms work can now intentionally
manipulate network effects to remake markets, not just respond to them.
The implicit assumption in traditional business strategy that competition is
a zero-sum game is far less applicable in the world of platforms. Rather
than re-dividing a pie of more-or-less static size, platform businesses often
grow the pie (as, for example, Amazon has done by innovating new models,
such as self-publishing and publishing on demand, within the traditional
book industry) or create an alternative pie that taps new markets and
sources of supply (as Airbnb and Uber have done alongside the traditional
hotel and taxi industries). Actively managing network effects changes the
shape of markets rather than taking them as fixed.
Second, platforms turn businesses inside out, moving managerial
influence from inside to outside the firm’s boundaries. Thus, a firm no
longer needs to seize every new opportunity on its own; instead, it can
pursue only the best opportunities while helping ecosystem partners seize
the others, with all partners sharing the value they jointly create.13
These two new realities add a dramatic layer of complexity to business
competition. Platform strategy resembles traditional strategy much the way
three-dimensional chess resembles the traditional game.14 Within the
ecosystem, the lead firm negotiates dynamic tradeoffs involving
competition at three levels: platform against platform, platform against
partner, and partner against partner.
At the first level, one platform competes with another, as in the video
game console battles among Sony (PlayStation), Microsoft (Xbox), and
Nintendo (Wii). Strategic advantage is based not on the attractiveness of
particular products or services but rather on the power of entire ecosystems.
The Sony PlayStation Portable was a stronger gaming device than the
iPhone, which lacked specialized left and right controls. When Sony
released the PSP-2000 in fall of 2007, after Apple’s summer release of the


iPhone, Sony’s stock rose about 10 percent. But before long, the iPhone
ecosystem vastly outstripped that of the PSP. As we’ve already noted, Apple
has subsequently enjoyed far great financial success than Sony, thanks in
large part to the size and value of its ecosystem.
At the second level, a platform competes with its partners—for example,
when Microsoft appropriates such partner innovations as browsers,
multithreading, streaming media, and instant messaging and incorporates
them into its operating system, or when Amazon operates as a platform for
independent merchants while also selling some of the same goods on the
same platform in competition with those merchants. This is a delicate and
dangerous move. It can strengthen the platform, but at the expense of
weakening partners—a short-term gain that can lead to painful long-term
consequences.
At the third level, two unrelated platform partners compete for positions
within the platform ecosystem, as when two game app developers strive to
attract the same consumers on the same console.15
Let’s consider some of the specific impacts that these platform-driven
changes have on traditional views of strategy.
As we’ve seen, platforms expand the boundaries of the firm. The shifting
horizons of managerial influence now make competition less significant for
strategists than collaboration and co-creation—or, as scholars Barry J.
Nalebuff, Adam M. Brandenburger, and Agus Maulana call it, “co-
opetition.”16 The shift from protecting value inside the firm to creating
value outside the firm means that the crucial factor is no longer ownership
but opportunity, while the chief tool is no longer dictation but persuasion.
The five forces model depends on the distinct boundaries that
characterize traditional product markets. Each of the five forces—customer
power, supplier power, and so on—is a separate entity that must be
managed independently. By contrast, in platform markets, a winning
strategy blurs the boundaries among market participants, thereby increasing
valuable interactions on the platform. A Skillshare student today can
become a teacher tomorrow; an Etsy customer one day can begin selling her
own crafts on the site the next. Platform competition requires treating
buyers and suppliers not as separate threats to be subjugated but as value-
creating partners to be wooed, celebrated, and encouraged to play multiple
roles.


The resource-based view assumes that a firm must own, or at least
control, the inimitable resource. In the world of platforms, the nature of the
inimitable resource shifts from physical assets to access to customer–
producer networks and the interactions that result. In fact, it can be better
for the firm not to own physical resources, since eschewing ownership
enables it to grow more quickly. As the examples of Airbnb and Uber
remind us, the resource pool that a platform company can access is capable
of growing much faster than the platform company itself.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (1):
PREVENTING MULTIHOMING BY LIMITING
PLATFORM ACCESS
In traditional business, Porter’s five forces and the ability to control
inimitable resources—as modified by the dynamic of technology-driven
hypercompetition—have largely shaped business strategy. In the world of
platforms, new competitive factors have moved to the fore. These new
factors help determine who participates in a platform ecosystem, the value
they help to create, who controls that value, and ultimately the size of the
market. These new factors have become the focus of a series of new
competitive strategies.
Let’s consider them one by one, beginning with the strategy of limiting
platform access so as to control and capture a greater share of the value
created on the platform.
As we’ve seen, the resource-based view of business value must be
modified when applied to platform businesses. However, the resource-based
emphasis on inimitable resources has its parallel in the world of platforms:
Platforms seek exclusive access to essential assets. They do this, in part, by
developing rules, practices, and protocols that discourage multihoming.
Multihoming occurs when users engage in similar types of interactions
on more than one platform. A freelance professional who presents his
credentials on two or more service marketing platforms, a music fan who
downloads, stores, and shares tunes on more than one music site, and a
driver who solicits rides through both Uber and Lyft all illustrate the
phenomenon of multihoming. Platform businesses seek to discourage


multihoming, since it facilitates switching—when a user abandons one
platform in favor of another. Limiting multihoming is a cardinal
competitive tactic for platforms.
Here’s an example of how the effort to limit multihoming plays out in
the new world of strategy. Adobe Flash Player is a browser app that delivers
Internet content to users, including audio/video playback and real-time
game play. Flash could have been used by app developers on Apple’s
iPhone operating system—but Apple prevented this by making its iOS
incompatible with Flash and insisting that developers use similar tools
created by Apple itself.
Developers and users responded with dismay, and some observers called
the policy an anti-competitive gambit that might be subject to governmental
sanction under antitrust regulations. The furor grew so heated that, in 2010,
Apple’s Steve Jobs felt compelled to defend the policy in an open letter—a
highly unusual step for a CEO to take. In his “Thoughts on Flash,” Jobs
argued that Flash was a closed system and technically inferior to other
options, consuming excessive energy and otherwise delivering poor
performance on mobile devices. Keeping Flash off the iPhone, Jobs
claimed, would preserve the quality of the Apple user experience.17
The real reasons were much deeper and more strategic. Adobe had
designed Flash developer tools to allow content and program porting from
Apple iOS to Google Android and to web pages more generally. Apps
developed in Flash could multihome, reducing the iPhone’s distinctiveness.
Adobe also released extensions that allowed in-app purchases. By allowing
developers to take interactions off the iTunes platform, Flash would cause
Apple to lose its 30 percent cut of every interaction as well as control over
the associated usage data—information that provides valuable clues
concerning trends in the marketplace.
If Apple had supported Flash, it would have granted users access to
enormous amounts of Flash content already on the web while giving
developers more ways to monetize their investments by multihoming across
platforms.18 But it would have been a big loss for Apple. So they used
licensing rules and technology to keep interactions from going off platform.
Another example of how the strategic battle for control of access to the
customer can play out is the story of Alibaba.
Ming Zeng is chief strategy officer of Alibaba. At the MIT Platform
Strategy Summit hosted by the authors in 2014, Zeng explained how


denying a powerful competitor access to Alibaba helped change the shape
of the market and enabled at least a portion of Alibaba’s remarkable
growth.19
Early in the evolution of Alibaba, the company was scrambling for ways
to attract users and generate significant network effects. The company’s
“great explosion” in network effects didn’t occur until it devised a policy
requiring every employee to find and list 20,000 items for sale by some
person or merchant. The resulting increase in product listings generated
two-sided demand. Alibaba and its companion consumer site Taobao
quickly became the fastest-growing site for online purchases, attracting any
Chinese consumer looking to purchase almost any imaginable product.
Prior to that great explosion, when Alibaba was struggling to attract
traffic, CEO Jack Ma and his team had made a counterintuitive decision:
they created technological barriers that prevented Baidu from searching
their website. Baidu is China’s biggest Internet search engine—the Google
of China. Blocking Baidu’s bots from searching Alibaba for products being
sought by Baidu users cut off a vast supply of potential customers. Doing
this at a time when Alibaba was desperate for shoppers must have seemed a
bit crazy.
But Alibaba’s leaders were playing a long-term strategic game. They had
their eye not just on the shopping interactions that would take place on their
platform but on the potential to monetize the platform by selling
advertising. They were determined to retain control of the community of
would-be shoppers that they were gradually building on Alibaba—so that
Alibaba alone would be able to sell ads aimed at those shoppers. Barring
Baidu’s bots from Alibaba’s listings was a way of preventing Baidu from
hosting the consumer-oriented ads that companies would ultimately want to
direct to the growing numbers of Chinese online shoppers—and making
sure that those ads would appear on Alibaba’s platform instead.
The strategy worked. As Alibaba’s user base expanded, it gradually
displaced Baidu as the most valuable online advertising platform in China.
It’s as if eBay or Amazon had found a way to capture the targeted
advertising revenues now enjoyed by Google. The income generated helps
to explain why Alibaba earned more profits in 2014 than Amazon has
earned in its entire history.


HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (2):
FOSTERING INNOVATION,
THEN CAPTURING ITS VALUE
The open-ended nature of platforms creates enormous opportunities for
users to create new value. Platform managers can build their businesses by,
first, giving partners frictionless opportunities to innovate, then capturing
some or all of the value created by acquisition or duplication. As we saw in
chapter 8, SAP encourages innovation by partners on its business services
platform by periodically publishing a road map of the platform real estate it
plans to open to developers over the next 18–24 months. This tells
developers where they can build, giving them up to two years of lead time
before they face competition from SAP itself, and prevents developers from
wasting time and resources developing a site for SAP users only to find its
work undermined by the arrival of SAP’s own bulldozers.
Over the long haul, it is in the interest of platform managers to take
control of the major sources of value created by and for users in their
ecosystem. This leads to what we might call the platform-world variant of
the resource-based theory of value: A platform business need not own all
the inimitable resources in its ecosystem, but it should seek to own the
resources whose value is greatest. This is why Alibaba (rather than Baidu)
owns search on its platform, why Facebook (rather than Google) owns
search on its platform, and why Microsoft (rather than some outside
software developer) owns Word, PowerPoint, and Excel on its platform.
These are all crucial resources that create value for the majority of the
platforms’ users—that’s why it is critical for the platform owners to control
them. Less valuable, or more niche, resources can be ceded to ecosystem
partners without significantly weakening the competitive position of the
platform itself.
This principle explains why platform managers need to keep a careful
watch on new features or apps that appear on the platform. These will
usually make their first appearance far down the “long tail” of adoption,
with relatively few platform participants using them to co-create value.
Most will stay there, but a few will show the ability to jump rank, climbing
rapidly toward the head of the distribution curve. A few will even show
signs of attracting their own interactive communities, which means they


have the potential to become platforms themselves. Recall that social
gaming company Zynga and the photo-sharing services Instagram and
Snapchat all started off as mere blips on the Facebook platform. But their
social sharing and network effects enabled them to grow fast.
Growth of this kind often launches a strategic tug-of-war. The platform
may seek to absorb the function of the innovative partner and the value it
creates by acquisition. As we’ve noted, Facebook succeeded in acquiring
Instagram, purchasing the company for $1 billion in 2012; it has (so far)
failed to acquire Snapchat, having made a $3 billion offer that company
cofounder Evan Spiegel rejected in December 2013.
The platform may also seek to weaken the startup by promoting
competitors, as Facebook has done with Zynga. As of 2011, there were
more than three thousand games on Facebook, collectively weakening
Zynga’s individual bargaining power.20 The startup’s response may be to
sell, to fight back through multihoming, or to expand into other business
arenas. Zynga, for example, now multihomes on Tencent’s QQ social
network and on the Apple and Google mobile platforms, as well as offering
its own cloud service.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (3):
LEVERAGING THE VALUE OF DATA
One of the clichés of the Internet economy is the saying “Data is the new
oil”—and like most clichés, it contains a lot of truth. Data can be a source
of enormous value to platform businesses, and well-run firms are using data
to shore up their competitive positions in a wide variety of ways.
Platform businesses can use data to improve their competitive
performance in two general ways—tactically and strategically. An example
of tactical data use is in the performance of A/B testing, to optimize
particular tools or features of the platform. If Amazon wants to determine
whether placing the buy-it-now button at the top right or the bottom left on
a web page will generate more sales, it can run an experiment by randomly
alternating the button placement and tallying the results, possibly cross-
tabulated against various customer characteristics. Tactical data analysis is
quite effective—and it’s the reason why Amazon now places the buy-it-now
button at the top right of a web page.


Strategic data analysis is broader in its scope. It seeks to aid ecosystem
optimization by tracking who else is creating, controlling, and siphoning
value both on and off the platform and studying the nature of their
activities. When Facebook uses data about member activity to observe
Zynga doing something unexpected or to spot Instagram diverting traffic in
novel ways, that is strategic data analysis.
Some notable platform strategy battles have been won by companies that
took advantage of data supremacy to outcompete their rivals.
By most measures, Monster should have won the battle for supremacy
among job placement platforms. As one of the earliest entrants into the
market, it had a first mover advantage, and it quickly generated strong
network effects in the two-sided market of employers and employees
seeking one another. However, there were built-in limitations to the data
Monster gathered. Because Monster targeted only active job seekers, it
captured no information concerning users’ broader social networks. And
once a particular job search interaction was completed, both employer and
employee would leave the platform, halting the flow of data altogether.
By contrast, LinkedIn targeted the social networks of all professionals,
not just active job seekers. This led to a higher degree of ongoing
engagement and captured data from those who were happily employed but
willing to consider new job opportunities—a vastly expanded user base.
LinkedIn also captured data from interactions among professionals
interacting with one another as well as with recruiters, providing two
separate feedback loops on the same platform. Later, LinkedIn began
emphasizing content creation and sharing by its users to foster additional
reasons for them to spend time on the platform. LinkedIn’s big edge in the
scope, depth, and volume of marketplace data has given it a huge advantage
in competing against Monster.
Platform design can be optimized in various ways to generate better user
data. Guided by a two-sided network analysis, the authors developed a set
of recommendations for the design of data analysis tools to provide
improved ecosystem leverage for SAP.
We emphasized the value of search tools that help clients find solution
providers among SAP ecosystem partners. Better matches facilitated by
enhanced data make both sides happier. We also noted that solution
providers can find clients by identifying unsuccessful user searches,
reflecting the existence of potential clients in need of business solutions. In


addition, we noted the need for tools that help clients benchmark their
capabilities against other, similar companies on the platform, as well as
tools to help developers benchmark their capabilities against other
developers on the platform. Such tools can help SAP users compete more
effectively with rivals who are not on the platform.
A final set recommendation that we developed with SAP is to look for
new business service capabilities that cut across industry verticals and new
features that are rapidly climbing the long tail, meaning that they are
growing in popularity among business users. These represent new sources
of value that platforms like SAP can absorb into its platform for the benefit
of ecosystem partners who have yet to discover them.
Data analytics can thus significantly augment the capabilities of both the
platform company and its ecosystem partners, making the platform more
successful and greatly increasing its ability to generate value for users.
Analytics can guide investments in product design and in customer and
partner success, reinforcing the platform’s network effects. Collectively,
these new data tools create a formidable barrier to entry—a platform
version of Porter’s competitive moat. If competitors don’t have the data,
they can’t create the value—which means they can’t create the interactions,
which further limits their access to the data.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (4):
REDEFINING MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
Classic merger and acquisition (M & A) strategy suggests that business
leaders should pursue targets that either add complementary products or
market access or subtract supply chain costs. In a world dominated by five
forces competition, the key question driving M & A evaluation is whether
or not the target company has a moat protecting a sizeable fortress of value.
Platform managers need to adjust this strategy. For them, the key
question is whether the target company creates value for a user base that
significantly overlaps with the one they are currently serving.
If the answer is yes, then a tentative conclusion that the target may be
worth acquiring can be reached. However, there are additional hurdles to be
surmounted before making the commitment to buy, such as the profitability


of the target company and its ability to elicit a continuing stream of repeat
interactions from platform participants. Fortunately, a platform business is
in an unusually privileged position when it comes to measuring the value of
a potential acquisition. Unlike a traditional pipeline company, a platform
owner can delay an acquisition until it has observed how a partner transacts
on the platform.
This solves the traditional challenge of information asymmetry in M & A
evaluation. Instead of basing a buy decision on someone else’s audited
financial data, the purchaser can rely on firsthand observation of transaction
data and even run real-world experiments to test various strategic scenarios.
Managing a platform lets you take the partnership for a test drive before
signing a purchase agreement.
Furthermore, based on the fact that platform businesses don’t need to
own all the critical assets as long as they have access to them in their
ecosystems, platform companies can pursue fewer M & A deals than many
traditional firms feel compelled to do. In the process, they enjoy at least two
significant benefits.
First, claiming a portion of the value created by a platform partner is far
less risky than buying that partner. Recall that, in 2011, Farmville and
Mafia Wars were the biggest hits in gaming, driving the stock market value
of game developer Zynga through the roof. It’s easy to imagine that the
leaders of Facebook must have been tempted to buy Zynga, which would
have not only provided them with the full value of Zynga’s game portfolio
but also denied access to this key asset to rival platforms like Myspace.
But Facebook resisted the temptation—and wisely so. Game
development is notoriously unpredictable; even the most successful games
flame out after a few years, and there’s no guarantee that another hit will
follow. Rather than buying Zynga and shouldering the responsibility for
creating the next big sensation, it was far better for Facebook to let
hundreds of game companies compete to produce the next hit and then
capture a fraction of the upside.
Second, keeping a partnership at arm’s length reduces the platform’s
technological complexity. As the very term vertical integration implies, any
new business a platform purchases must be integrated with the platform,
which creates both technical and strategic challenges. A platform built from
a dozen independently developed technologies will break sooner, cost more,
and deliver a worse customer experience than one built on a lean


architecture that conducts all its business activity through clean interfaces.
Recall our discussion of the benefits of modular design in chapter 3: in a
modular system, when a part or partner fails, a new one can be swapped in
relatively easily. But when a part or partner fails in an integrated system, the
whole system can grind to a halt.
For these reasons, managers of platform businesses can afford to
approach the challenge of M & A strategy in a more thoughtful, deliberate
fashion than leaders of traditional companies, who often feel compelled to
snap up the next hot startup before someone else does.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (5):
PLATFORM ENVELOPMENT
Platform managers need to continually scan the horizon, observing the
activities of other platforms—particularly platforms that serve similar or
overlapping user bases. We call these adjacent platforms. When a new
feature appears on an adjacent platform, it may represent a competitive
threat, since there’s a possibility that users of your platform may find the
new feature attractive enough to begin multihoming or even to abandon
your platform altogether.
To respond, the platform manager can choose either to provide a similar
feature directly or to offer it indirectly via an ecosystem partner. When used
most successfully, this strategy leads to the phenomenon we call platform
envelopment. This occurs when one platform effectively absorbs the
functions—and the user base—of an adjacent platform.
For example, back in the 1990s, RealNetworks invented streaming audio
in the form of its 1995 product, Real Audio. It soon owned 100 percent of
the market. But once Microsoft decided to capture this market, the
enormous scope of its existing platform gave it an almost unstoppable
advantage. Since MS Windows had a market share of over 90 percent in
operating systems, almost everyone who was interested in media streaming
already had an operating system from Microsoft. All Microsoft had to do
was develop a software product similar to Real Audio and offer it as part of
a bundle with its Windows operating system. The Windows streaming audio
platform soon enveloped the much smaller platform created by Real Audio
—despite the older software’s superior performance.


The envelopment strategy is a common one that we can see in operation
in many platform arenas. Apple is now endeavoring to use its iPhone
platform to envelop the markets for mobile payment systems and wearable
technology. Similarly, China’s Haier Group is expanding its appliance
platform in an effort to envelop the market for connected home
applications.
Of course, the opportunities and threats run both ways. If Platform A is
trying to envelop adjacent Platform B by developing a feature that competes
with Platform B’s most attractive offering, Platform B may try to envelop
Platform A by mounting the same kind of attack in reverse. In this kind of
envelopment battle, the larger platform, with its more numerous initial user
base and more powerful network effects, is generally triumphant. But as the
story of Monster versus LinkedIn demonstrated, a platform that offers
superior value to users can win a competitive battle despite an initial size
disadvantage.
By comparison with traditional pipeline businesses, platform companies
are able to move very rapidly to respond to competitive moves—and to
mount competitive assaults of their own. The winners will usually be those
platforms that are able to consistently create the greatest value for users.
But in today’s business, no victory is permanent, which means that platform
companies must be at least as vigilant in guarding against complacency as
traditional firms.
HOW PLATFORMS COMPETE (6):
ENHANCED PLATFORM DESIGN
In the world of traditional business, companies compete by attempting to
create higher-quality products and services. In an analogous fashion,
platforms compete by trying to improve the quality of the tools they provide
to pull in users, facilitate interactions, and match producers with consumers
(the basic elements of platform design we described in chapter 3).
We saw a simple example of how this works in chapter 5, when we
explained how video hosting platform Vimeo managed to coexist with
YouTube despite serving an overlapping market, differentiating itself
through better hosting services, greater bandwidth availability, more
valuable viewer feedback, no obtrusive pre-roll advertisements, and other


features that attract more selective video producers despite YouTube’s much
larger viewer base. Vimeo’s competitive stance in relation to YouTube
resembles that of many traditional businesses that coexist with a market-
dominating rival by identifying a specialized niche and creating a higher-
end product designed to cater to that audience.
In some cases, superior platform design enables a platform to
dramatically outcompete a preexisting rival. Airbnb initially had far fewer
users than the much older Craigslist, which also provides listings of rooms
and apartments for short-term rent. However, Airbnb did a much better job
at the key platform functions of facilitation and matching. On Craigslist, a
person seeking a room for rent had to drill down through an unmanaged list
of options clustered by city and organized by time of posting. By contrast,
Airbnb allowed a person to search through options organized not only
according to these characteristics but also by quality, number of rooms,
price, and mapped geolocation. Furthermore, users could also strike deals
directly through Airbnb, whereas Craigslist users had to go off platform to
make a rental agreement. This made Airbnb far easier to use and enabled
the platform to rapidly outgrow the erstwhile category leader.
WHEN ADVANTAGE IS SUSTAINABLE:
WINNER-TAKE-ALL MARKETS
In business, no victory is permanent—but on occasion, a particular firm is
capable of enjoying a dominant position within its industry for a decade or
longer. When this happens, we can say that the company has maintained a
sustained advantage. This happens most often in a winner-take-all market.
This is a market in which specific forces conspire to encourage users to
gravitate toward one platform and to abandon others. The four forces that
most often characterize winner-take-all markets are supply economies of
scale, strong network effects, high multihoming or switching costs, and lack
of niche specialization.
As we explained in chapter 2, supply economies of scale are an
industrial-era source of market power driven by the massive fixed costs of
production in such industries as railroads, oil and gas exploration, mining,
pharmaceutical development, and auto and aircraft manufacture. In
industries like these, volume matters, since amortizing costs over more


buyers means that margins improve with scale. It might cost Intel $1 billion
to develop a semiconductor fabrication plant, but once the plant is built, the
incremental costs of making a million chips—or a billion—are negligible.
The greater the supply economies of scale, the greater the tendency toward
market concentration. In the U.S., despite competitive markets and the
regulatory pressure created by antitrust legislation, a handful of firms
dominate industries in which supply economies of scale play a large role—
for example, the auto industry.
As we also saw in chapter 2, network effects are the Internet-era source
of market power. Thanks to positive network effects, the value created and
the profit margins enjoyed by the company both increase as more users join
the ecosystem.21 This is why firms with network effects can enjoy a 10x
multiple in value relative to other firms that have comparable revenues but
lack network effects.22 With their current product focus and business
models, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, NBC, Lexis, and Whirlpool do not
have strong network effects. Amazon, Netflix, LegalZoom, and Nest do.
Because positive network effects attract more users to whichever platform
is larger, they are a second force that is likely to strengthen a market’s
winner-take-all tendency.
A third factor driving the winner-take-all effect is high multihoming and
switching costs. As we discussed earlier in this chapter, multihoming takes
place when users participate on more than one platform. Of course,
multihoming enables users to take advantage of the benefits provided by
multiple platforms—but it always comes with a cost, monetary (such as
multiple subscription fees) or otherwise (such as the inconvenience of
having to upload data to more than one platform website).
Somewhat comparable to multihoming costs are switching costs—the
costs associated with leaving one platform and moving to another. Again,
these costs may be monetary (such as the penalty assessed when a cell
phone user switches service providers in mid-contract) or non-monetary
(such as the inconvenience of moving all your family photos from one web
hosting service to another).
Both higher multihoming costs and higher switching costs tend to push a
market toward higher concentration, dominated by fewer, larger companies.
For example, because most people cannot afford to carry both an Android
phone and an Apple phone, they tend to choose one of these two
alternatives and stay with it for at least a few years. By contrast, lower costs


encourage people to participate in two or more platforms at once. Because
most credit cards carry a low annual fee or none at all, many people carry
Visa, MasterCard, and American Express cards in their wallets, perhaps
accompanied by a couple of department store cards, choosing among them
in various circumstances based on convenience and other factors.
In markets where multihoming and switching costs are low, late entrants
can gain market share more easily, leading to markets that are more open
and fluid. For example, because most social networks offer free basic
service, multihoming on two platforms is virtually costless—which is one
reason Facebook and LinkedIn were able to compete successfully with their
forerunners, Myspace and Monster. By contrast, high multihoming costs are
one reason Microsoft has had such difficulty entering the mobile market
behind Apple and Google, despite its advantage in desktop operating
systems and the market share it gained when it acquired mobile phone
maker Nokia.
The fourth and final factor affecting demand-side scale is users’ taste for
niche specialization. When a particular set of users has distinctive needs or
tastes, they can support a separate network, thereby weakening the winner-
take-all effect. In the 1990s, when Windows enjoyed strong advantages in
the world of desktop operating systems due to its strong network effects and
the high multihoming costs in the market, Apple survived thanks to niche
specialization—it was inordinately popular among graphic artists and
musicians. Similarly, LinkedIn was able to establish a foothold among
social networks against the overwhelming network effects of Facebook
because it served the distinctive needs of business professionals.
A market with little or no niche specialization is particularly susceptible
to the winner-take-all effect. And the greater the winner-take-all forces, the
more vicious the platform competition. In the market for ride-sharing
transportation services, the absence of distinct user needs and the presence
of strong network effects explains the fierce rivalry between Uber and Lyft.
Each side has ruthlessly poached the other’s drivers by offering referral
bounties and cash incentives. Some of the alleged tactics border on the
unethical. For example, Lyft has accused Uber of ordering, then cancelling,
more than 5,000 rides in order to clog the Lyft service. Uber denied the
specific charge. But there’s no doubt that both companies are convinced that
only one is likely to survive their rivalry, and that each is determined to do
whatever it takes to be the one left standing.23


As we’ve seen, the nature of competition in the world of platforms is very
different from that in the world of traditional pipeline businesses. It’s a
natural next step to wonder whether and how these differences are
impacting the nature of business regulation. Do definitions of fundamental
concepts like monopoly, fair trade, price fixing, anticompetitive practices,
and restraint of trade need to be reconsidered in their application to
platform companies? Are existing rules designed to protect the interests of
consumers, workers, suppliers, competitors, and entire communities
effective and reasonable in the world of platforms? These are some of the
questions we’ll examine in the next chapter.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER TEN
    Platform competition is like 3D chess, involving competition at three levels: platform
against platform, platform against partner, and partner against partner.
    In the world of platforms, competition becomes less important that cooperation and co-
creation. Control of relationships becomes more important than control of resources.
    Among the methods that platforms use to compete with one another are preventing
multihoming by limiting platform access; fostering innovation, then capturing its value;
leveraging the value of information; nurturing partnerships rather than pursuing mergers
and acquisitions; platform envelopment; and enhanced platform design.
    Winner-take-all markets exist in certain platform markets. They are driven by four main
factors: supply economies of scale, network effects, multihoming and switching costs, and
the lack of niche specialization. In winner-take-all markets, competition is apt to be
particularly fierce.
OceanofPDF.com


11
POLICY
How Platforms Should
(and Should Not) Be Regulated
In the fall of 2014, the New York City subways were suddenly filled with
ads for a business many city residents were just beginning to learn about—
Airbnb. These were not ordinary ads aimed at convincing potential
customers to try out the room rental services provided by Airbnb. They
were what advertising people call corporate image ads, designed to burnish
the reputation of the company itself. “Airbnb is great for New York City,”
read the slogan on every ad.
But not all subway riders agreed. Within days, many of the ads had been
“edited” by marker-wielding graffiti writers with their own thoughts about
Airbnb. Journalist Jessica Pressler recorded some of the choicest comments
in New York magazine. One poster had been supplemented with the
observation, “Airbnb accepts NO Liability.” Another had been marked with
the scrawl, “The dumbest person in your building is passing out a set of
keys to your front door!” And on several posters, the phrase “for New York
City” had been replaced with a different handwritten conclusion: “Airbnb is
great for Airbnb.”
The war of the posters reflected a bigger conflict already being waged in
New York City and in other cities around the world where Airbnb was
expanding its foothold. Airbnb’s corporate image advertising campaign was
part of an expensive lobbying and public relations program designed to
counter what the company viewed as an unfair assault by regulators,
business rivals, and misinformed members of the media and the general
