# 11. Policy: How Platforms Should (and Should Not) Be Regulated

public. The issues under debate: Is Airbnb a blessing and a boon to New
York and its citizens, or a cancer that is undermining the quality of life and
the economic soundness of the city? And who should have the right and the
power to decide?
THE REGULATORY CHALLENGE: REWORKING OLD
RULES FOR A NEW WORLD
The emergence of the world of platforms is giving rise to an increasingly
important social challenge: the need to design balanced internal governance
systems and external regulatory regimes to ensure they operate fairly.1 As
platforms such as Airbnb, Uber, Upwork, RelayRides, and many more play
a growing role in the economy and in the social and political spheres, issues
about the rights of participants as well as the impact of platform businesses
on other sectors and on society as a whole are becoming increasingly
salient. Thus, the unprecedented growth of platforms is bringing regulatory
issues to the front of the popular consciousness in ways that have not been
seen since the financial meltdown of 2008–09.
As debates about these issues rage, many observers are beginning to
recognize that much of what we all “know” about regulatory policy is
wrong—at least when applied to today’s rapidly evolving platform markets.
There is significant tension between the social goals of promoting
innovation and economic development, which argue for a relatively laissez-
faire approach to regulating platforms, and the social goals of preventing
harm, encouraging fair competition, and maintaining respect for the rule of
law.
It’s time for policymakers, legal scholars, and business advocates to
reexamine old assumptions about regulation in light of the changes being
brought about by the rise of the platform. In this chapter, we’ll explore
some of the key questions that leaders must grapple with in the years to
come as platforms continue to transform the economy. Some of the issues
we will explore include possible effects on tax policy, affordable housing,
public safety, economic fairness, data privacy, labor rights, and more.


THE DARK SIDE OF THE
PLATFORM REVOLUTION
We have already noted the many benefits that the explosive growth of
network platforms is providing. However, we must also acknowledge that
the spread of platforms will not usher in some kind of new-economy
nirvana. Like every business, social, or technological innovation, the rise of
platforms has the potential for harm.2
Some of the complaints about the rise of platforms reflect the disruptive
impact of platform businesses on traditional industries. It’s natural that
companies and workers whose profits and livelihood may be threatened by
new business models will fight back by any means available, including
seizing on evidence, meaningful or not, that the new models are causing
economic, environmental, social, or cultural harm. Some of the attacks on
platform businesses certainly fall into this category. It’s not hard to
understand why large publishers and bookstore chains might hate Amazon,
why record companies might hate iTunes, why taxi companies might hate
Uber, and why hotel chains might hate Airbnb. Naturally, when criticism of
platforms—including calls for strict regulation to limit their impact—comes
from interested sources like these, it should be taken with a grain of salt.
But this doesn’t mean that there are no legitimate complaints to be raised
about the impact of platform businesses. Visitors to New York who take
advantage of Airbnb to enjoy affordable accommodations are fans of the
service, as are the hosts who make extra money by renting out their spare
rooms. But some of their neighbors are unhappy. Horror stories about orgies
in Airbnb rentals, assignations with prostitutes (one of whom reportedly
ended up getting stabbed), and parties with uncontrolled groups of rowdy
young drunks have found their way into the tabloid press. One worried
Manhattan landlord, Ken Podziba, felt driven to install surveillance cameras
to prove that a tenant was renting out her place in violation of a state law
forbidding short-term sublets. He succeeded in having her evicted. “Airbnb
is making money while letting people do whatever they want,” Podziba
exclaims. “It’s crazy.”3
As we saw in chapter 8, the impacts of Airbnb on third parties
uninvolved in the rental arrangement are what economists call externalities.
A recurring economic problem is when the cost of negative externalities is


borne not by the people or companies that created them but by “innocent
bystanders” who are stuck with the problem. Externality issues are a great
way for a business to antagonize its neighbors and invite intervention by
regulators—and Airbnb is currently grappling with a number of them.
Lack of consistent insurance coverage has been one of the most serious
externality questions around Airbnb. In December 2014, after years of
complaints, Airbnb announced a new policy that would provide $1 million
of liability coverage to protect its U.S. hosts from damages caused by
wayward guests. The problem: this is so-called secondary coverage, which
only kicks in after the host’s personal homeowner’s policy is used up. And
nearly all personal homeowner’s policies in the U.S. specifically exclude
coverage for “commercial activity” in the home—including rentals. Airbnb
appears to be hoping that the cost of damages will somehow get pushed
onto personal insurance policies administered by companies that aren’t
diligent about investigating claims—or that are deceived by homeowners
who lie about their role as Airbnb hosts.
Naturally, this partial insurance coverage is worrisome to many Airbnb
hosts. But as financial journalist Ron Lieber points out, it also creates an
externality that could impact thousands of otherwise uninvolved citizens.
“If Airbnb succeeds in sharing risk with personal insurance companies,” he
writes, “then everyone’s premiums have to rise to cover it.”4
Of course, as we’ve noted, some externalities are positive—economic
and other benefits that businesses provide to uninvolved third parties. Some
data suggest that hotel prices fell slightly after the entry of Airbnb, likely
increasing the tourism business and ultimately benefiting local restaurants
and other attractions.5 Other data suggest that the number of drunk driving
deaths has fallen slightly after the entry of Uber.6 But such positive
externalities are often difficult to document and quantify, while negative
externalities tend to be vivid, unmistakable, and painful. Is it fair for Airbnb
to slough off those external costs onto individuals who are not part of the
platform, or onto the society at large?
These issues are far from theoretical. Some platform businesses have
actually been shut down because of concerns about negative externalities.
Consider the MonkeyParking app. Launched in San Francisco in January
2014, this system encouraged drivers to vacate parking spaces by
auctioning off the empty places to other users of the system, splitting the
proceeds with the driver who vacated. Many observers considered it unfair


that the system encouraged the privatization and monetization of a public
good—parking spaces—and thereby affected the openness and accessibility
of a public transportation system on which countless individuals and
businesses depend. It also had a negative impact on privately owned
parking lots, whose owners had invested in their businesses to serve the
same need. In response to the complaints, in June 2014, regulators stepped
in to close the platform.7
The MonkeyParking story isn’t a black-and-white judgment call. It raises
the question of whether, when, and how the social harm of privatizing a
public resource outweighs the benefit of providing planned access to a
scarce resource. A case can be made that a system like MonkeyParking
produces environmental benefits by reducing the need for drivers to roam
downtown streets in search of parking spaces, burning fossil fuels and
adding to traffic congestion in the process. But if we permit MonkeyParking
to auction off public parking spaces for private profit, are we opening up to
other questionable market activities? Should platform users be permitted to
claim choice locations in public parks or beaches on summer weekends and
auction them off to the highest bidders? What about seats in the most
desirable public schools? Or private rooms in the best-run public hospitals?
Do we want to live in a society where those with the most money can claim
an ever larger share of the most attractive public goods? These are some of
the questions about external impacts that a seemingly simple case like the
MonkeyParking story raises.
Labor platforms, bulwarks of what some call the freelance or 1099
economy, raise still other issues of social impact and equity. Platforms like
Upwork, TaskRabbit, and Washio are fine for people who value a flexible
work schedule above all, but are much more problematic for people who
find themselves with no choice except to operate as full-time employees on
a freelance basis without the benefits and worker protections normally
mandated by law. It’s understandable that businesses want to take advantage
of the agility and low overhead costs that labor platforms make possible.
But in a society like the United States, where basic services such as health
care are provided largely through employer programs, is it desirable to
create an economic advantage to companies that offload the costs of such
services onto their freelance employees—or onto government support
programs that are already financially stressed?8


Platforms certainly create benefits for their users—if they didn’t, they
wouldn’t be exploding in popularity. But they also create unintended side
effects, including negative externalities, that society as a whole must
consider and address.
THE CASE AGAINST REGULATION
Despite the problems illustrated by platform business like Monkey-Parking,
there are many who would argue that the potential abuses and social
dislocations caused by platforms are a small price for the tremendous
innovation, new value, and economic growth they produce. Platform
businesses are here to stay, and they are bringing undoubted benefits to
millions of people. Why run the risk of discouraging innovation through the
heavy hand of regulation?
Opponents of regulation are quick to point out the many cases in which
it fails or backfires. Nobel Prize-winners Ronald Coase and George Stigler,
members of the famous laissez-faire-oriented Chicago School of
economics, argue that the vast majority of market failures are best
addressed 
by 
market 
mechanisms 
themselves—for 
example, 
by
encouraging the free growth of competitors who provide goods and services
that produce greater social benefits than their rivals. In their view, the
evidence of history suggests that government regulators tend to be
incompetent or corrupt, which means that regulation generally fails to solve
the problems it is intended to address. In specific instances where the free
market fails to resolve a significant problem of market fairness or consumer
protection, it can be addressed by private litigation in the courts.
One of the most common mechanisms of regulatory failure was labeled
by Stigler “regulatory capture.”9 The basic premise is that market
participants will act to influence regulation in their own interests, often
making the underlying market problems worse rather than better. In his
1971 article, Stigler illustrated the point with examples drawn from oil
import quotas, the prevention of new firms entering the airline, trucking,
and banking industries, and the control of access to labor markets through
licensing requirements for workers such as barbers, embalmers, physicians,
and pharmacists. Thanks to regulatory capture, government rules are often
used to block competition and thwart innovation rather than to protect


consumers and benefit society. Stigler and his followers argue that the
economy and society as a whole will benefit when regulatory capture is
eliminated—and that this requires the elimination of most government
regulation of business. Jean-Jacques Laffont and Jean Tirole (the latter the
2014 winner of the Nobel Prize in Economics) extended Stigler’s analysis
using an agency perspective, making the point that “principals,” like voters,
have imperfect control over their “agents,” including elected and appointed
officials. Laffont and Tirole show that it would be impossible for firms to
benefit from regulatory capture if the principals involved had more
complete information about and control over the behavior of their agents.10
There’s no doubt that regulatory capture does exist. Managers of
government agencies charged with devising and enforcing business
regulations must often turn to business leaders for advice and guidance on
how to craft those regulations, which often means that the rules end up
benefiting companies—or certain highly influential companies—rather than
the public at large. In some powerful industries, such as financial services,
executives have been known to divide their careers between Washington
and the private sector, so that the same people who design regulatory
regimes later advise corporations on the best ways to evade those regimes
or manipulate them for profit (a practice that Laffont and Tirole specifically
highlighted).
Today, some of the regulatory battles about platform businesses reflect,
in part, efforts by traditional industries to use government regulation as
shields against the competitive models that platforms introduce. Thus, as
commentator Conor Friedersdorf puts it, “The car service Uber is fighting
in cities all over America to end the regulatory capture enjoyed by the
taxicab industry.”11 Airbnb is facing similar battles with regulators who are
influenced by long-standing relationships with the hospitality industry.
In the eyes of some observers, the phenomenon of regulatory capture
sharply undercuts the claims to legitimacy of most economic regulation by
government. For example, in a post on his blog Cafe Hayek, libertarian
economist Don Boudreaux summarizes the way Uber enables drivers to
transform their personal cars from private goods into part of the economy’s
capital stock, then goes on to criticize “government interventions against
Uber and other sharing-economy innovations” as both “obstacles to market
forces that improve consumers’ access to goods and services” and “assaults


against market forces that increase the amount of wealth-producing capital
that ordinary people are able to own, control, and profit from.”12
You may or may not agree with Boudreaux that attempts to restrict the
spread of Uber constitute today’s “single most obnoxious example of
government intervention.” But the existence of the phenomenon of
regulatory capture is not necessarily a fatal blow to the argument in favor of
regulation—or even the argument in favor of regulating platforms in
particular. It’s possible to argue that, rather than eliminating regulation
altogether, we need to design political, social, and economic systems that
reduce the likelihood of regulatory capture—for example, through laws that
restrict the “revolving door” between business and government.
Economist Andrei Shleifer, a scholar in the areas of corporate
governance and government regulation, points out that there are strong
differences in the prevalence of regulatory capture across countries. When
governments are relatively unchecked by their citizens, strong regulation
often leads to high levels of corruption and expropriation by government
officials. And, indeed, this is widely seen in authoritarian countries.
However, in countries with more accountable governments, such as those
seen in northern Europe, higher levels of regulation appear to be relatively
free of such corruption, which reduces the level of regulatory capture. In
these circumstances, Shleifer argues, regulation can be compatible with
promotion of social welfare and economic growth.
Shleifer notes, moreover, that the reliance of the Chicago School on
litigation as an alternative to regulation assumes and depends upon the
existence of an independent and honest judiciary. This ignores the fact that
judges and lawyers are just as subject to manipulation and capture as other
government employees.13 More broadly, Shleifer’s argument is consistent
with the argument made by Laffont and Tirole in favor of regulation that is
specific to countries and technologies.14
In general, the historical record doesn’t support the arguments of people
who favor no regulation of business. In fact, it’s difficult to identify any
developed marketplace that has been completely free of intervention by
government authorities. Regulation to prevent anti-competitive practices
goes back at least as far as ancient Greece and Rome, where state
authorities took swift action to mitigate grain market price fluctuations that
occurred due to natural (weather) events as well as deliberate market
manipulation by merchants and shipping agents.15 In the same way, modern


societies depend upon regulators to enforce rules of fair play in markets.
When regulation fails, we get the scandals of insider trading, the meltdown
of the mortgage securities market, or the high prices enjoyed by incumbent
monopolists.
Relatively few people want to live in a world free of all regulation, and
in a complex society like the one we live in today, regulation serves a
number of important social functions. The airline system in the developed
world is astonishingly safe, given the complexity of the technologies
involved and terrorist attempts to sabotage it.16 This record is a result both
of improved technology and training and of relentless post-crash
investigations by government agencies like the National Transportation
Safety Board, which have led to a systematic elimination of risk factors. In
similar fashion, we depend upon regulation to maintain the purity of our
drinking water, the safety of our transportation systems, and our ability to
respond to and control infectious diseases.
For all these reasons, only a relatively small fraction of the population
would endorse the extreme libertarian position of calling for a complete
elimination of business regulations—which means that the question is not
whether, but precisely how, platform businesses should be covered by
regulatory regimes.
Of course, there is a tradeoff between the benefits and costs of
regulation. A complete absence of regulation is likely to produce high social
and economic costs through the persistence of problems like business fraud,
unfair competition, monopolistic and oligopolistic practices, and market
manipulation. On the other hand, the most extreme level of government
intervention into markets, as seen in some totalitarian countries, leads to
other problems, including corruption, inefficiency, waste, and lack of
innovation. Usually the existence of such tradeoffs implies that an
intermediate solution is best, and indeed the world’s most vibrant
economies have typically employed some intermediate level of government
regulation via oversight agencies, judicial review, or some combination of
the two.
Economist Simeon Djankov and colleagues have classified the range of
possible regulatory regimes on a spectrum from private orderings (what we
call private governance), through systems that rely on court rulings
administered by independent judges or regulation by state employees, to
direct government ownership of assets (socialism).17 Their visual depiction


of this spectrum (Figure 11.1) reflects the tradeoff between social losses
because of private misdeeds and social losses because of government
misbehavior.
Over the last two generations, as Andrei Shleifer has noted, most
economists and political theorists have shifted from viewing government
intervention in a positive light to preferring privatization.18 Today, there’s a
trend toward regulation that was once provided by governments now being
provided by private entities acting in their own self-interest—for example,
the gradual shift from nationally mandated accounting standards like the
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles used in the United States toward
the International Financial Reporting Standards promulgated by the
International Accounting Standards Board, a private organization based in
London. We believe this trend will continue and that governments must
rethink what they choose to regulate and what kinds of regulation private
entities can provide more efficiently. One purpose of this chapter will be to
suggest the circumstances in which regulators should consider intervention
in platform markets and those in which platforms might best govern
themselves.


FIGURE 11.1. Djankov’s depiction of the curve of “social losses” produced by either the
complete absence of regulation (on the left) or total control of business by government (on the
right). Reprinted by permission.
REGULATORY ISSUES RAISED BY THE GROWTH OF
PLATFORM BUSINESSES
Let’s consider some of the most significant regulatory issues that have come
to the fore as a result of the rise of platform businesses over the last two
decades.


Platform access. As platforms become increasingly important markets
for goods and services, access to platforms can be a legitimate subject for
inquiry by regulatory authorities. When certain potential participants are
excluded from a platform, it raises questions about who benefits from the
exclusion, whether that exclusion is fair, and what its long-term impact on
the overall marketplace is likely to be.
For example, the Alibaba Group handles 80 percent of e-commerce
transactions in China.19 The threat of exclusion presents a serious challenge
to any firm conducting business online. Access is also a concern of every
startup hoping to break into the top listings, among millions, when they
have no transactions history to raise their page ranks. In the computer game
console market, the platform sponsors (Sony, Microsoft, and Nintendo)
have been known to offer category exclusivity to certain firms such as
Electronic Arts in exchange for their support of the platform. Firms can
achieve the same ends when they buy producers that provide critical
components or software for their platforms. For example, Microsoft
acquired the game studio Bungie in order to ensure exclusive access to the
popular Halo video game franchise when the Xbox was launched in 2001.
Access and exclusivity also play a role in platform compatibility. In
1997, Sun Microsystems filed suit against Microsoft for intentionally
“forking” the Java programming language—that is, creating an
incompatible branch in the code base—in order to limit its appeal on
operating systems other than Microsoft Windows. Sun filed another suit in
2002 when Microsoft excluded Java from desktop distribution in favor of
.NET, a proprietary Microsoft language.20 In 2015, the mobile operating
system Android has split into open and proprietary versions. Commercial
and regulatory inducements to maintain compatibility can be necessary to
preserve the interests of consumers.
The issue of exclusion is especially significant when network effects are
strong, as business professor Carl Shapiro argues. “[S]uch exclusionary
contracts and exclusive membership rules,” Shapiro notes, “can be
especially pernicious in network industries, posing a danger that new and
improved technologies will be unable to gain the critical mass necessary to
truly threaten the current market leader.”21 He goes on to say: “Ultimately,
this is not a story about consumer harm based on monopoly pricing,
although that can be part of the problem. The graver problem is that the
pace of innovation may be slowed, denying consumers the full benefits of


technological progress that a dynamically competitive market would offer.”
This phenomenon has been dubbed excess inertia, referring to the power of
network effects to slow or prevent the adoption of new, perhaps better,
technologies. When one or a few platforms can dominate a particular
market because of the power of network effects, they may choose to resist
beneficial innovations in order to protect themselves from the costs of
change and other disruptive effects.
It’s certainly arguable that regulators should consider whether
government intervention would be appropriate in cases where arbitrary
denial of access to a particular platform seems likely to lead to excess
inertia.22 However, it’s not always easy for observers to judge what the true
impact of a particular competitive move may be. In some instances, the
apparent outcome may change dramatically when viewed over time.
For example, in a 2014 article, two of the authors of this book (Geoffrey
Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne) argued that platform policies that limit
competition among developers can actually benefit consumers in the long
run by fostering higher rates of innovation.23 The process works like a short-
term micro-patent: a platform grants temporary category exclusivity to a
particular extension developer in exchange for substantial investment in
new products or services. (SAP has used this “preferred partner” strategy
with developers like ADP, and Microsoft has used it with selected game
developers.) Over time, the innovations created under this time-limited
arrangement tend to be folded into the core platform. They then become
available to all consumers for their direct consumption and also become
available to the next generation of developers to foment new innovation.
For these reasons, we’d urge regulators to move with caution when
considering intervention in cases that concern platform access.
Fair pricing. A practice that has traditionally drawn regulatory interest is
predatory pricing—the situation in which a firm prices goods or services so
low that it cannot possibly be making money. The low prices temporarily
benefit consumers, but in the long run harm them by driving competitors
out of business, which permits the remaining supplier to raise prices to
monopoly levels. This, of course, is the objective of the predatory pricer in
the first place, and it explains why government regulators have sometimes
stepped in to prohibit pricing practices they view as predatory in nature.


However, two of the authors of this book (Parker and Van Alstyne) have
done research that calls into question the traditional interpretation of lower-
than-cost prices and therefore the regulator’s definition of predatory pricing.
Our analysis shows that in fact firms with strong two-sided network
externalities can maximize profit even when they distribute services to one
side of the market at a price of zero. They achieve this result by earning
attractive profits through sales of the goods or services they provide to the
other side of the market.24
Along with other authors, including Jean Tirole, this line of research in
two-sided networks has overturned the conventional wisdom and required
regulators to retool their predation tests to incorporate network effects.25 In
particular, regulators have viewed the practice of selling goods or services
at or below cost as evidence of intent to drive competitors out of business
with the intent of then raising prices once those competitors are gone.
However, as discussed above, when firms take cross-market externalities
into account, they can rationally price their goods or services at zero when
selling to certain groups of customers, even in the absence of competition.
Despite these changes in competition analysis, there are still open issues
of platform law to be decided. The case brought against Google’s search
service by the European Union in 2015, which accuses Google of favoring
its own comparison shopping service over that of rivals, illustrates this
point.26 Interestingly, a similar complaint to the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) in the U.S. was dropped in 2013.27 Another platform giant, Amazon,
is facing scrutiny over its role in the book market. The concern is that
Amazon is lowering prices in order to gain market share and that, once
competitors exit, prices will rise.28 We are skeptical about the specific
charge against Amazon—namely, that book prices will rise significantly
once the company’s dominance is complete—but we are somewhat more
sympathetic to the idea that Amazon might act as too powerful a gatekeeper
for an important cultural industry, perhaps establishing its own proprietary
format for digital content, as it has tried to do with Amazon Word (AZW),
the format used on the Kindle reader. Free pricing of book chapters given
away in the AZW format, for example, could be used as a Trojan horse,
attracting readers as part of a long-term strategy leading to increased
platform control and a shift from an open to a closed proprietary standard.


Data privacy and security. Citizens have long had reason to wonder
about what firms might be doing with the personal data they collect about
their customers. The ability of businesses to gather finely detailed data
about individual households expanded dramatically with the introduction of
the consumer credit card. This financial innovation helped increase
consumer spending by making it much easier to access credit. But this, of
course, meant banks had a significant incentive to use data to measure the
creditworthiness of customers. To provide this analysis, three major
consumer credit information agencies arose: Equinox, Experian, and
Transunion. In exchange for interaction-level detail from the banks, the
agencies computed credit scores for consumers that banks could use to
decide whether to extend credit and if so, at what rates. If you’ve ever taken
out a car loan or a mortgage, you’re familiar with the importance and
impact of your credit score.
Early data security regulation focused on the need to provide
transparency around the criteria used to compute credit scores. Stories of
racial and geographic discrimination abounded.29
In 1974, Congress passed the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which
prohibited credit discrimination on the basis of sex and marital status. It was
amended in 1976 to include race, color, religion, national origin, source of
income, and age. In 1977, the FTC began to devote a significant fraction of
its resources toward enforcing the act and addressing the discriminatory
practices that had led to its passage.30
Today, however, issues regarding the use of consumer data have grown
in scale and complexity. The credit agencies have been plagued by
problems such as stolen and mistaken identities that can take years for
consumers to resolve, causing untold harm.31 The use and abuse of
consumer information by the credit agencies and the lenders who rely upon
them are also the subject of fierce debate. Practices like predatory lending
—the deliberate targeting of consumers who can’t afford credit by lenders
eager to profit from exorbitant interest rates and fees for missed payments
—have been blamed for contributing to economic inequality and even
market instability.
It’s against this backdrop that the FTC came to be the leading U.S.
player in regulating the practices of data service providers.
Most consumers appear to be willing to trade access to detailed data
about their spending behavior for easy access to credit. But many may not


fully appreciate the fact that the same dynamics that power the credit
agencies underlie the services provided by “free” information service
businesses—the data aggregators we described in chapter 7. If you’ve gone
online to search for or simply research information about a camera, a book,
or any other consumer product, you probably noticed that advertisements
for the same product subsequently popped up on every website you visited.
This is data-driven marketing in action, and the sale of the underlying
personal information about consumers is a significant source of income for
many platform businesses.
You may find those customized ads on the Internet a bit unsettling. Even
more unsettling are some of the less obvious ways in which personal data
are used. Many firms—both platform businesses and others—track
consumers’ web usage, financial interactions, magazine subscriptions,
political and charitable contributions, and much more to create highly
detailed individual profiles. In the aggregate, such data can be used for
cross-marketing to people who share profiles, as when a recommendation
engine on a shopping site tells you, “People like you who bought product A
often enjoy product B, too!” The anonymity of this process renders it
unobjectionable to most people. But the same underlying data can be, and
is, sold to prospective employers, government agencies, health care
providers, and marketers of all kinds. Individually identifiable data about
sensitive topics such as sexual orientation, prescription drug use,
alcoholism, and personal travel (tracked through cell phone location data)
can be purchased through data broker firms such as Acxiom.32
Consumer concern over the practices of the data broker industry has led
to a number of investigations, including a major FTC inquiry that resulted
in a report titled “Data Brokers: A Call for Transparency and
Accountability.”33 But very little has actually changed to prevent practices
that many find objectionable.34
Skeptics say that, in reality, citizen concerns about data privacy are
superficial. They point out that consumers routinely share intimate personal
information about themselves on social media platforms such as LinkedIn
and Facebook, and that they are increasingly “instrumenting themselves”
using fitness, health, and diet tools like Fitbit, Jawbone, and MyFitnessPal.
Although these platforms have privacy policies that are available to
consumers, they are written in dense legalese that very few users bother to
read. The readiness with which consumers publicly expose information


about themselves through platforms suggests that few citizens care
passionately about the issue of data privacy—which makes it unlikely that
either regulators or platform managers will rein in the use of personal data
any time soon.
One final point with respect to privacy is the issue of data ownership.
Data aggregators and other firms with access to information are, in effect,
asserting an ownership interest in data that might otherwise be viewed as
belonging to individuals. In a provocative act designed to shed light on the
issue, a young woman named Jennifer Lyn Morone has incorporated herself
in order to assert an ownership interest in the data stream that she
generates.35 Companies that profit from the use and sale of personal data, of
course, are unlikely to find Morone’s gesture either amusing or persuasive.
But the issue is not going to disappear. J. P. Rangaswami, chief data officer
for Deutsche Bank, predicts:
As we learn more about the value of personal and collective information, our approach to such
information will mirror our natural motivations. We will learn to develop and extend these rights.
The most important change will be to do with collective (sometimes, but not always, public)
information. We will learn to value it more; we will appreciate the trade-offs between personal
and collective information; we will allow those learnings to inform us when it comes to mores,
conventions, and legislation.36
In a world where data is widely described as “the new oil,” it’s clear that
the issue of data ownership will need to be resolved through some
combination of regulatory action, court rulings, and industry self-
regulation.37 Each new scandal involving the release of sensitive
information, such as the 2014 disclosure that Sony Pictures had leaked
access to the viewing history of millions of users, is likely to increase the
push to establish ownership rights over user data.38 Such ownership rights
would give victims a legal course of action after data breaches occur; the
theory is that, given high enough liability, firms will take data security more
seriously and act to prevent future leaks.39 In some niche markets,
agreements over data ownership are already being developed. For example,
in November 2014, a collection of major agricultural companies and
organizations, including Dow, DuPont, Monsanto, and the National Corn
Growers Association, agreed on a set of principles defining the rights of
farmers to own and control data about their crops.40 Consider the
implications: sensor data used to improve crop yield could just as easily be
used to predict soybean futures. These secondary uses have the potential to


create vast wealth in which the sources of that data would have a legitimate
interest.
National control of information assets. The global reach of the Internet
has added significant complication to business regulation. Developing
sensible rules concerning the role of national borders in business
transactions, and then finding ways to enforce those rules consistently and
fairly, is far more difficult in a world that is electronically interconnected.
One example of this difficulty is the application to platform businesses of
rules regarding national control of data access.
When multinational firms expand into less developed countries, they are
usually required to follow so-called local content regulations, which are
designed to stimulate the local economy and to ensure that a portion of the
economic growth created by the new venture remains in the host country
rather than being transferred to the headquarters of the multinational. For
example, when corporations like Siemens and GE expand into sub-Saharan
Africa, they are often required to set up local operations, in activities such
as training and service. This is why Siemens operates a Siemens Power
Academy in Lagos, Nigeria, to train technicians for the electrical power
industry.
Some industry observers believe it is possible that the local content
requirement might extend to data services—requiring, for example, that
business data be stored and processed locally rather than internationally. If
this principle becomes widely established, the value of the data involved
may be significantly diminished. For example, if GE or Siemens power
turbines around the globe were connected into a single network for data
collection and study, the resulting data flow could become the basis of
comparative analysis that would yield a unique “usage signature” for each
machine. This would enable data analysts to make more accurate
predictions of turbine performance and create customized maintenance
schedules that could save money for both the corporation and its customers.
However, realizing this positive outcome requires access to tremendous
amounts of information for real-time processing—access that local data
content laws might thwart. It’s a good example of the kind of regulatory
restriction that governments should reconsider in the light of the new
capabilities offered by platform ecosystems.41


Privacy laws in Europe represent another form of what might be called
data nationalism. Rules concerning the flow of data have been established
for the ostensible purpose of protecting citizens’ privacy. The result is a
hodgepodge of local data processing centers and a fragmentation of data
that, if aggregated, could be used for commercial purposes. The number of
billion-dollar startups in the U.S. is forty-two, but only thirteen in the EU.42
An inability to scale network effects could be one reason. Recent evidence
suggests that this EU data privacy regime is already having a notable
economic impact. For example, ad placement firms, which rely on insights
from big data to optimize their decisions, are significantly less effective in
their European operations than in comparably wealthy regions such as the
United States that lack restrictive data management rules.43
Tax policy. One of the hottest regulatory issues facing platforms is tax
policy. As quickly growing platforms that do business around the country
and even around the world reorganize the economy and put countless local
“mom and pop” companies out of business, who benefits from the sales tax
dollars generated? Should they be paid at the location of a central producer,
or should they be collected at the point of consumption? The economic and
political impact of questions like these can be substantial.
As the world’s second biggest online retailer (based on revenues),
Amazon has been the poster child for this issue. In most countries where
Amazon operates, a national sales or value-added tax is levied, which
Amazon must collect from all customers. However, the crazy quilt of state
and local sales taxes in the U.S. creates opportunities for Amazon to
minimize its tax collection obligations and thereby keep the perceived price
of its goods as low as possible. The company has battled with numerous
state regulators and legislatures over sales tax rules, often refusing to collect
taxes until specifically compelled to do so by the passage of new laws. In
some states, Amazon claims not to maintain a “legal presence” sufficient to
require payment of sales tax, despite operating large warehouses and
shipping centers in those states. And in some cases, Amazon has played one
state off against another—for example, apparently rewarding Indiana for
passing a law that exempted the company from collecting sales tax by
locating no fewer than five of its regional warehouses in the state. Today,
Amazon collects sales taxes in twenty-three U.S. states, including several of


the largest, while holding out against tax collection requirements
elsewhere.44
The same issue exists in regard to other online platforms, such as labor
platform Upwork, which reduces local tax collections by putting local
staffing agencies out of business. It would seem that the international reach
of online platforms renders traditional local and state sales tax regimes
obsolete, and that a national sales tax law would be a natural and logical
solution. However, as of the mid-2010s, it seems highly unlikely that the
U.S. Congress, with its strong anti-tax bias, will pass such a law.
A next-best solution would be a bill making it easier for states to impose
sales tax on goods purchased online from out-of-state sources, and such a
bill has in fact been introduced in Congress several times since 2010. An
early version, called the Main Street Fairness Act, failed to advance beyond
the committee stage, thanks in part to heavy lobbying against the bill by
representatives of Amazon.
A newer version called the Marketplace Fairness Act was passed in the
Senate in May 2013, though it has not yet been brought to a vote in the
House. In a fascinating twist, the Marketplace Fairness Act has been
publicly supported by Amazon (as well as by retail giant Walmart). The
likely reason for the reversal: since Amazon now collects sales tax on most
of the goods it sells, the company stands to gain from a simplified sales tax
system that will apply equally to all Internet merchants—including the
many smaller rivals of Amazon who currently skate by collecting little or
no tax on most of their sales. It’s a classic illustration of how regulatory
debates that evoke majestic concepts such as equity, freedom, and the
sanctity of the marketplace often turn, in the end, on nitty-gritty issues of
dollars and cents and the political clout that various players bring to the
legislative table.
Labor regulation. Those who operate labor platforms usually choose to
describe their systems as intermediaries that serve solely to match labor
with demand for services. In this view, the people who sign up for work
through firms such as Uber, TaskRabbit, and Mechanical Turk are truly
independent contractors, and the platform bears little legal (or moral)
responsibility to the parties on either side of the interaction once the match
has been made.


However, from the perspective of regulators who are charged with
safeguarding the welfare of working men and women, this position is
dubious. In the traditional world of offline business, a number of firms that
classify full-time, permanent employees as contract labor for legal and
regulatory purposes have been drawing unfavorable attention for the
practice. For example, in August 2014, FedEx lost a federal court case
involving 2,300 full-time workers in California who were classified as
contractors rather than employees. The practice, which the court ruled was
illegal, reduced FedEx’s responsibility for benefits, overtime payments,
Social Security and Medicare contributions, and even reimbursement for
work expenses such as uniforms. (FedEx has said it plans to appeal the
ruling.)45
Labor platforms will need to monitor the evolution of regulation in this
area very carefully. While government agencies and judges vary in their
attitudes and in their readiness to challenge widespread business practices,
many look askance at employment models that seem to be designed solely
to shield companies from responsibility for the well-being of their workers.
Perhaps equally significant, the reputation of online labor platforms has
already taken a serious hit in the unofficial “court of public opinion”—as
reflected, for example, in more than a million Google results, many from
respectable mainstream media outlets, in response to the query “Internet
sweatshop.”46 In the long run, public disapproval of business behavior can
have a meaningful impact on the value of a company’s brand—which
means that the court of public opinion operates, at times, as an unofficial
regulatory body that business leaders are wise to heed.
Similarly, there are limits to the extent to which labor platforms will be
able to evade responsibility for their practices in hiring, screening, training,
and supervising workers—even when those workers are technically
classified as independent contractors. Uber, for example, has experienced
significant criticism for alleged sexual assaults committed by its drivers on
passengers.47 At a time when Uber is engaged in a fierce battle over
regulation with the traditional taxi industry, it can ill afford the suspicion
that its labor practices are shoddy.
On a very different front, the emergence of online labor platforms is
creating new challenges for regulators tasked with monitoring and
measuring the national and local labor markets. Because of multihoming,
freelancers can switch between multiple platforms over the course of a day


—for example, drivers can accept jobs for both Uber and Lyft. This makes
it all the more complex for government agencies to accurately capture labor
and unemployment data, which in turn play an important role in economic
and political policy debates. If employment platforms continue to grow, this
will be an increasingly important issue.
Potential manipulation of consumers and markets. When platforms
grow big enough, they have the potential to cease being mere participants in
markets—serving to efficiently match existing supply with existing demand
—and actually begin manipulating individual users and even entire markets
through their great size and reach.
There are disturbing indications that this is already beginning to happen.
Retail platform Amazon controls such a large share of the online book
market that even giant publishers feel pressured to accept business terms
they’d otherwise consider unacceptable. During a seven-month dispute with
Amazon over price-setting policy, the French-based Hachette Book Group
—one of the world’s largest publishers—found online sales of its products
being delayed and preorder buttons for some of its titles being removed.
Since preorders play an important role in determining whether or not a book
achieves bestseller status, these steps by Amazon impacted the long-term
success of a number of Hachette publications. The two sides finally came to
terms in November 2014, having apparently reached some kind of
compromise and with neither side claiming outright victory.48
Facebook users and privacy experts were distressed in June 2014, when
it was revealed that, two years previously, the newsfeeds of almost 700,000
members had been deliberately manipulated as part of a psychological
experiment. The researchers, including Cornell professor Jeffrey Hancock
as well as some Facebook employees, altered the news flows to include an
abnormally low or an abnormally high number of either positive or negative
posts. According to the study results, the status messages posted by the
Facebook members in response showed that “emotional states can be
transferred to others via emotional contagion, leading people to experience
the same emotions without their awareness.”49
The stakes get higher as influence moves to politics. In one study of 61
million Facebook users, news feeds with positive social pressure caused
roughly 2 percent more people to vote or at least declare that they had voted
relative to people who did not receive such messages. In fact, Facebook


social messaging increased turnout directly by about 60,000 people and
indirectly by about 280,000 more people via social contagion.50 While there
is no evidence that election outcomes changed, one can imagine close races
where a 2 percent margin affects who wins.
It’s an interesting finding—one that Facebook advertisers and others
seeking to influence the attitudes and behaviors of large numbers of people
might find valuable. But these studies were conducted without the
knowledge or consent of their subjects. And not all the studies received
prior approval by any institutional review board, which is normally required
before experimentation on human subjects is conducted. Outside experts
responded by challenging the ethics and possibly even the legality of
Facebook’s actions. Amidst the ensuing furor, Mike Schroepfer, Facebook’s
chief technology officer, announced that the company would henceforth
conduct an “enhanced review process” before performing research dealing
with sensitive emotional issues.51
In a third case, Uber was embroiled in controversy in July 2015, when a
team funded by FUSE Labs, a research organization sponsored by
Microsoft, reported on the existence of so-called “phantom cabs” on the
Uber passenger app—cars that appear to be close to a passenger pickup
location but which in fact do not exist. An Uber spokesperson explained the
phantoms as a mere “visual effect” that riders should ignore, but some
drivers and passengers suspect they may be a deliberate ploy to trick riders
into thinking Uber cabs are closer than they really are. Other reported visual
anomalies on the Uber app create misleading or confusing impressions of
high-demand areas that forecast higher “surge” pricing.
The FUSE researchers say that both drivers and passengers are learning
to game the system, trying to avoid being misled by Uber’s inaccurate
visual data. They conclude: “Uber’s access to real-time information about
where passengers and drivers are has helped make it one of the most
efficient and useful apps produced by Silicon Valley in recent years. But if
you open the app assuming you’ll get the same insight, think again: drivers
and passengers are only getting part of the picture.”52
Cases like these illustrate the wide variety of ways that highly popular
platforms can use their market power and their access to vast amounts of
data to mislead people and manipulate their behavior without their
knowledge or consent. The temptation for platform managers to engage in
such practices for potential economic gain is likely to be huge. But defining


this kind of ethically questionable behavior, developing clear and
reasonable rules to discourage it, and then enforcing those rules without
excessive intrusiveness and bureaucracy will be a huge challenge for
regulators.
TIME FOR REGULATION 2.0?
Some observers say that the advent of the information age, in which vast
amounts of previously inaccessible data are now available for evaluation,
analysis, and use in smart decision-making, should drive a wholesale
rethinking of traditional approaches to regulation. Nick Grossman, an
entrepreneur, investor, and former MIT Media Lab Scholar, calls for a
transition from today’s Regulation 1.0, which emphasizes prescriptive rules,
certification processes, and gatekeeping, to a new system he calls
Regulation 2.0, based on open innovation tempered by data-driven
transparency and accountability.53 Both kinds of regulatory regime share the
goal of creating trust and fostering fairness, security, and safety, but the
means employed are very different.
In Grossman’s view, regulation based on restricted access makes sense in
a world of scarce information. Traditionally, it was difficult or impossible
for a consumer to gather accurate information about the quality or safety of
a particular taxi driver or hotel. That’s why most governments have taken
steps to screen and certify taxi drivers, require insurance coverage for
drivers, and monitor the safety and cleanliness of hotel accommodations.
But in a world of abundant information, regulation based on data-driven
accountability makes more sense. Firms like Uber and Airbnb can be
granted freedom to operate in exchange for access to their data. Because it
is possible to know exactly who did what to whom and when, consumers
and regulators can hold people and platforms accountable for their
behaviors after the fact. Uber customers can use driver ratings to decide
whether or not to accept a particular ride; Airbnb customers can use host
ratings to pick a safe and comfortable place for a night’s stay; and both
organizations can be sanctioned or even shut down by regulators if their
activities violate public expectations of safety and fair dealing.
Under Grossman’s Regulation 2.0 scheme, government regulatory
agencies would operate quite differently from the way they do today. Rather


than establishing rules of market access, their primary job would be to
establish and enforce requirements for after-the-fact transparency.
Grossman imagines a city government responding to the arrival of Uber by
passing an ordinance that states: “Anyone offering for-hire vehicle services
may opt out of existing regulations as long as they implement mobile
dispatch, e-hailing, and e-payments, 360-degree peer-review of drivers and
passengers, and provide an open data API for public auditing of system
performance with regards to equity, access, performance, and safety.”54
It certainly makes sense for policy-makers to seek ways to take
advantage of the vast new flows of data created by online business—and in
particular by the rise of platforms—in developing new systems for
monitoring and regulating economic activity. And in some arenas, enhanced
transparency, perhaps under government mandate, can powerfully
supplement or even replace traditional forms of regulation, reducing the
costs and inertia associated with government intervention and encouraging
innovation.55 For example, mandated disclosures of food nutrition data, auto
safety ratings, and the energy efficiency of appliances have helped millions
of consumers to make wiser choices and encouraged companies to improve
the quality of their products.56
Grossman’s emphasis on the power of transparency to enforce high
community standards of behavior is particularly relevant in an age driven
by information. An interesting analogy can be drawn with the ideas
promulgated by Richard Stallman, the programmer–activist who is a leader
of the “free software” movement. Stallman points out that one of the key
virtues of free (or open source) software is that anyone can inspect the code
and see what it does. Of course, only experts are likely to do this. But those
who take the opportunity will be in a position to offer an informed
judgment about the virtues and vices of the program, and, when necessary,
to alert the general public to the problems they detect. If software code
allows a company to spy on customers, defraud them, or misappropriate
their data, then making the code freely accessible to all will quickly expose
the problem and likely force its correction.57
In this sense, free software resembles the free speech guaranteed to
Americans by the Bill of Rights—in the hands of engaged citizens, both can
serve as crucial weapons in the battle against private or public malfeasance.
And the same can be said about the platform data that Grossman’s new
regulatory system would rely upon. As Supreme Court Justice Louis


Brandeis famously said, “Sunshine is said to be the best disinfectant;
electric light the most efficient policeman.”
Of course, it’s unlikely, especially in the short term, that a wholesale
replacement of traditional regulation with a new, information-based system
would produce results that most citizens would find acceptable. Would most
families be satisfied to have government inspections of food processing
plants eliminated, so long as statistics about deaths from salmonella and
trichinosis associated with particular companies were widely available? In
matters of life and death, traditional systems of standard-setting and
certification make it easier for people to consume goods and services
without anxiety, and it’s hard to imagine that most consumers would want
to completely eliminate those systems.
Furthermore, an effective Regulation 2.0 regime would require
significant talent upgrades on the part of government agencies as well as
complex revisions to existing statutory codes. As suggested by the cases of
apparent customer and market manipulation we described earlier in this
chapter, platform businesses can’t necessarily be trusted to behave with
consistent transparency and integrity unless independent outsiders are
monitoring their actions. These outsiders could be teams of tech-savvy
experts employed by government agencies; they could be employees of
rival businesses who take advantage of open data access to study the
behavior of their competitors and publicize instances of wrongdoing. In
either case, Regulation 2.0 could still end up being fairly intrusive and
costly.
Grossman cites the work of economist Carlota Perez, who has described
how “great surges” in technology have led to “profound changes in people,
organizations and skills in a sort of habit-breaking hurricane.” Perez goes
on to say that these surges also demand changes in regulatory regimes—and
Grossman’s contention is that the advent of the information age represents
the latest such surge.58
There’s much truth in the notion that the information age—including the
rise of the platform—is a paradigm-altering shift that will profoundly
impact every corner of society, including government regulation of
business. But, as Grossman notes, Perez describes the great surges as cycles
of change that take around fifty years to play out. That’s about right—and
this suggests that it will take time to determine in exactly what ways the
traditional regulatory system can safely be discarded in favor of a system


like Regulation 2.0. In many cases, we may conclude that maintaining at
least a portion of the current permission-based regulatory apparatus while
augmenting its effectiveness using systems of permissionless, data-driven
accountability will yield the best results.
OUR ADVICE FOR REGULATORS
We began this chapter by describing the basic economic tradeoff between
private governance and government regulation. Corporate governance acts
to mitigate negative externalities that affect the private interests of the firm.
Platforms are adept at regulating market failures on-platform but less able
to regulate them off-platform. Experience suggests that firms are usually
quick to react to changing technology and market conditions, but they
generally do not act to maximize social welfare unless forced to do so by
the power of public opinion or by regulatory constraints.
Government regulation, on the other hand, is supposed to be focused on
safeguarding the interests of the general public and those of private
industry. It can wield tools of enforcement such as search warrants, the
power of civil forfeiture, and the authority of law. Unfortunately, regulators
are subject to capture, especially in countries with weak democracy and
government oversight. Thus, neither private governance nor government
regulation can be counted on to serve as a foolproof guardian of the public
interest.
For policymakers who are taking on the challenging task of adapting
traditional regulatory systems to the new conditions of the age of platforms,
we recommend two sets of frameworks. The first, provided by economists
Heli Koski and Tobias Kretschmer, suggests that industries with strong
network effects can generate market inefficiencies and that the goal of
public policy should be to minimize those. The market inefficiencies of
particular concern are abuse of dominant position and the failure to ensure
that new and better technologies are adopted as soon as they become
available.59
The second framework, developed by David S. Evans, proposes a three-
step process to test for the desirability of government regulatory action. The
first step is to examine whether the platform has a functioning internal
governance system in place. The second step is to see whether the


governance system is mostly being used to reduce negative externalities
that would harm the platform (such as criminal behavior by users) or to
reduce competition or take advantage of a dominant market position. If, on
balance, the firm is using its governance system to deter negative
externalities, then no further action is necessary. However, if the
governance system appears to encourage anticompetitive practices, then a
third and final step is required. This step involves asking whether the
anticompetitive behavior outweighs the positive benefits of the governance
system. If so, then a violation has occurred, and a regulatory response is
required. If not, then no further action is needed.60
Proponents of low regulation are likely to urge restraint in applying
government pressure to platform businesses, especially during the startup
phase. After all, they might reason, the harm done to the marketplace or to
the general public by a startup company is likely to be relatively small,
especially when compared with the potential positive effects to be derived
from innovation, new business model development, and economic growth.
The time to apply the rules more stringently will come later, once the start
up has grown to the point where the costs and benefits of regulation are
both reasonable.
Early in its history, YouTube had an informal though unacknowledged
policy of allowing copyrighted material to be posted on its site. As YouTube
grew, concern over this lax enforcement of intellectual property rights
increased, putting pressure on the company to establish a stricter
compliance standard. Over time, mechanisms have been worked out to
compensate rights holders, and today there are many instances of musicians
earning significant revenues from their YouTube channels.
However, this approach does not satisfy everyone. Harvard professor
Benjamin Edelman observes:
If we let tech companies launch first and ask questions later, we invite misbehavior … Perhaps
some sectors suffer unnecessary or outdated regulation; if so, let’s remove the regulations through
proper democratic processes. If we let a few firms ignore the rules, we effectively penalize those
that comply with the law, while granting windfalls to free-wheeling competitors. That’s surely not
a business model consumers are looking for.61
We close with some general principles of regulatory guidance:
Where possible, we would hope that regulators will move to make
adjustments to law to more quickly adapt to technological change. Old


regulatory practices, such as the predatory pricing tests developed for non-
network industries, simply do not work for new technologies and business
models. Regulation must incorporate the recent advances in economic
theory that show that firms can still be maximizing their profits even when
they choose to distribute certain products and services at zero price.
Regulators should also act to reduce the opportunities for arbitrage.
Given that the number of New York City taxi medallions has not changed
since 1937, it should surprise no one that an alternate market would develop
to leap the regulatory hurdle. In this sense, Uber is a response to regulatory-
driven market failure, much like the gypsy cabs that have long operated
under the regulatory radar.
Another area where regulators can add value to new technologies is
where consumers depend upon accurate information in order for markets to
function. Gas stations have long had their pump accuracy checked,
restaurants have had health inspectors, and buildings have had safety
inspections. Such audits have provided the consumer confidence for those
markets to function. Comparable systems for auditing ratings and service
quality might help the new platform-based markets develop and thrive.
Access to platform data represents a real opportunity to limit market
failures both on and off platform.
Finally, we would encourage regulators to have a light touch in order to
encourage innovation. Change often provokes anxiety, and there’s an
understandable impulse to slow the pace of technological and economic
innovation in order to fend off unforeseeable consequences that may be
harmful. But history suggests that, in most cases, allowing change to
flourish leads mainly to positive results in the long run.
One of the most notable regulatory battles related to technological
change took place in the early 1980s, when the major movie studios fought
to prevent ordinary citizens from using the then-new video recording
technology to create copies of movies and TV shows for their personal use.
In the landmark 1984 case Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios,
Inc., the Supreme Court ruled that such copying constituted fair use and
therefore did not violate copyright law. From an economic standpoint, the
Sony decision proved to be highly beneficial. To the surprise of the movie
moguls, the studios that once opposed video recorders made more money
after the new technology was allowed to emerge, through the creation of an
entirely new secondary market for movie rentals that did not previously


exist. In a similar fashion, new platform markets are likely to create
unexpected new opportunities for growth and profit, even for many
incumbent businesses that may be fearful of change. For this reason,
regulator-induced industry sclerosis must be strenuously avoided, despite
the pressures government officials may feel from anxious business leaders
eager to protect their familiar turf.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER ELEVEN
    Opponents of regulation point to phenomena like regulatory capture to argue that
government intervention in business is usually ineffectual. But history suggests that some
level of societal regulation of business is healthy and beneficial both to the economy and to
society as a whole.
    There are a number of regulatory issues that are unique to platform businesses or that
require fresh thinking in the light of the economic changes that platforms are causing.
These include access to platforms, compatibility, fair pricing, data privacy and security,
national control of information assets, tax policy, and labor regulation.
    The flood of new data made available by today’s information age technologies suggests the
possibility of new regulatory approaches based on after-the-fact transparency and
accountability rather than restrictions on market access. But such new approaches will need
to be designed thoughtfully and carefully to fully protect the public.
    Economic frameworks for industries with network effects suggest that dominance alone is
not necessarily cause for government intervention. Rather, failure to manage externalities,
abuse of dominance, manipulating populations, and delaying innovation can indicate when
intervention in platform markets is necessary and appropriate.
OceanofPDF.com


12
TOMORROW
The Future of the Platform Revolution
As you’ve seen in the previous chapters of this book, platforms have been
transforming entire sectors of the economy, marginalizing incumbents and
enabling small startups to rise rapidly to global dominance. It’s rare to see a
single new business model sweep the field in so many industries so quickly.
Still, you might be feeling that we’ve been overstating the impact of the
platform, at least a bit. After all, hasn’t the platform revolution so far been
restricted to a relative handful of sectors? Many of the most important
aspects of our economy, our society, and our lives—education and
government, health care and finance, energy and manufacturing—appear
largely unaffected by the rise of the platform.
That’s true—so far. But these and other arenas are already seeing the
encroachment of platform business models. In the years to come, we
believe it’s likely that platform businesses, while not claiming control of
every aspect of these economic sectors, will stake out significant areas of
influence in all of them. In this final chapter, we want to sketch some of the
future trends that are already taking shape and that you will want to be
aware of as you make plans for your own future.
WHAT MAKES AN INDUSTRY READY FOR
THE PLATFORM REVOLUTION?
