# 12. Tomorrow: The Future of the Platform Revolution

In our research into the disruption of industries by platforms, we’ve noted
characteristics that make a particular industry especially susceptible. Here
are some of the types of businesses that are most likely to join the platform
revolution in the years to come:
•        Information-intensive industries. In most industries today, information is an important
source of value—but the more crucial information is as a value source, the closer the industry
is to being transformed by platforms. This explains why media and telecom are two of the
industries that have already been disrupted so thoroughly by platforms. New entrants have
created ecosystems that can create and disrupt content and software more quickly and easily
than large firms with thousands of employees once did. 
•    Industries with non-scalable gatekeepers. Retailing and publishing are two examples of
industries that traditionally have employed expensive, non-scalable human gatekeepers—
buyers and inventory managers in the case of retail, editors in the case of publishing. Both are
already undergoing disruption thanks to the rise of digital platforms, with millions of
producers (artisans, craftspeople, writers) creating and marketing their own goods through
platforms like Etsy, eBay, and Amazon. 
•    Highly fragmented industries. Market aggregation through a platform increases efficiencies
and reduces search costs for businesses and individuals looking for goods and services created
by far-flung local producers. Platforms ranging from Yelp and OpenTable to Etsy, Uber, and
Airbnb have made it easy for customers to visit a single source to gain access to thousands of
small suppliers. 
•    Industries characterized by extreme information asymmetries. Economic theory suggests
that fair, efficient markets require that all participants have equal access to information about
goods, services, prices, and other crucial variables. But in many traditional markets, one set of
participants has far better access than others. Used car dealers, for example, knew much more
about the condition and history of the cars they sold, as well as about supply and demand
variables, than their customers—hence the distrust in which they were held. Data aggregating
and sharing platforms such as Carfax are now leveling the field, making detailed information
about used car values available to anyone willing to pay a small fee. Other markets where
information asymmetries have made fair dealing difficult, from health insurance to home
mortgages, are ripe for similar changes.
Based on the factors above, one may question why banking, health care,
and education continue to be so resistant to transformation. All three
industries are information-intensive. (Health care may seem like a service-
intensive industry, but all of its efficiencies are powered by information.)
However, industries that might seem to be susceptible to platform
approaches, yet are likely to be resistant to such disruption, have certain
other characteristics. These include the following:
•    Industries with high regulatory control. Banking, health care, and education are all highly
regulated. Regulations favor incumbents and work against the interests of startups trying to
unlock new sources of value. Emerging platforms are starting to attack this problem in an
effort to create new sources of value, but regulatory control is holding them back.


•    Industries with high failure costs. The costs of a defaulted loan or matching a patient with
the wrong doctor are much higher than the cost of showing inappropriate content on a media
platform. Consumers are reluctant to participate on platforms when the perceived costs of
failure are high.
•        Resource-intensive industries. Resource-intensive industries have typically not been
dramatically affected by the Internet. Winning participants in these markets still depend on
their access to resources and their ability to manage efficient, large-scale processes such as
mining, oil and gas exploration, and agriculture, in which information has a limited role to
play.
The impact of these factors will change over time. As more and more
processes and tools get connected to the Internet, every industry has the
potential to become an information-intensive industry. For example,
resource-intensive industries like mining and energy will increasingly need
to leverage the power of platforms, creating efficiency gains and faster
learning by connecting their resources—material, labor, and machines—
over a central network to coordinate workflows. Over the next few years,
we will see the start of transformation in large resource-intensive companies
as they leverage platforms toward greater efficiency gains.
Even as we consider the relative likelihood that various industries will be
susceptible to platform transformation in the near future, let’s bear in mind
that industry boundaries are becoming increasingly porous due to the
impact of platforms. Think about the advertising industry, for example. In a
world of pipelines, businesses’ access to consumers was limited to media
and retail channels: television networks, newspapers and magazines,
department stores. Very few businesses could afford to own their own
direct-to-consumer channels for promoting their goods and services. By
contrast, in today’s world of Internet-powered platforms, any business can
engage with consumers directly, capturing data about their preferences,
connecting them with external producers, and offering personalized services
that provide individual customers with unique value.
In effect, every company can now be an advertising company. Uber, for
example, has the potential to be the world’s largest hyperlocal advertising
business. Through its rider data, Uber can gain unique insight into where
users live, where they work, when and how often they commute, and many
other such aspects of behavior. The company could use such data to connect
users with local merchants. Many other kinds of companies with vibrant
platforms, from banks to retailers, could employ a similar strategy.


The power of the platform is modifying—even erasing—many other,
similar barriers that once separated industries from one another. Thus, one
of the most dramatic effects of the rise of the platform has been the
emergence of unexpected new competitors from seemingly unrelated
industry sectors. Bear this in mind as you consider the possible future
impact of the platform model on your own industry, whatever it may be.
With these insights in mind, let’s consider some of the most plausible
and intriguing future scenarios for the expansion and evolution of platforms
in specific sectors of the economy.
EDUCATION:
THE PLATFORM AS GLOBAL CLASSROOM
Education is perhaps the prime example of a major industry that is ripe for
platform disruption. Information-intensive? Check. In fact, the fundamental
product being sold by schools, colleges, and universities is information of
various kinds. Non-scalable gatekeepers? Check. Ask any parent whose
child has recently had to navigate the slow, complex, inherently arbitrary
process by which a lucky handful of students are admitted to the most
prestigious and selective colleges, and you’ll hear plenty about the
shortcomings of some of the world’s most powerful gatekeepers. Highly
fragmented? Check. Within the United States, there are over 13,000 public
school districts, as well as thousands of private school systems, colleges,
universities, and proprietary schools, each fiercely independent and proud
of its unique programs and standards. Information asymmetry? Check. Only
a small percentage of parents feel competent to judge the qualifications and
reputations of schools and colleges—hence the proliferating, competing,
and confusing array of rating systems and the ever-increasing pressure on
students to earn entry to the handful of institutions that are universally
admired—the Harvards and Yales of the world.
With millions of families forced to negotiate this non-system system
every year, it’s no wonder that most emerge frustrated and uncertain as to
whether or not they’ve found the right school for their child. Then factor in
the unsustainable cost inflation that education has experienced in the U.S.:
having grown by twenty-five times over the past fifty years, higher
education spending has skyrocketed even faster than health care spending.


The overall picture is of an industry under tremendous pressure to change
so as to deliver better value for the dollars being invested.
The drive to build education platforms is well under way, as businesses
like Skillshare, Udemy, Coursera, edX, Khan Academy, and others suggest.
Eager to avoid being rendered irrelevant or obsolete by upstart platform
companies, a number of the world’s greatest universities are moving to
position themselves as leaders in this educational revolution. Institutions
including Harvard, Princeton, Stanford, the University of Pennsylvania, and
many others are offering online versions of some of their most popular
classes in the form of “massive open online courses” (MOOCs)—many in
partnership with companies like Coursera.
In the years to come, the spread and increasing popularity of teaching
and learning ecosystems will have an enormous impact on public school
systems, private schools, and traditional universities. Barriers to entry that
have long made a first-class education an exclusive, expensive, and highly
prestigious luxury good are already beginning to fall. Platform technologies
are making it possible for hundreds of thousands of students to
simultaneously attend lectures by the world’s most skilled instructors, at
minimal cost, and available anywhere in the world that the Internet is
accessible. It seems to be only a matter of time before the equivalent of a
degree from MIT in chemical engineering will be available at minimal cost
in a village in sub-Saharan Africa.
The migration of teaching to the world of platforms is likely to change
education in ways that go beyond expanded access—important and
powerful as that is. One change that is already beginning to happen is the
separation of various goods and services formerly sold as a unit by colleges
and universities. Millions of potential students have no interest in or need
for the traditional college campus complete with an impressive library, a
gleaming science lab, raucous fraternity houses, and a football stadium.
The traditional university makes education available to a select few:
professors with specific, laboriously obtained academic credentials and
highly qualified students with the time and money to invest in campus life.
For this relative handful of people, the old model of education may work
well. But education platforms like Skillshare make high-level teaching and
learning available to thousands who can’t or won’t fit the traditional mold.
Suddenly, brilliant instructors and eager learners can find one another


anywhere, anytime. It’s a priceless opportunity that the online platform
makes available at a tiny fraction of the traditional cost.
Education platforms are also beginning to unbundle the process of
learning from the paper credentials traditionally associated with it. As of
2014, statistics show that only about 5 percent of students who enroll in
MOOCs receive certificates of completion—a data point that has led many
to conclude that online teaching is ineffective. But a study of more than 1.8
million MOOC enrollees at the University of Pennsylvania found that 60
percent of students become actively engaged with the course content,
watching class videos, connecting with their peers, and completing one or
more assignments. The researchers concluded that “students treat MOOCs
like a buffet, sampling the material according to their interests and goals.”1
As students gravitate to MOOCs—especially those that teach specific work
skills, like the many online courses in fields such as software engineering,
design, marketing, and film editing—they appear to be more interested in
the real-world abilities they are honing than in such traditional symbols of
achievement as a class transcript or a diploma. A high ranking on TopCoder,
a platform that hosts programming contests, will earn a developer a job at
Facebook or Google just as fast as a computer science degree from
Carnegie Mellon, Caltech, or MIT. Platform-based students for whom a
conventional credential is important can often make special arrangements to
receive one—for example, at Coursera, college credit is a “premium
service” you pay extra for.
The platform-based unbundling of educational activities is separating the
teaching of specific skills from reliance on vast, multipurpose institutions
like traditional universities. Duolingo uses a crowdsourcing platform to
teach foreign languages. Its founder, Luis von Ahn, is a computer scientist
who never studied language instruction. After reading the most respected
books on the topic, he performed comparative tests of the leading theories
using the crowds that visited his website and an evolving set of testing tools
to measure the results. Today, more people are using Duolingo to learn a
language than all the students in high school in the U.S. combined.2
Duolingo separates language teaching from traditional educational
institutions. The same thing is happening with the teaching of programming
on TopCoder, marketing on Salesforce, or guitar on Microsoft Xbox.
Learning platforms are facilitating many other experiments with the
form, structure, and substance of traditional education. For example, the


Minerva Project, launched in September 2014, with an initial class of thirty-
three students, aims to replace the traditional liberal arts college with an
online platform that allows students to attend interactive seminars with
professors located anywhere in the world. The students themselves will live
for a year at a time in dorms in various cities—San Francisco, Berlin,
Buenos Aires—where local cultural, professional, and recreation facilities
will be incorporated into the curriculum. Minerva hopes to grow to admit
some 2,500 students per year, each paying a total fee of around $28,000
(including room and board)—about half the cost of attending a selective
college or university.
“The Minerva boast,” journalist Graeme Wood observes, “is that it will
strip the university experience down to the aspects that are shown to
contribute directly to student learning.”3 Will Minerva succeed? Only time
will tell. But whether it does or not, many other educational experiments are
sure to follow. The flexibility and power of the platform to facilitate
connections between teachers and students makes this virtually inevitable.
The long-term implications of the coming explosion in educational
experimentation are difficult to predict with certainty. But it wouldn’t be
surprising if many of the 3,000 colleges and universities that currently
dominate the U.S. higher education market were to fail, their economic
rationale fatally undercut by the vastly better economics of platforms.
HEALTH CARE: CONNECTING
THE PARTS OF AN UNWIELDY SYSTEM
Like education, health care is an information-intensive industry that
features non-scalable gatekeepers (in the form of insurance company
networks and much-in-demand physicians whose referrals are needed
before any consultation can occur), a high degree of fragmentation (among
hospitals, clinics, labs, pharmacies, and millions of individual practitioners),
and enormous information asymmetries (thanks in part to professionals who
sometimes encourage an attitude of “doctor knows best” among patients
who are often overwhelmed by the complexities of modern medicine). And
like education, health care is an industry widely felt to be in crisis,
particularly in the United States. The fragmented U.S. health care delivery


system imposes huge costs in missed diagnoses, garbled data, wasted time,
and squandered resources.
In its simplest form, the platform model can make accessing health care
faster and more convenient by providing an Uber-like interface that permits
people to summon medical help wherever they are. Such a system has
already been launched in several cities, including Miami, Los Angeles, and
San Diego, by a company called Medicast. Click the Medicast app, describe
your symptoms, and a physician is guaranteed to arrive within two hours.
The service is popular among doctors who want to earn a few extra dollars
during their off-hours.4
But the potential impact of the platform model on medicine goes far
deeper than such basic one-off interactions. In fact, the platform revolution
offers huge opportunities to remedy many of the problems that plague
American health care. Connecting all suppliers—as well as health care
consumers themselves—in a hyperefficient platform has the potential to
revolutionize the system.
One of the early harbingers of the kind of change we can expect in the
decades to come is the enormous popularity of mobile health care apps and
wearable fitness devices linked to networks that provide analysis and
information based on the personal data generated. Millions of Americans
are already demonstrating that they are comfortable having electronic tools
measuring their pulse, blood pressure, activity levels, sleeping patterns, and
other health indicators, as well as sharing this information with a software
package that can offer diagnostic readings and customized advice.
Expanding and enhancing this approach can help shift the emphasis of the
health care system from curing or managing illnesses—often diagnosed late
and treated at very high cost—to preventing them.
It’s also easy to envision a platform that could help individuals manage
such chronic—and costly—health care problems as diabetes, hypertension,
heart disease, asthma, allergies, and obesity. For example, a wearable
device could track a diabetic’s nutrition intake, exercise regimen, and blood
glucose levels; use the data to describe and explain recommended
treatments based on past medical experience and history; and alert a
clinician when warning signs of an impending medical crisis arise. One
analyst estimates that such a platform could reduce the national investment
in diabetes management by at least $100 billion per year.5 Extend the same
logic to the other chronic illnesses that affect tens of millions of Americans


—and which our current pay-for-service health care system manages poorly
—and the potential cost savings could skyrocket … to say nothing of the
thousands of lives that would be extended and improved.
Even greater benefits will be realized when one or more platforms
emerge that are capable of integrating a wide range of health care data from
multiple sources—not just wearable sensors but also patient input and
electronic health records generated and maintained by service providers.
Developing a platform that is accessible both to patients and to an array of
professionals—physicians, nurses, technicians, therapists, pharmacists,
insurance carriers, and others—while still protecting patient confidentiality
will represent a crucial challenge. As health care consultant Vince Kuraitis
notes:
Many healthcare value propositions will be dependent on broad networks and platforms. If you
had high blood pressure and needed to manage your own care with support from your physician,
what good would it be if your lab values were on one platform and your medications were listed
on another, non-interoperable platform? If you were traveling and went to a hospital emergency
room, what good would it do you if your health data was stored on a network not accessible by
the hospital?6
Many of today’s leading technology companies are already beginning to
position themselves for the coming battle to dominate the health care
platform business. Microsoft, Amazon, Sony, Intel, Facebook, Google, and
Samsung have all launched platforms designed to stake out at least one
corner of the rapidly growing fitness–health care space.
One intriguing entrant is Apple’s HealthKit app, announced in mid-2014,
which allows a range of health and fitness apps—including those from
outside providers like Nike—to share data with one another. Apple
announced plans to work with the famous Mayo Clinic and other health
care companies to develop systems that would allow data from HealthKit to
be shared with physicians and other caregivers (with appropriate privacy
safeguards). And in early 2015, Apple unveiled its new Apple Watch, which
boasts an array of health and fitness tracking, measurement, and
communication tools.
Under the circumstances, it’s not surprising that, according to consultant
Kuraitis, Apple has been hiring a large number of professionals to staff up
its health platform business—including many with MD and PhD degrees. It
seems clear that, within the next decade or two, at least one giant platform


business will become a major player in the U.S. health industry. Apple is
one of the companies with its eyes fixed on that goal.
The transition from today’s fragmented health care system to an efficient
platform-based system will not be easy. The barriers to health care platform
development include economic and managerial forces that discourage the
sharing of patient data and services. These forces help to explain, for
example, why the implementation of electronic medical records mandated
by the Affordable Care Act (2010) has been poorly managed, with record
systems so customized by institution that two hospitals in the same
community are often unable to share data regarding the same patient. The
problem is exacerbated by the financial incentives for health care
organizations to keep each patient within a single medical “home.” Many
patients are mandated by their insurance carriers to seek services within one
health care system, usually defined by geography—an approach that is
untenable for patients who are highly mobile or transient, like many young
adults.
Furthermore, there is huge variability in how clinicians interact with the
health care system. Some are employed by hospitals or other large
institutions, which means they usually enjoy relatively easy access to
platform data. Others are employed by the government, which means that
the platform data they generate are accessible to the government but not to
others. Still others are privately employed, which means that the platform
data they produce are extremely fragmented.
Until financial incentives are aligned to encourage universal sharing of
patient services and data, the growth of platforms within health care may be
slow. Helping to bring about this alignment should be a key focus of
regulators and industry leaders.
ENERGY: FROM SMART GRID TO
MULTIDIRECTIONAL PLATFORM
In a world driven by vast amounts of energy—and in which the supply and
usage of energy are intimately linked to such crucial factors as global
climate change and international geopolitical conflict—we can’t afford to
squander the energy supplies we have or use them in ways that harm the
natural environment. That’s where platform technologies can make a big


difference. The electrical energy grid, fueled by sources that include coal,
gas, oil, water, wind, solar, and nuclear power, has long been a giant
interconnected network of complex technologies. However, it’s a network
plagued by numerous costly inefficiencies, such as the mismatch between
supply and demand caused by variability of energy use over the course of a
day and across seasons of the year. The more fully we can convert this
network into an intelligent, interactive ecosystem of participants who can
produce, share, conserve, store, and manage energy wisely together, the
greater the value we can extract from our energy resources—and the
healthier the world we’ll pass on to future generations.
Today, energy companies and government authorities around the world
are working with scientists and engineers to implement “smart grid”
technologies that are improving the use and control of energy through
digital systems for measuring, communicating, analyzing, and responding
to vast amounts of data. Enhanced electrical metering tools are making it
easier to implement variable pricing systems that improve the
responsiveness of the system to variations in demand, encourage
conservation, and smooth out fluctuations in energy availability and use.
Decentralization is reducing the grid’s reliance on a few vast production
facilities, increasing reliability, decreasing vulnerability to sabotage or
disaster, and making it easier to distribute energy produced by consumers
using wind turbines, photovoltaic panels, and other small-scale systems.
These changes prefigure the interactive network that is likely to shape
tomorrow’s global energy marketplace. In effect, we’re migrating from the
one-way pipeline model of energy production and distribution to a platform
model, in which millions of individuals and organizations are
interconnected and able to play varying roles as circumstances change—
consuming energy one moment, producing and selling it the next.
Centralized production and control of energy by a few massive utilities will
in time give way to millions of small producer–consumers, many as modest
as a single solar panel on a family’s rooftop.
Continued technological breakthroughs will drive this transformation.
Battery technology, for example, will play a crucial role. The leading
sources of renewable energy, wind and solar, are both intermittent, which
leads to mismatches between supply and demand. More efficient
rechargeable electrical storage batteries could provide an answer. Tesla,
most famous for its electric vehicles, is currently building a so-called


gigafactory in Nevada that is expected to manufacture a new generation of
powerful batteries that are capable of supplying energy to a home for up to
two days. Sister company SolarCity—run by a cousin of Tesla chairman
Elon Musk—which already controls 39 percent of the residential solar
market, has announced that, within a decade, all of its power units will
come complete with battery storage.
The disruptive potential of this technology for the traditional utility
industry is enormous; in fact, a 2013 report by the Edison Electric Institute
warned, “One can imagine a day when battery storage technology or micro
turbines could allow customers to be electric grid independent.” Energy
analyst Ravi Manghani foresees a day when today’s energy utilities become
“something closer to service providers and minders of an increasingly
distributed grid rather than the centralized power producers they are
today.”7
It’s a pattern we’ve seen being played out in every corner of the world of
platforms: power, which once flowed in a single direction from a central
source, is increasingly shared and controlled by millions of market
participants. The shift applies to the literal power that flows through
electrical lines as well as to the metaphorical kinds of power traditionally
wielded by corporate chieftains.
The missing link in the transformation of the energy industry has been a
platform that permits large-scale energy transactions. That is beginning to
change. The state of California now allows bundlers of distributed energy
resources to offer those resources on the wholesale market, and, as we
discussed in chapter 4, the state of New York is considering the
development of a platform dedicated to the management of distributed
energy resources. By mobilizing existing distributed resources, systems like
these should facilitate the integration of clean renewable power to
accommodate the inherent variability in energy demand.
What is unclear is whether current stakeholders in the energy industry
will embrace the emergence of energy platforms or engage in drawn-out
regulatory battles in an effort to preserve their current advantages. The
challenge for regulators will be to design a system that benefits as many
stakeholders as possible—including the future generations that are counting
on us to leave them with both adequate supplies of energy and a clean,
healthy environment.


FINANCE: MONEY GOES DIGITAL
In a sense, the earliest forms of money—historically documented at least as
far back as the Babylonian Code of Hammurabi in the second millennium
BCE—represented the first platform businesses. Money is a form of value
accepted by all the participants in a particular economic system, who
thereby constitute an interactive network able to engage in transactions with
one another for mutual benefit. So the world of finance—payment,
currency, credit, investment, and the myriad transactions these generate—
has always involved platform-like behavior.
Today, online financial platforms like PayPal and Square have created
new ways of conducting payment transactions (online in the case of PayPal,
mobile and app-based in the case of Square), which in turn open doors to
the creation of new categories of merchants. Just as the invention of money
some four thousand years ago facilitated astonishing new flexibility and
economic growth, the new digital platforms for financial transactions are
encouraging thousands of participants to become producers and sellers as
well as consumers.
Financial platform companies are also working on unlocking new forms
of value hidden within transaction data itself—something that only the new
digital tools for gathering and analyzing that data make possible. Knowing
who has transacted with whom can help companies discover consumer
tastes and spending habits, information they can leverage to generate still
more economic activity. For example, MasterCard is a venerable platform
business that today operates a financial ecosystem linking two billion
cardholders to 25,000 banks and more than 40 million merchants around the
world. Now its technology R & D division, known as MasterCard Labs, is
experimenting with payment mechanisms that are focused on creating new
opportunities to expand the platform’s usefulness. Leveraging contextual
data captured on the platform, these new tools encourage users to transact
by determining the next possible payment opportunity, prompting the user
toward it, and facilitating the interaction. ShopThis!, for instance, is a
MasterCard Labs innovation that lets magazine readers click on an
embedded app to instantly purchase an item they’ve read about from an
affiliated retailer, such as Saks Fifth Avenue.8
Other familiar financial platforms—many of them traditionally quite
conservative in their business culture as well as significantly constrained by


regulation—will be pushed to develop innovations based on the latest
platform technologies. Commercial bankers, for instance, have been closely
monitoring the rise of online peer-to-peer lending communities like Zopa
and Lending Club, which are facilitating billions of dollars’ worth of
financial transactions and providing credit while bypassing traditional
gatekeepers. Peer-to-peer lending platforms have the potential to be
particularly disruptive because of their ability to identify patterns in lending
and borrowing from the troves of digital data they collect. Using these
patterns, these platforms may be able to do a better job of identifying
behaviors that predict defaults and fraud than traditional banks that rely on
a static set of data markers. Partly for this reason, Lending Club is able to
offer most borrowers a lower interest rate on their loans than that available
from a traditional bank—while lenders earn a higher return than they would
get from most conventional investments.9 Over time, commercial banks will
be driven to adapt the same big-data tools that peer-to-peer lending
platforms are using to measure and control risk.
Alternative sources of funding for businesses are also creating new
competition for banks. Platforms such as AngelList allow investors to join
syndicates that offer funding to early-stage startups in exchange for equity
participation. While these applications are themselves still at an early stage
of development, they suggest the kinds of new investment models that
platforms are making possible.
Platform-based data analysis tools can also be used to enhance the
marketing of financial products. Personal finance platforms such as Mint
have begun gathering and analyzing data about users’ financial status,
challenges, and goals that can enable financial institutions to target them
with products designed to cater to their specific needs. Well-designed
financial platforms can do a better job of consummating mutually beneficial
matches between financial services and the consumers who need them than
traditional sales and marketing channels have done. 
Even more important, traditional financial institutions are beginning to
use platform models to expand the reach of their services to segments of the
economy that they formerly could not touch. For example, banks are
leveraging platforms to tap the cash economy, which they see as a huge
future source of growth, particularly in Asia. To gain a foothold in this
arena, banks are building invoicing and payment platforms that enable
small businesses in the cash economy to better conduct business with one


another while capturing data about their interactions in the process. The
analytics derived from this data will help banks target small businesses with
financial products for the first time in a highly relevant manner. Likewise,
some banks are offering digital services to assist consumers with real estate
searches in the hope of gathering data that could indicate lending
opportunities.
Insurance is another space that is set to be rapidly transformed in the age
of data platforms. Connected cars are now gathering real-time data about
driving behavior, and insurance companies are leveraging such data to offer
customized premium pricing based on user-specific driving habits. The
growing popularity of wearable devices for tracking health and wellness
indicators will create opportunities for health insurance companies to offer
similarly customized insurance packages.
Still another potential source of future growth is the hundreds of millions
of “unbanked” people, both in the developing world and in less affluent
neighborhoods in the U.S. and other developed countries, who currently
have no access to tools that can help them pay their bills, borrow money,
save, and make investments. Because they live in areas without bank
branches and lack the capital needed to qualify for a traditional bank
account or line of credit, the unbanked are forced to rely on costly,
inconvenient, and sometimes fraudulent alternatives like check-cashing
services, money order businesses, payday loan companies, and illegal loan
sharks. These substandard financial operators represent another barrier to
self-sufficiency that makes it harder for the poor to escape poverty.
Now that millions of these less affluent consumers have access to mobile
technology in the form of cell phones, the possibility of creating affordable
online financial platforms customized to their needs has become a reality.
Naturally, each of these poor or near-poor customers will generate less
value for a bank or financial platform operator than a wealthy customer
might—but their numbers are so vast that this market represents a huge
business opportunity. In sub-Saharan Africa and other developing regions,
telecom and technology companies such as Vodafone (through its
Safaricom subsidiary) are sparring with traditional financial institutions
such as Kenya’s Equity Bank to determine who will control the leading
financial platform and its hundreds of millions of potential customers.10
In this area, as in many others, the bankers have heard the message that
is spreading through one industry after another—disrupt or be disrupted.


Increasingly, they are looking to the platform model as the chief disruptive
mechanism.
LOGISTICS AND TRANSPORTATION
Logistics and transportation—the business functions by which people and
things are moved efficiently from place to place—are resource-intensive
industries that were once largely unaffected by the emergence of digital
business models. Logistics companies such as FedEx have enjoyed
significant competitive advantages because of the huge fixed costs of
owning a fleet of cars, trucks, and planes, which create enormous barriers to
entry for competitors. But a platform approach doesn’t require fleet
ownership. Platforms that can aggregate real-time market information on
the movement of physical goods and carriers can orchestrate an ecosystem
of third-party delivery agents to manage an efficient logistics and delivery
system while requiring minimal capital investment.
Specific industries that rely on complex logistical processing are already
being transformed by the superior ability of platforms to coordinate the
movement of vehicles and resources using highly efficient algorithms to
match demand and supply. For example, San Francisco-based Munchery is
one of several rapidly growing new food delivery platforms. By aggregating
citywide demand according to specific time slots, Munchery’s algorithms
determine the best truck routes to maximize density of delivery points,
thereby minimizing the marginal costs of delivery. In Indonesia, a platform
business named Go-Jek allows motorbike drivers to offer rides in a manner
similar to Uber. Go-Jek also offers free food delivery throughout the
Indonesian capital of Jakarta by leveraging the connected motorbikes and
using cleverly designed algorithms to determine the most efficient delivery
routes.
LABOR AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: PLATFORMS
REDEFINE THE NATURE OF WORK
As we’ve discussed, some of the most dramatic examples of platform
advances have involved labor markets. Every indication is that the


transformation of work by the world of platforms is likely to continue in the
decades to come, with some implications that are easy to foresee—and
others that may take the world by surprise.
One assumption that is already being shattered is the idea that only
routine, semi-skilled jobs like taxi driving, food delivery, or household
chores are susceptible. Even traditional professions like medicine and law
are proving to be susceptible to platform models. We’ve already mentioned
Medicast, which applies an Uber-like model to finding a doctor. Several
platform companies are providing online venues where legal services are
available with comparable ease, speed, and convenience. Axiom Law has
built a $200 million platform business by using a combination of data-
mining software and freelance law talent to provide legal guidance and
services to business clients; InCloudCounsel claims it can process basic
legal documents such as licensing forms and nondisclosure agreements at a
savings of up to 80 percent compared with a traditional law firm.11
In the decades to come, it seems likely that the platform model will be
applied—or at least tested—in virtually every market for labor and
professional services. How will this trend impact the service industries—
not to mention the working lives of hundreds of millions of people?
One likely result will be an even greater stratification of wealth, power,
and prestige among service providers. Routine and standardized tasks will
move to online platforms, where an army of relatively low-paid, self-
employed professionals will be available to handle them. Meanwhile, the
world’s great law firms, medical centers, consulting partnerships, and
accounting practices will not vanish, but their relative size and importance
will shrink as much of the work they used to do migrates to platforms that
can provide comparable services at a fraction of the cost and with far
greater convenience. A surviving handful of world-class experts will
increasingly focus on a tiny subset of the most highly specialized and
challenging assignments, which they can tackle from anywhere in the world
using online tools. Thus, at the very highest level of professional expertise,
winner-take-all markets are likely to emerge, with (say) two dozen
internationally renowned attorneys competing for the splashiest and most
lucrative cases anywhere on the globe.
The platform transformation of labor will further accelerate trends that
have already made huge inroads into the organization of work. The division
of labor into smaller and smaller units of work, which Adam Smith


recognized as a key to the productive capability of organizations almost
three centuries ago, is likely to continue, powered by increasingly smart
algorithms that are capable of breaking down a complex job into tiny,
simple tasks to be handled by hundreds of workers, then reassembling the
results into a unified whole. Amazon’s Mechanical Turk already applies this
logic to many assignments.
The trend toward freelance work, self-employment, contract labor, and
nontraditional career paths will also continue to accelerate. The Freelancers
Union estimates that one in three American workers already does some
freelance work; that percentage is likely to increase in the years to come. Of
course, this will be a mixed blessing. Many people who want flexibility and
freedom to set their own working hours and conditions—artists, students,
travelers, working moms, the semi-retired—will thrive in this new
environment. Those who prefer stability and predictability in their work—
or who are accustomed to relying on an employer for vital benefits such as
health insurance and a retirement plan—will find the transition challenging,
even painful. Traditional labor unions, which organized and defended the
rights of the vast armies of workers that big corporations once employed,
will continue to decline, leaving individuals to scramble for security on
their own.
As we noted when discussing the regulation of platforms in chapter 11,
the growing dominance of the world of platforms will create genuine
challenges for society. Traditional corporate employment once provided a
safety net for millions of workers and their families. As the platform
revolution shreds the final vestiges of that safety net, it seems clear that
government—or some other new social institution, as yet unenvisioned—
will have to find a way to fill the gap.
GOVERNMENT AS PLATFORM
Government, of course, is not an industry in the conventional sense. But it’s
a major sector of the economy with a huge impact on the life of every
citizen. And it certainly has the characteristics of being information-
intensive, surrounded by gatekeepers (as anyone who has struggled with an
unresponsive government bureaucracy will attest), fragmented (into dozens
or hundreds of agencies with overlapping, often mutually contradictory


mandates), and marked by information asymmetries (exacerbated by the
legal mumbo-jumbo in which laws and regulations are usually written).
So it’s understandable that ordinary citizens, along with well-intentioned
legislators, elected officials, and civil servants, might be eager to apply the
platform model to governments at all levels. Making government processes
as transparent, responsive, flexible, user-friendly, and innovative as a well-
designed and well-managed platform would be an enormous blessing to the
country and could go a long way toward alleviating the cynicism and
negativity with which many citizens currently view government.
Of course, transforming government is easier said than done.
Constitutional and legal restrictions, conflicting pressures from interest
groups and lobbyists, partisan hostilities, budgetary constraints, the
complex challenges inherent in developing services suitable for all citizens
rather than just a self-selected subset, and the sheer inertia built into any
organization that has grown through accretion over more than two centuries
—all of these factors pose huge challenges to leaders who want to apply
principles from the for-profit sector to streamlining government along
platform lines.
Yet despite these difficulties, local, regional, and national governments
around the world are beginning to incorporate some of the benefits of the
platform model into their daily operations. Perhaps not surprisingly, one of
the leading examples is the city of San Francisco, perched at the northern
end of Silicon Valley. The city’s Open Data policy, originally launched in
2009 for implementation through the Mayor’s Office of Civic Innovation, is
designed to promote the sharing of city data through an open-access portal,
the creation of public–private partnerships to facilitate the development of
value-creating tools that citizens and companies can use, and the promotion
of data-based initiatives intended to improve the quality of life for everyone
living in and around the San Francisco Bay area.
The city’s data platform, dubbed DataSF, contains a vast array of
information about the city, gleaned from both public and private sources, as
well as an application programming interface and tips for outside
developers who want to use the data to create apps. To encourage creative
use of the platform, the city government has sponsored a series of Data
Jams, Hackathons, and app competitions centered on specific civic
challenges, from transportation to sustainable development. For example, in
June 2013, San Francisco’s City Hall was the site of a Housing Data Jam in


which fifty local entrepreneurs took a deep dive into issues related to local
housing—homelessness, affordable home finance, building safety, energy
efficiency, and more. By October, ten privately created apps had been
launched using information from DataSF to create tools for improving
housing conditions in the city. They included Neighborhood Score, a mobile
app that provides a block-by-block health and sustainability score for every
area of the city; Buildingeye, a map-based app that makes building and
planning information easily accessible; Project Homeless Connect, which
uses mobile technology to help people without shelter find the resources
they need to get off the streets and into decent housing; and House Fax, a
“Carfax for houses,” that allows homeowners and residents to access the
maintenance history of a particular building.12
Ongoing efforts to apply platform thinking to San Francisco city
government include a number of other initiatives, including the creation of
a single central portal where local businesses can manage all the licensing,
regulation, and reporting requirements associated with operating in the city;
the Universal City Services Card, which provides a one-stop location for
accessing San Francisco services ranging from marriage licenses to golf
course discounts; and a partnership with Yelp, the restaurant-rating
platform, that will incorporate city health department scores for local
eateries into their online Yelp profiles.
While San Francisco has advanced the concept of “government as
platform” further than most jurisdictions, similar efforts are underway in
cities, states, and regions around the U.S. and the world. The federal
government is beginning to travel the same path. Data.gov, launched in
2009, has gradually been expanded, updated, simplified, and enhanced to
make large amounts of once inaccessible government data easy to reach for
every citizen, as well as providing tools to enable the building of apps using
the data.
The burgeoning government platforms that are springing up around the
world will only be as open, democratic, and empowering as the sponsoring
agencies and our political leaders will allow them to be. (It’s not surprising
that the National Security Agency and other intelligence organizations are
not among the federal offices participating in Data.gov.) Will the
platforming of government usher in a new age of universal responsiveness,
efficiency, and freedom … or will it further advantage the prosperous and
the well connected at the expense of the poor and the powerless?


THE INTERNET OF THINGS:
A WORLDWIDE PLATFORM OF PLATFORMS
At its core, the platform revolution is about using technology to connect
people and provide them with tools they can use to create value together. As
digital technology continues to advance—in particular, as chips, sensors,
and communication devices continue to grow smaller and more efficient—
the number and ubiquity of these connections continue to grow. Many are
now being located not in computing devices such as laptops and cell phones
but in ordinary machines and appliances—including everything from home
thermostats and garage door openers to industrial security systems. With
designers and engineers finding more and more ways to usefully link the
machines, gadgets, and other devices people interact with daily, a vast new
layer of data infrastructure is emerging that has been dubbed the Internet of
things. This new universe of networks will have a profound impact on the
power of tomorrow’s platforms.
A wide range of companies is deeply engaged in the effort to build the
Internet of things—and, if possible, to control both the new infrastructure
and the ultra-valuable data it will provide. As we’ve mentioned, industrial
firms like GE, Siemens, and Westinghouse are moving to create information
links among the turbines, engines, motors, heating and cooling systems, and
manufacturing plants they build and operate, hoping to enable tremendous
new efficiencies and cost savings. Digital technology firms like IBM, Intel,
and Cisco are racing to design the tools and connections that will make the
vast new networks possible. And Internet-centered companies like Google
and Apple are designing interfaces and operating systems that will enable
both technology experts and ordinary people to have easy access to the
Internet of things and use it in countless ways we’re only beginning to
imagine and explore.
What’s more, the potential power of the Internet of things will only
continue to grow as the varieties of devices available to us and their
capabilities continue to expand. To mention just a few examples, consider
the transformative power of such just-around-the-corner technologies as
driverless cars, cheap and powerful electrical storage batteries for the home,
and easy-to-use 3D printers for quickly replicating useful objects. As these
and other new tools become widely available, they’ll also quickly be linked


to the Internet of things, making even more powerful value-creating
platforms possible.
Applied to the Internet of things, platform economics will dramatically
alter the business models associated with countless familiar goods and
services. Take, for example, the familiar lightbulb. Originally patented by
Thomas Edison in 1878, the basic engineering of the incandescent bulb has
scarcely changed since then, which is why the typical bulb retails for just 40
cents and provides its maker with virtually no profit margin. It’s also highly
inefficient, wasting more than 95 percent of the energy it uses in the form of
heat.
Improved products such as the compact fluorescent bulb and the light
emitting diode (LED) have made lighting technology much more efficient
as well as more profitable. But when home lighting systems are connected
to the Internet of things, the very purpose of the lightbulb is transformed.
Lights can be programmed for intruder alerts; they can flash to warn parents
when a toddler is wandering near the stairs or the stove; they can blink to
remind grandma to take her medication. Lights with wireless connectivity
can track the energy consumption of other appliances, enabling lightbulb
vendors to offer energy management services to homeowners and utility
companies. Suddenly, the lightbulb maker can afford to give away a $40
LED in exchange for a share of the ongoing revenues provided by
networked services.
Platform-based connections among household and personal devices have
attracted much of the publicity surrounding the Internet of things. But the
potential for transformation in the B2B world is, if anything, even greater.
David Mount, a partner at the high-tech investment firm of Kleiner Perkins
Caufield and Byers, refers to the coming wave of innovation as the
Industrial Awakening. He lists eight markets with the potential to generate
new multi-billion-dollar industries based on smart connections among
industrial devices:
•    Security: using platform-based networks to protect industrial assets from attacks
•    Network: designing, building, and servicing the networks that will link and control industrial
tools
•    Connected services: developing software and systems to manage the new networks
•    Product as a service: transitioning industrial companies from selling machines and tools to
selling services facilitated by platform connections
•    Payments: implementing new ways to create and capture value from industrial equipment


•    Retrofits: equipping the $6.8 trillion worth of existing industrial machinery in the U.S. to
participate in the new industrial Internet
•        Translation: teaching a wide array of devices and software systems to share data and
communicate with one another
•    Vertical applications: finding ways to connect industrial tools at various places in the value
chain to solve specific problems
In total, Mount concludes (drawing on data from a World Economic
Forum report) that the Industrial Awakening will generate $14.2 trillion of
global output by 2030.13
Economist Jeremy Rifkin has deftly summarized this development, as
well as some of its broader implications:
There are now 11 billion sensors connecting devices to the internet of things. By 2030, 100 trillion
sensors will be [in place] … continually sending big data to the communications, energy and
logistics internets. Anyone will be able to access the internet of things and use big data and
analytics to develop predictive algorithms that can speed efficiency, dramatically increase
productivity and lower the marginal cost of producing and distributing physical things, including
energy, products and services, to near zero, just as we now do with information goods.14
We may not be on the verge of seeing the majority of physical goods
priced at or even near to zero—not yet. But it seems safe to say that we’ve
barely begun to imagine the transformative potential of the platform model.
A CHALLENGING FUTURE
Having read this far, you’ve undoubtedly recognized that the authors of this
book are, in many ways, enthusiastic about the economic and social
changes being wrought by the rise of the platform. The remarkable
efficiency improvements, innovative capabilities, and enhanced consumer
options that platforms make possible have already begun to create amazing
new forms of value for millions of people in many walks of life.
But every revolutionary change has its dangers, and every major social
and economic disruption creates both winners and losers. The platform
revolution is no exception. We’ve already seen the problems some long-
established industries are suffering as their familiar business models are
upended by the advent of platforms. From newspaper publishers to record
producers, taxi companies to hotel chains, travel agents to department
stores, numerous businesses have seen their market shares, revenues, and


profitability plummet in the face of platform competition. The fallout
inevitably includes uncertainty, loss, and suffering on the part of countless
individuals and even some entire communities.
It’s easy for pundits and consultants to call for business leaders to “adapt
and adjust” to a transformed business environment. But the process of
adaptation is often lengthy, confusing, and painful, and some companies
and workers will never find their way in the emerging platform-dominated
world. It’s an unfortunate reality that society must recognize and deal with.
Society must also respond to the structural changes that the platform
revolution is creating. We examined some of these in chapter 11, including
the unprecedented access to personal and business information enjoyed by
the largest platform businesses; the massive shift from traditional forms of
employment to more flexible yet uncertain modes of contingent, freelance
work; the unpredictable external impacts, positive and negative, that
platforms have on the communities in which they operate; and the potential
for manipulation of individuals and entire markets by powerful platforms.
Traditional forms of government regulation developed for pipeline
businesses are inadequate to addressing the social challenges these
platform-based upheavals will bring. But it will take time for policy-makers
to fully understand the nature of the changes and to develop regulatory
responses that protect citizens from the most serious dangers posed by the
platform revolution without unduly stifling beneficial innovations. It will
take even longer for ordinary people and the civil society organizations they
support and rely upon to absorb the nature of the platform revolution and
create appropriate institutional responses.
History shows that it took generations for Western societies to develop
effective responses to the dislocations and abuses associated with the
Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries—responses
that included the union movement, the building of a modern skills-based
educational system to prepare workers for new forms of employment, and
the funding of a social safety net to care for those who fell through the
cracks. In the same way, it will take time for contemporary societies to
figure out what they need to do to respond appropriately to the shifts in
economic, social, and political power being generated by the platform
revolution—which is why we need to begin thinking about these issues
now, as the contours of the revolution are beginning to emerge.


One inevitable by-product of dramatic technological change seems to be
hyperbole. From the popularizing of the term automation in the 1930s
(when predictions about the obsolescence of work were common) to the
dot-com and Internet booms of the 1990s and 2000s, there’s been no
shortage of enthusiasts and hucksters breathlessly describing the latest
innovations and declaring, “This changes everything!”
We hope that, in this book, we’ve provided abundant evidence to
document our belief that the platform revolution is indeed transforming our
world in a host of significant and exciting ways. But there’s one thing the
platform revolution will not change—namely, the ultimate goal that
technology, business, and the entire economic system need to serve. The
purpose of all these human constructs should be the unlocking of individual
potential and the building of a society in which everyone has the
opportunity to live a rich, fulfilling, creative, and abundant life. It’s up to all
of us—business leaders, professionals, working people, policy-makers,
educators, and ordinary citizens—to play our part in making sure that the
platform revolution brings us closer to that objective.
TAKEAWAYS FROM CHAPTER TWELVE
    Industries that are most prone to platform transformation in the near future include those
that are information-intensive, those with unscalable gatekeepers, those that are highly
fragmented, and those characterized by extreme information asymmetries.
    Industries that are less likely to be transformed by platforms in the short run include those
with high regulatory control and high failure costs as well as those that are resource-
intensive.
    It’s possible to foresee some of the specific changes that are likely to impact selected
industries in the decades ahead, including education, health care, energy, and finance.
    The platform model will continue to shape transformations in the markets for labor and
professional services as well as the operations of government.
    The burgeoning Internet of things will add a new layer of connectivity and power to the
platforms of the future, linking people and devices to one another in new value-creating
ways.
    The platform revolution will ultimately transform our world in unpredictable ways, calling
for society as a whole to develop creative, humane responses to the challenges this change
will produce.


OceanofPDF.com


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The creation of a book is a team effort to which many people contribute. A few members of our
publishing team have been particularly important to all three coauthors of Platform Revolution.
We want to thank our editorial advisor, Karl Weber, for his tremendous skill in unifying the voices
of three authors. Karl, your patience, wisdom, and experience have been essential.
We want to thank our agent, Carol Franco, for her wise counsel at every stage of this project. And
we are grateful to our editor at W. W. Norton, Brendan Curry, and to the rest of the Norton team for
their enthusiasm and belief in this book.
We would like to thank the many companies and organizations that have provided research
funding and have made their employees available to us in support of our effort to better understand
network business models. Geoff Parker and Marshall Van Alystne are grateful to organizations that
include Accenture, AT&T, British Telecom, the California ISO, Cellular South, Cisco,
Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Dun & Bradstreet, France Telecom, GE, Goldman Sachs, Haier
Group, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, IBM, Intel, the International Post Corporation, Law &
Economics Consulting Group, Mass Mutual, Microsoft, Mindtree, Mitsubishi Bank, NetApp, PIM
Interconnection, the State of New York, Pearson, Pfizer, SAP, Telecom Italia, Thomson Reuters, the
U.S. Postal Service, and the U.S. Office of the Inspector General. This book is richer for the
generosity of their support.
Sangeet Choudary would like to thank the various companies he has worked with in advisory
positions and on commissioned research, including the Centre for Global Enterprise, the INSEAD
Business School, Intuit, Yahoo, Schibsted Media, Spotify, Commonwealth Bank of Australia,
500Startups, JFDI Asia, Autodesk, Adobe, Accenture, Dun & Bradstreet, Webb Brazil, BHP Billiton,
Philips, Shutterstock, SWIFT, the iSpirit foundation, and Telkom Indonesia. All these experiences
have proven extremely valuable in building up Sangeet’s body of work on platforms.
In addition, each of the authors has a personal list of friends, colleagues, advisors, and supporters
they wish to acknowledge.
GEOFFREY G. PARKER
I thank my wife, Debra, my father, Don, and my children, Benjamin and Elizabeth, for their
wonderful support and feedback during the process of writing this book.
I thank my advisors and mentors at MIT—Arnold Barnett, Steve Connors, Richard DeNeufville,
Charles Fine, Gordon Hamilton, Richard Lester, Richard Tabors, and Daniel Whitney—for their
support, guidance, and enthusiasm. They truly opened up a new world to me.
At MIT, I was fortunate to meet a group of lifelong collaborators: Edward Anderson, Nitin
Joglekar, and Marshall Van Alstyne. I could not ask for a finer set of colleagues and friends.
