# Acknowledgments

In the process of teaching and learning about platforms, I came to meet Tom Eisenmann, who has
been a great friend and collaborator. His ideas have contributed significantly to this work.
I was also fortunate to meet our coauthor Sangeet Choudary, who has worked at and consulted
with numerous platform firms. His experience has been wonderfully complementary to my own.
I thank Erik Brynjolfsson, Andy McAfee, Dave Verrill, and the great team at the MIT Initiative on
the Digital Economy (IDE). The IDE has been instrumental in hosting the MIT Platform Summit and
providing Marshall and me with the opportunity to work with multiple companies as part of our
effort to bridge practice and academia.
Peter Evans has inspired me with his insatiable curiosity and drive to measure the growing
platform economy. I have also been fortunate to be part of a large community of like-minded scholars
who are interested in the economics of information systems, and I am grateful for the regular
interaction.
I am grateful to my colleagues at Tulane University, who have provided a sounding board for me
to test and strengthen the ideas presented in this book. I have also been fortunate to teach wonderful
students at Tulane, who have eagerly helped to refine earlier versions of this material.
I wish to acknowledge the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy, and the
Louisiana Board of Regents for their generous support of my research agenda.
Finally, I again thank Marshall, who has joined me on a nearly twenty-year odyssey to try to
understand the rules of the world we are living in and how to navigate its ever-changing waters. I
look forward to many more years of entertainment and fascination as we continue the journey.
MARSHALL W. VAN ALSTYNE
Thank you, Erik and Alexander, for your love, support, and patience while Dad worked on this book.
Thank you, Joyce, for carrying through on a project that’s finally over. Family will always matter
most.
I thank my advisors at MIT: Erik Brynjolfsson, Chris Kemerer, Stuart Madnick, Thomas Malone,
Wanda Orlikowski, and Lones Smith.  The standards you set were remarkable. I also thank the MIT
community for letting me be a part of it, for its openness, and for its joy in experimentation. There is
a reason that Open CourseWare, edX, PET scans, RSA encryption, spreadsheets, and condensed soup
sprang from people in this environment. It is one of the most grueling and at the same time one of the
best intentioned and most rewarding places anywhere.
I join Geoff in thanking the members of the great team at the MIT Initiative on the Digital
Economy, including Dave Verrill, Erik Brynjolfsson, Andy McAfee, Glenn Urban, Tommy Buzzell,
and Justin Lockenwitz. Thank you Michael Schrage for good wine and deep thoughts. You all are
where great ideas gain great influence.
Our work on platforms draws heavily on that of Tom Eisenmann and Andrei Hagiu at Harvard
Business School, whose teaching materials are excellent. Tom in particular taught me how much
theory really does need application, and his contributions as a collaborator have led to many
successful papers.
When it comes to understanding startups and social aspects of platforms, few could be better than
our coauthor Sangeet Choudary, who has worked at and consulted with numerous platform firms. His
experience is wonderful, and he could not be a better addition to our team.
Recently, Peter Evans has inspired us with his ability to build a community of platform
scholarship and deliver new data analytic insights into the behaviors of the network economy.
At Boston University, I thank the research rebels—Erol Pekoz, Stine Grodal, and Chris Dellarocas
—who meet regularly over lunch to discuss research, swap stories, and poke fun at each other’s
ideas. As head of the digital learning initiative, Chris practices what we discuss here. Paul Carlile, the


whole school and I owe you thanks for helping to create such a supportive and collaborative
academic culture. Maria Anderson and Brett Marks, thank you for making everything work.
In teaching, I owe much to my many students, especially those in IS710, IS827, and IS912, who
helped me fully cook my half-baked ideas. It’s wonderful to see so many of you start companies and
take leadership roles—please keep in touch with me as your careers blossom. Sinan Aral, a
remarkable MIT student turned faculty member, helped sharpen some of my key ideas on networks.
Students like Tushar Shanker, now at Airbnb, are the best reason to teach.
The National Science Foundation deserves special credit for helping to launch my academic career
with a CAREER Award, as well as providing numerous grants along the way via the IOC, SGER,
iCORPS, and SBIR programs.
Geoff Parker, it’s hard to imagine any of this without you. You’ve been a friend, collaborator,
drinking buddy, and sparring partner—contributing to my growth in all the ways that mattered. It’s
been almost two decades of output, but we’re just getting started. My best work has been possible
because of you. Thank you.
SANGEET PAUL CHOUDARY
First and foremost, I thank my wife, Devika, and my parents, Varu and Effie, for supporting every
decision I’ve ever taken, including the decision to quit a traditional career and devote my life’s work
to understanding how connected systems transform the world. Out of this curiosity emerged the focus
on researching platforms. 
I also thank my parents-in-law, Payal and Arun Sikka, for their enthusiasm and support at every
step of this journey. I thank my friends Yow Kin Cheong, David Dayalan, L. T. Jeyachandran, and
many others who have enthusiastically partnered on this journey with me. 
I want to especially thank my coauthors, Geoffrey Parker and Marshall Van Alstyne, for being the
best allies and partners I could ever have asked for on this journey to understanding the impact of
technology and connectivity on today’s economy. It’s been a privilege to have partnered with them in
further building the body of work that explains this field.
Finally, I am grateful to everyone who has followed my work on platforms on the Internet and
across different research and media channels, embracing the principle of connected business models
and my work on this topic as they work to transform their businesses. It is that large-scale proof of
concept—multiple businesses globally applying this work and achieving important results—that
drives me daily to build our understanding of this field further.
OceanofPDF.com


GLOSSARY
Adjacent platforms. Platforms that serve similar or overlapping user bases.
Application programming interface (API). A standardized set of routines, protocols, and tools for
building software applications that makes it easy for an outside programmer to write code that will
connect seamlessly with the platform infrastructure.
Brand effects. The power of a highly positive brand image to attract consumers and lead to rapid
growth of a business. Not to be confused with network effects.
Convex growth. See Metcalfe’s law.
Core developers. Programmers and designers who create the core platform functions that provide
value to platform participants. These developers are generally employed by the platform managers
—the brand names that are familiar to users, such as Apple, Samsung, Airbnb, Uber, and many
others. Their main job is to get the platform into user hands and to deliver value through tools and
rules that make the core interaction easy and mutually satisfying.
Core interaction. The single most important form of activity that takes place on a platform—the
exchange of value that attracts most users to the platform in the first place. Therefore, platform
design generally starts with the design of the core interaction. The core interaction involves three
key components: the participants, the value unit, and the filter. All three must be clearly identified
and carefully designed to make the core interaction as easy, attractive, and valuable to users as
possible.
Cross-side effects. In a two-sided market, network effects created by the impact of user from one
side of the market on users from the other side of the market—for example, the effects that
consumers have on producers and the effects that producers have on consumers. Cross-side effects
can be positive or negative, depending on the design of the system and the rules put in place.
Curation. The process by which a platform filters, controls, and limits the access of users to the
platform, the activities they participate in, and the connections they form with other users. When
the quality of a platform is effectively curated, users find it easy to make matches that produce
significant value for them; when curation is nonexistent or poorly handled, users find it difficult to
identify potentially valuable matches amid a flood of worthless matches.
Curation of participants. See Trust.
Data aggregators. Outside developers that enhance the matching function of the platform by adding
data from multiple sources. Under license from the platform management, they “vacuum up” data
about platform users and the interactions they engage in, which they generally resell to other
companies for purposes such as advertising placement. The platform that is the source of the data
shares a portion of the profits generated.
Enhanced access. The provision of tools that enable a producer to stand out above the crowd and be
noticed on a two-sided platform, despite an abundance of rival producers and the resulting intense
competition to attract consumer attention. Platforms that charge producers fees for better-targeted
