# Glossary

messages, more attractive presentations, or interactions with particularly valuable users are using
enhanced access as a monetization technique.
Envelopment. The process by which one platform effectively absorbs the functions—and often the
user base—of an adjacent platform.
Excess inertia. The power of network effects to slow or prevent the adoption of new, perhaps better,
technologies. When one or a few platforms are able to dominate a particular market because of the
power of network effects, they may choose to resist beneficial innovations in order to protect
themselves from the costs of change and other disruptive effects.
Feedback loop. In platforms, any pattern of interactions that serves to create a constant stream of
self-reinforcing activity. In the typical feedback loop, a flow of value units is delivered to the
participant which generates a response from him or her. If the units are relevant and interesting,
the user will be drawn to the platform repeatedly, generating a further flow of value units and
prompting more interactions. Effective feedback loops help to swell the network, increase value
creation, and enhance network effects.
Filter. An algorithmic, software-based tool used by the platform to enable the exchange of
appropriate units of information between users. A well-designed filter ensures that platform users
receive only units of information that are relevant and valuable to them; a poorly-designed filter
(or no filter at all) means users may be flooded with units of information they find irrelevant and
valueless, driving them to abandon the platform.
Frictionless entry. The ability of users to quickly and easily join a platform and begin participating
in the value creation that the platform facilitates. Frictionless entry is a key factor in enabling a
platform to grow rapidly.
Linear value chain. See Pipeline.
Liquidity. A state in which there are a minimum number of producers and consumers in a platform
marketplace and a high level of interactions taking place. When liquidity is achieved, interaction
failure is minimized, and the intent of users to interact is consistently satisfied within a reasonable
period of time. Achieving liquidity is the first and most important milestone in the life cycle of a
platform.
Market aggregation. The process whereby platforms provide centralized markets to serve widely
dispersed individuals and organizations. Market aggregation provides information and power to
platform users who formerly engaged in interactions in a haphazard fashion, often without access
to reliable or up-to-date market data.
Matching quality. The accuracy of the search algorithm and the intuitiveness of the navigation tools
offered to users as they seek other users with whom they can engage in value-creating
interactions. Matching quality is critical to delivering value and stimulating the long-term growth
and success of a platform. It is achieved through excellence in product or service curation.
Metcalfe’s law. A principle formulated by Robert Metcalfe which states that the value of a network
grows nonlinearly as the number of users of the network increases, making more connections
among users possible (a type of growth also known as convex growth). Specifically, Metcalfe’s
law posits that the value of a network with n connected users is proportional to the square of the
number of users (n2).
Multihoming. The phenomenon of users engaging in similar types of interaction on more than one
platform. A freelance professional who presents his credentials on two or more service marketing
platforms, a music fan who downloads, stores, and shares tunes on more than one music site, and
a driver who solicits rides through both Uber and Lyft all illustrate the phenomenon of
multihoming. Platform businesses seek to discourage multihoming, since it facilitates switching—
the abandonment by users of one platform in favor of another.
Network effects. The impact that the number of users of a platform has on the value created for each
user. “Positive network effects” refers to the ability of a large, well-managed platform community


to produce significant value for each user of the platform. “Negative network effects” refers to the
possibility that the growth in numbers of a poorly managed platform community can reduce the
value produced for each user.
Pipeline. The structure of a traditional (non-platform) business, in which a firm first designs a
product or service, then manufactures the product and offers it for sale or puts in place a system to
deliver the service. Finally, a customer shows up and purchases the product or service. This step-
by-step arrangement for creating and transferring value can be viewed as a kind of pipeline, with
producers at one end and consumers at the other. Also known as a linear value chain.
Platform. A business based on enabling value-creating interactions between external producers and
consumers. The platform provides an open, participative infrastructure for these interactions and
sets governance conditions for them. The platform’s overarching purpose: to consummate matches
among users and facilitate the exchange of goods, services, or social currency, thereby enabling
value creation for all participants.
Platform envelopment. The process whereby one platform effectively absorbs the functions—and
the user base—of an adjacent platform.
Price effects. The power of extremely low prices for goods or services to (temporarily) attract
consumers and lead to rapid growth of a business. Not to be confused with network effects.
Product or service curation. See Matching quality.
Re-intermediation. The process whereby platforms introduce new kinds of middlemen into markets.
Typically, re-intermediation involves replacing non-scalable and inefficient agent intermediaries
with online, often automated tools and systems that offer valuable new goods and services to
participants on both sides of the platform.
Same-side effects. In a two-sided market, network effects created by the impact of users from one
side of the market on other users from the same side of the market—for example, the effects that
consumers have on other consumers and the effects that producers have on other producers. Same-
side effects can be positive or negative, depending on the design of the system and the rules put in
place.
Sharing economy. The growing sector of the economy in which products, services, and resources are
shared among people and organizations rather than having their availability limited to one
proprietor. Often facilitated by platform businesses, sharing economy systems have the potential
to unlock hidden or untapped sources of value and to reduce waste.
Side switching. The phenomenon of platform users from one side of the platform joining the
opposite side—for example, when those who consume goods or services produced on the platform
begin to produce goods and services for others to consume. On some platforms, users engage in
side switching easily and repeatedly.
Spreadable value unit. See Value unit.
Supply economies of scale. Economic advantages driven by production efficiencies, which reduce
the unit cost of creating a product or service as the quantities produced increase. These supply
economies of scale can give the largest company in an industrial economy a cost advantage that is
extremely difficult for competitors to overcome.
Switching. The abandonment by users of one platform in favor of another.
Switching costs. The costs incurred by users when they abandon one platform in favor of another.
These may be financial costs (for example, cancellation fees) or costs in terms of time, effort, and
inconvenience (for example, the need to move information files from one platform to another).
Trust. The degree to which users of a platform feel comfortable with the level of risk associated with
engaging in interactions on the platform. Trust is achieved through excellent curation of
participants in the platform.
Value unit. The most basic item of value that may be exchanged by users on a platform—for
example, a photo on Instagram, a video on YouTube, a craft product on Etsy, or a freelance project


on Upwork. When a value unit is spreadable, it can be easily distributed by users both on and off
the platform, thereby helping to fuel viral growth.
Viral growth. A pull-based process that encourages users to spread the word about the platform to
other potential users. When users themselves encourage others to join the network, the network
becomes the driver of its own growth.
Virality. The tendency of an idea or brand to be circulated rapidly and widely from one Internet user
to another. Virality can attract people to a network, but network effects keep them there. Virality is
about stimulating growth among people off-platform, while network effects are about increasing
value among people on-platform.
Winner-take-all market. A market in which specific forces conspire to encourage users to gravitate
toward one platform and to abandon others. The four forces that most often characterize winner-
take-all markets are supply economies of scale, strong network effects, high multihoming or
switching costs, and lack of niche specialization.
OceanofPDF.com


NOTES
CHAPTER 1: TODAY
1.    Bill Gurley, “A Rake Too Far: Optimal Platform Pricing Strategy,” Above the Crowd, April 18,
2013, http://abovethecrowd.com/2013/04/18/a-rake-too-far-optimal-platformpricing-strategy/.
2.    Thomas Steenburgh, Jill Avery, and Naseem Dahod, “HubSpot: Inbound Marketing and Web
2.0,” Harvard Business School Case 509-049, 2009.
3.        Tom Goodwin, “The Battle Is for the Customer Interface,” TechCrunch, March 3, 2015,
http://techcrunch.com/2015/03/03/in-the-age-of-disintermediation-the-battle-is-all-for-the-
customer-interface/.
CHAPTER 2: NETWORK EFFECTS
1.    Aswath Damodaran, “Uber Isn’t Worth $17 Billion,” FiveThirty-
EightEconomics, June 18, 2014, http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/uber-isnt-worth-17-billion/.
2.    Bill Gurley, “How to Miss By a Mile: An Alternative Look at Uber’s Potential Market Size,”
Above the Crowd, July 11, 2014, http://abovethecrowd.com/2014/07/11/how-to-miss-by-a-
mile-an-alternative-look-at-ubers-potential-market-size/.
3.    W. Brian Arthur, “Increasing Returns and the Two Worlds of Business,” Harvard Business
Review 74, no. 4 (1996): 100–9; Michael L. Katz and Carl Shapiro, “Network Externalities,
Competition, and Compatibility,” American Economic Review 75, no. 3 (1985): 424–40.
4.        Carl Shapiro and Hal R. Varian, Information Rules (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business
School Press, 1999).
5.    Thomas Eisenmann, Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall Van Alstyne, “Strategies for Two-Sided
Markets,” Harvard Business Review 84, no. 10 (2006): 92–101.
6.    Sarah Needleman and Angus Loten, “When Freemium Fails,” Wall Street Journal, August 22,
2012.
7.    Saul Hansell, “No More Giveaway Computers. Free-PC To Be Bought by eMachines,” New
York Times, November 30, 1999, http://www.nytimes.com/1999/11/30/business/no-more-
giveaway-computers-free-pc-to-be-bought-by-emachines.html.
8.        Dashiell Bennett, “8 Dot-Coms That Spent Millions on Super Bowl Ads and No Longer
Exist,” Business Insider, February 2, 2011, http://www.businessinsider.com/8-dot-com-super-
bowl-advertisers-that-no-longer-exist-2011-2.
9.    “The Greatest Defunct Web Sites and Dotcom Disasters,” Crave, cnet
.co.uk, 
June 
5, 
2008,
http://web.archive.org/web/20080607211840/http://crave.cnet.co.uk/0,39029477,49296926-
6,00.htm.
