

---PAGE BREAK---

AUTHOR’S NOTE
About ten miles north of Stonehenge, in the county of Wiltshire,
England, there exists another monument to prehistoric times—
another message from the past coded in sandstone and chalk pillars.
This site is called Avebury. It lies near a four-thousand-year-old path
called the Ridgeway, which may be the oldest road in Europe. If you
walk that path yourself, down the stone-lined avenue to the stone
circle, and look east toward the morning sky, you will see a view
like the cover of this book. A French artist named Paul Malecarnet
painted the three stones, and made the middle stone, in the
foreground, into a portal to an unexpected bright sky.
I have looked at this painting many times, starting with its first
exhibition, in 1986, by the Francis Kyle Gallery, and now in my
home. I cannot see it without thinking of the stones as three
separate messages from the past, three separate views of possible
futures. There, in the middle, is a future of hope, one which we
might not have dared see unless we looked for it. We do not expect
to see it; indeed, we do not understand it. But it changes our world.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

A CURRENCY PAPERBACK
PUBLISHED BY DOUBLEDAY
a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell
Publishing Group, Inc.
1540 Broadway, New York, New York 10036
CURRENCY and DOUBLEDAY are trademarks of Doubleday, a division of Bantam Doubleday
Dell Publishing Group, Inc. The Art of the Long View was originally published in hardcover
by Currency Doubleday, a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, Inc., in
1991.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schwartz, Peter.
The art of the long view: paths to strategic insight for yourself and your company / Peter
Schwartz.
p.  cm.
eISBN: 978-0-307-81611-5
1. Strategic planning.  2. Business forecasting. 3. Organizational change—Management.   I.
Title.
HD30.28.S316 1996
658.4’012—dc20 95-42080
Copyright © 1991, 1996 by Peter Schwartz
All Rights Reserved
v3.1
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

CONTENTS
Cover
Author’s Note
Title Page
Copyright
Acknowledgments
Dedication
Introduction to the Paperback Edition: The Strategic Conversation—
Broadening The Long View
The Pathfinder’s Tale
The Smith & Hawken Story: The Process of Scenario-Building
The Scenario-Building Animal
Uncovering the Decision
Information-Hunting and -Gathering
Creating Scenario Building Blocks
Anatomy of a New Driving Force: The Global Teenager
Composing a Plot
The World in 2005: Three Scenarios
Rehearsing the Future
Epilogue: To My Newborn Son
Afterword: The Value of a Strategic Conversation
User’s Guide: How to Hold a Strategic Conversation


---PAGE BREAK---

Appendix: Steps to Developing Scenarios
Endnotes
Scenario Planning: Select Bibliography
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book is my attempt to make available to others what I have
learned in the course of the last two decades about the art of the long
view. It is based on the opportunity I have had to work with many
colleagues and friends in a variety of settings in research institutes,
giant multinational companies, and most recently in a small
company I helped to start. Along the way I had the privilege of
having many fine teachers. Among the most important and inspiring
have been Pierre Wack, Jay Ogilvy, Willis Harman, Arie de Geus,
Napier Collyns, Kees van der Heijden, Don Michael, and Stewart
Brand. Many others provided insight, guidance, and support. These
include Arnold Mitchell, Peter Shoup, David Miller, Ted Newland,
Bo Ekman, Peter Gabriel, Michael Porter, O. W. Markley, Duane
Elgin, Tom Mandel, Rana Nanjappa, Mary Catherine Bateson,
Francisco Varela, Peter Warshall, Alexander Singer, Johan Nic Vold,
Danny Hillis, Dan Yergin, Amory Lovins, Lee Schipper, Paul
Hawken, Rusty Schweickart, Lo van Wachem, Steve Barnett, Floyd
Hauffe, and John Jennings. My colleagues and friends in Global
Business Network have been especially helpful and patient,
providing both insight and encouragement throughout the
interminable process: Kay Swanson, Lawrence Wilkinson, Danica
Remy, Jim Smith, Roberta Gelt, Karen Greenwood, Ken Hamik,
Stephen Cass, Yana Valachovic, Nancy Murphy, Eric Best, and Lynn
Carruthers.
The ideas and methods in this book owe a great deal to the senior
management of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group. Our success in
planning had much more to do with their exceptional capabilities as
managers than with any “magic” from a new technique. They had
the wisdom to develop these tools and the ability to use them with
nuance and good judgment.


---PAGE BREAK---

If this book is readable and useful it is due to the considerable
talents, persistence, and support of three people: Harriet Rubin, my
editor at Doubleday, whose consistent insights into the mind of the
reader gave this book its form and guided its evolution, and Howard
Rheingold and Art Kleiner, the two writers whose labors provided
words for my often inarticulate ideas.
My most important teacher, my toughest critic, and my strongest
supporter was my wife, Cathleen, who was remarkably patient
during the seemingly endless gestation of this modest work while
she had a briefer gestation of a far greater work, our son Benjamin.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

For my mother and father,
whose lives inspired mine.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTION TO THE PAPERBACK EDITION: THE
STRATEGIC CONVERSATION—BROADENING THE LONG
VIEW
            The book in your hands presents the art of “taking the
long view” of decisions that need to be made today. As you (or your
organization, or your enterprise) prepare to invest or pull back
investment, to engage yourself or disengage, to establish or close
down a project, to move into new parts of the world or establish
new relationships, how can you think best about the impact of your
actions? How can you see, most clearly, the environment in which
your actions will take place, and how those actions will fit with (or
stand against) the prevailing forces, trends, attitudes and influences?
I wrote this book, initially, to show managers, business readers,
and individuals how to begin using a method for investigating
important decisions, a method that I and my close associates have
found extremely useful for more than twenty years. And yet, this
method is overlooked by most planning processes, usually because
(although it includes analysis) it’s not “quantitative enough.” This
method is the scenario—a vehicle, as my colleague Napier Collyns
says, for an “imaginative leap into the future.”
In a scenario process, managers invent and then consider, in
depth, several varied stories of equally plausible futures. The stories
are carefully researched, full of relevant detail, oriented toward real-
life decisions, and designed (one hopes) to bring forward surprises
and unexpected leaps of understanding. Together, the scenarios
comprise a tool for ordering one’s perceptions. The point is not to
“pick one preferred future,” and hope for it to come to pass (or,
even, work to create it—though there are some situations where
acting to create a better future is a useful function of scenarios). Nor


---PAGE BREAK---

is the point to find the most probable future and adapt to it or “bet
the company” on it. Rather, the point is to make strategic decisions
that will be sound for all plausible futures. No matter what future
takes place, you are much more likely to be ready for it—and
influential in it—if you have thought seriously about scenarios.
This book will take you through the scenario process from
beginning to end. We’ll begin by learning how to articulate and
isolate key decisions, those most relevant to your company. We’ll
then look at timing—Are your concerns likely to be illuminated by
scenarios set five years into the future? Or ten years, and even
more? The next step is in-depth research, including research in
places you might not ordinarily think of looking (such as “fringe”
publications, 
conversations 
with 
“remarkable 
people,” 
and
challenging environments). We will then look closely at driving
forces, key factors that will determine (or “drive”) the outcome of
the stories you are building. Some of these forces, you will decide,
are predetermined: you already know how they will play out in your
chosen time frame. Other forces are critical uncertainties, pivotal
elements that will act unpredictably, and thus might influence your
future. You will learn that as you talk, in depth, about the
significance of each of the driving forces, plots develop into stories,
and scenarios take shape. The most essential step in the process
comes at the end: Rehearsing the implications. Act out your options
in each of the future worlds and refine your understanding of all of
them.
The scenario process provides a context for thinking clearly about
the impossibly complex array of factors that affect any decision. It
gives managers a common language for talking about these factors,
starting with a series of “what-if” stories, each with a different
name. Then it encourages participants to think about each of them
as if it had already come to pass. “What if our worst nightmare took
place, and our primary business became obsolete?” Or, “What if our
most desired future came to pass? What unexpected challenges
would it present to us?” Or, “What if a completely unexpected series
of events changed the structure of our industry? Would we be
overwhelmed, or would we see the opportunities?” In the early


---PAGE BREAK---

1980s oil companies ought to have asked themselves, “What if the
price of oil collapses?” While movie studios ought to have asked
themselves, “What if the VCR creates new video-rental markets
rather than killing off the movie theater [as they feared]?”
Thinking through these stories, and talking in depth about their
implications, brings each person’s unspoken assumptions about the
future to the surface. Scenarios are thus the most powerful vehicles I
know for challenging our “mental models” about the world, and
lifting the “blinders” that limit our creativity and resourcefulness.
Organizations that have instilled the scenario practice into their
deliberations—including the Royal Dutch/Shell Group, Pacific Gas
and Electric, Motorola, and my own company, Global Business
Network—have 
managed 
to 
anticipate 
difficult 
times 
and
opportunities that have caught managers of other organizations
unawares.
In the chapters that lie ahead, you will find detailed discussions of
these uses of the scenario method. Now that five years have passed
since publication of The Art of the Long View, I realize that the
scenario method also does much more. It can be used as a building
block for designing strategic conversations—conversations that, in
themselves, lead to continuous organizational learning about key
decisions and priorities.
Thus, when Doubleday’s editors asked me to create a “User’s
Guide” for the paperback edition, I saw that invitation as an
opportunity to expand “the art of the long view” to include the
practice of strategic conversation. You’ll learn how to use the
scenario method in the main text of the book, and you’ll find more
information on the strategic conversation—and practical guidelines
for starting a conversation—in the Afterword and User’s Guide.
Once you understand the value of the strategic conversation’s
balance between formality and informality, your scenario work will
take on another dimension. It will no longer be project-specific,
oriented to particular events. It will be part of an ongoing
organizational learning process, robust and flexible enough to keep
the organization from being blindsided by unexpected events, but
intimately interwoven with the organization’s existing practices and


---PAGE BREAK---

relationships. Experience has shown that looking into the future is
most useful when it is the beginning, not the end, of a significant
conversation. The most successful managers, I believe, are those
who will see their fundamental work not as making decisions, but as
making mutual understanding.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

All the notions we thought solid, all the values of civilized life, all that
made for stability in international relations, all that made for regularity
in the economy  …  in a word, all that tended happily to limit the
uncertainty of the morrow, all that gave nations and individuals some
confidence in the morrow … all this seems badly compromised. I have
consulted all the augurs I could find, of every species, and I have heard
only vague words, contradictory prophecies, curiously feeble assurances.
Never has humanity combined so much power with so much disorder, so
much anxiety with so many playthings, so much knowledge with so much
uncertainty.
—Paul Valéry, “Historical Fact” (1932)
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

THE PATHFINDER’S TALE
            This book is about freedom. In western societies, people
are ostensibly free, but they feel constrained by the unpredictability
of events. Every year, every decade, we are surprised by social or
technological upheavals that appear suddenly, surprisingly. How
can people, businesses, and institutions plan for the future when
they do not know what tomorrow will bring? A deep and realistic
confidence is built on insight into the possible outcomes of our
choices. In this unpredictable context, freedom is the ability to act
both with confidence and a full knowledge of uncertainty.
To act with confidence, one must be willing to look ahead and
consider uncertainties: “What challenges could the world present
me? How might others respond to my actions?” Rather than asking
such questions, too many people react to uncertainty with denial.
They take an unconsciously deterministic view of events. They take
it for granted that some things just can’t and won’t happen; for
example, “oil prices won’t collapse,” or “the Cold War can’t ever
end.” Not having tried to foresee surprising events, they are at a loss
for ways to act when upheaval continues. They create blind spots
for themselves.
Scenarios are a tool for helping us to take a long view in a world
of great uncertainty. The name comes from the theatrical term
“scenario”—the script for a film or play. Scenarios are stories about
the way the world might turn out tomorrow, stories that can help us
recognize and adapt to changing aspects of our present
environment. They form a method for articulating the different
pathways that might exist for you tomorrow, and finding your
appropriate movements down each of those possible paths. Scenario
planning is about making choices today with an understanding of
how they might turn out.


---PAGE BREAK---

In this context the precise definition of “scenario” is: a tool for
ordering one’s perceptions about alternative future environments in
which one’s decisions might be played out. Alternatively: a set of
organized ways for us to dream effectively about our own future.
Concretely, they resemble a set of stories, either written out or often
spoken. However, these stories are built around carefully
constructed “plots” that make the significant elements of the world
scene stand out boldly. This approach is more a disciplined way of
thinking than a formal methodology.
I’ve used scenarios with some of the world’s largest businesses
and government institutions, in starting a small business, and I’ve
used them to make personal decisions about my diet and health.
You could use scenarios to plan a small business, to choose an
education, to look for a job, to judge an investment, or even to
contemplate marriage. Often, scenarios can help people make better
decisions—usually difficult decisions—that they would otherwise
miss or deny.
Consider, for example, the crisis overtaking the advertising
industry. Beginning in the early 1980s, anyone could have looked
ahead and seen the growing popularity of new communication
technologies: cable TV, videocassettes, and computer-based media
such as electronic mail and the Internet. This technological change
was an irrevocable force, certain to shock the media industries by
draining audiences—and then ad revenues—from traditional
network television. No one could say exactly when the shock would
come, or how it would play out, but it was clear that, within a
matter of years, ad agencies would find their business either
radically changed, or severely diminished—as had the U.S. steel
industry in the early eighties, for example.
While the changes were certain, their exact form was unclear.
How strong would be the influence of companies such as Disney,
which refused to allow advertising on prerecorded video tapes?
Which consumers would be most willing to use new forms of media
first? What regulatory pressures would prevent telephone companies
from entering the business of distributing film and television by
wire? What forms could advertising take ten years hence, and how


---PAGE BREAK---

could agencies make money at it? What would be the effect of
suddenly popular new communications media, such as fax
machines? A set of scenarios would have described the range of
worlds that might emerge by looking carefully at important
elements of the world in the early 1980s.
In 1987, the shock began to hit. Ad agency profits began to
decline, people found themselves laid off, and more and more
agencies had to haggle over fees with their clients. Most ad people
assumed the crisis was temporary; that it would be followed by a
new status quo. Today, ad agencies are in yet deeper economic
trouble, still hoping for a turnaround, and still refusing to look at
the opportunities—as well as the pitfalls—in the rise of new
technology. I know this because, along with several other people, I
began work in the late 1980s on a set of scenarios about the effects
of new technologies on the media business. We found clients from
every conceivable segment: a broadcast network, a telephone
company, a movie production studio, and a consumer products
company that places major advertisements. All but one of the
advertising agencies we invited to join us in this study of its own
future weren’t interested. To judge from our conversations with
them, they are afraid of what they might learn, as if the cost of
ignorance were smaller.
Scenarios are not predictions. It is simply not possible to predict
the future with certainty. An old Arab proverb says that, “he who
predicts the future lies even if he tells the truth.” Rather, scenarios
are vehicles for helping people learn. Unlike traditional business
forecasting or market research, they present alternative images of
the future; they do not merely extrapolate the trends of the present.
One common trend, for instance, is the U.S. birthrate. In the early
1970s, it hovered around 3 million births per year; forecasters at the
U.S. Census Bureau projected that this “trend” would continue
forever. Schools, which had been rushed into construction during
the baby boom of the fifties and early sixties, were now closed down
and sold. Policymakers did not consider that the birthrate might rise
again suddenly. But a scenario might have considered the likelihood
that original baby boom children, reaching their late thirties, would


---PAGE BREAK---

suddenly have children of their own. In 1979, the U.S. birthrate
began to rise; it is now over the 4 million per annum of the fifties.
Demographers also failed to anticipate that immigration would
accelerate. To keep up with demand, the state of California (which
had been closing schools in the late 1970s) must build a classroom
every day for the next seven years.
Often, managers prefer the illusion of certainty to understanding
risks and realities. If the forecaster fails in his task, how can the
manager be blamed? But in the long run, this denial of uncertainty
sets the stage for surprises, shattering the manager’s confidence in
his or her ability to look ahead. Scenarios allow a manager to say, “I
am prepared for whatever happens.” It is this ability to act with a
knowledgeable sense of risk and reward that separates both the business
executive and the wise individual from a bureaucrat or a gambler.
The Explorations of Pierre Wack
Scenarios first emerged following World War II, as a method for
military planning. The U.S. Air Force tried to imagine what its
opponents might do, and to prepare alternative strategies. In the
1960s, Herman Kahn, who had been part of the Air Force effort,
refined scenarios as a tool for business prognostication. He became
America’s top futurist, predicting the inevitability of growth and
prosperity. But scenarios reached a new dimension in the early
1970s, with the work of Pierre Wack, who was a planner in the
London offices of Royal Dutch/Shell, the international oil enterprise,
in a newly formed department called Group Planning.
Pierre and other planners at Royal Dutch/Shell (notably his
colleague Ted Newland) were looking for events that might affect
the price of oil, which had been more or less steady since World
War II. Oil was, in fact, seen as a strategic commodity; consuming
nations would do what they could to keep the price low, since the
prosperity of their economies depended on oil. But there were


---PAGE BREAK---

several significant events in the air. First, the United States was
beginning to exhaust its oil reserves. Meanwhile, American demand
for oil was steadily rising. And the emerging Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries was showing signs of flexing its
political muscle. Most of these countries were Islamic, and they
bitterly resented Western support of Israel after the 1967 six-day
Arab-Israeli war.
Looking closely at the situation, Pierre and Ted realized that
Arabs could demand much higher prices for their oil. There was
every reason that they would. The only uncertainty was when. One
could not know for sure, but it seemed likely to happen before 1975,
when old oil price agreements were due to be renegotiated. They
wrote up two sets of scenarios—each a complete set of stories about
the future, with tables of projected price figures. One story
presented the conventional wisdom at Royal Dutch/Shell: somehow,
the oil price would stay stable. In order for that to happen, a miracle
would have to occur; new oil fields, for instance, might have to
appear in non-Arab countries. The second scenario looked at the
more plausible future—an oil price crisis sparked by OPEC. Shell’s
directors listened carefully as Pierre presented these two scenarios.
The directors understood the implications: they realized that they
might have to change their business drastically.
Pierre waited for a change in behavior at Royal Dutch/Shell; but
no change in behavior came. That’s when he developed his
breakthrough: scenarios, as he later put it, should be “more than
water on a stone.” To be truly effective, they had to “change our
managers’ view of reality.”
In this new type of scenario, there were no more simple tales of
possible futures. Instead, Pierre described the full ramifications of
possible oil price shocks. He tried to make people feel those shocks.
“Prepare!” he told oil refiners and marketers. “You are about to
become a low-growth industry.” He warned the drillers and
explorers who sought new oil to get ready for the possibility that
OPEC countries would take over their oil fields. Most importantly,
Pierre vividly pointed to the forces in the world, and what sorts of


---PAGE BREAK---

influences those forces had to have. He helped managers imagine
the decisions they might have to make as a result.
And he was just in time. In October 1973, after the “Yom Kippur”
war in the Middle East, there was an oil price shock. The “energy
crisis” burst upon the world. Of the major oil companies, only Shell
was prepared emotionally for the change. The company’s executives
responded quickly. During the following years, Shell’s fortunes rose.
From one of the weaker of the “Seven Sisters,” the seven largest
global oil companies, it became one of the two largest and,
arguably, the most profitable. Pierre was no longer concerned with
prognostication; his concern was the mind-set of decision-makers. It
was no accident that his 1985 articles on scenarios in the Harvard
Business Review were titled, “The Gentle Art of Reperceiving,” rather
than “How to Predict the Future.” To operate in an uncertain world,
people needed to be able to reperceive—to question their
assumptions about the way the world works, so that they could see
the world more clearly. The purpose of scenarios is to help yourself
change your view of reality—to match it up more closely with
reality as it is, and reality as it is going to be.
The end result, however, is not an accurate picture of tomorrow, but
better decisions about the future. The planner and the executive are
partners in taking a long view. Thus, while Pierre Wack’s seminal
role is at the heart of this story, it is thoughtful and farsighted Shell
executives who invited him into that role in the first place, provided
him with the resources he needed, and paid him the compliment of
listening to him and taking him seriously. Surrounding Pierre was
an exceptionally able team, including Ted Newland and Napier
Collyns, who were critical to the success of the scenario process. In
this book I will focus more on the role of those whose day-to-day
activities lead them to spend time taking a long view. The real value
comes from the interaction with those who must decide and act.
Pierre Wack was not interested in predicting the future. His goal
was the liberation of people’s insights. His methods were the
inspiration for the art of the long view.


---PAGE BREAK---

The Personal Future
I have been a professional builder and user of scenarios since the
early 1970s, when I began working as a futurist for a California
think tank called Stanford Research Institute (now called SRI
International). When Pierre Wack first came to visit SRI in 1975, I
was a practitioner of the “Herman Kahn” school. I had not yet
thought about changing mind-sets or reperceiving the world.
Nonetheless, I knew Pierre by reputation: he was the man who had
anticipated the oil price crisis, when apparently nobody else had. He
was in charge of thinking about the future at one of the largest
companies in the world.
At Shell, Pierre had come to believe that if you wanted to see the
future you could not go to conventional sources of information.
Everyone else would know them as well and thus you would have
no unique advantage. You had to seek out truly unusual people who
had their finger on the pulse of change, who could see significant
but surprising forces for change. These people would be found in
very different walks of life, all over the world. He had come to SRI
at the invitation of two such “remarkable” people—Willis Harman,
who had started the futures group at SRI and had been pioneering
more intuitive approaches to thinking ahead, and Arnold Mitchell,
who was in the process of developing the SRI Values and Lifestyles
Program, a project for classifying segments of the public according
to deeper characteristics than simply age and location.
Pierre came into my office after Willis mentioned a study we had
done for the Environmental Protection Agency—on the future of
environmental issues. Pierre was a mysterious, elusive Frenchman,
almost oriental in appearance. I talked with him for about twenty
minutes, describing my work with scenarios; we were still just
describing possible futures and had not made the leap to influencing
decision-makers’ mind-sets. Nonetheless, a few days later, I received
a telex from London: “Would you leave SRI for two years and join
our team at Shell?” I demurred—one of the few decisions in my life


---PAGE BREAK---

that I’ve regretted. But I gradually began to work with him,
performing studies for Shell, learning the art and method of Pierre’s
approach.
In 1982, I was offered another opportunity to join Royal
Dutch/Shell’s Group Planning—this time, as Pierre’s replacement.
He was retiring. I would be working instead with Arie de Geus, the
coordinator of Group Planning, who was pursuing his own set of
ideas about organizational learning. I spent five years at Shell; then,
in 1987, I took the plunge as an entrepreneur starting, with a few
friends, a new style of organization called Global Business Network,
which brings together people from many different fields to help
companies gain insight into the future. This book is based upon
what I learned along the way about how to take the long view.
In the early 1970s, the most significant question a futurist could
answer (I felt) involved a political vision: “What is a realistic goal
for a better future?” The conventional political answers to this
question when I first asked it, in the early 1970s, seemed
implausible or undesirable. The right offered wealth at a high social
price; a small proportion of the population could live at a very high
standard, while the rest of the world’s environment deteriorated.
The left promised a future of forced equality, planned and managed
by “experts.” But even before communism collapsed in Eastern
Europe, it was possible to see that central planning would fail to
meet human spiritual and psychological needs, let alone physical
needs.
There is a hunger for another set of visions of a possible society.
We know that prosperity is not inevitable: the economic mistakes of
the late sixties and seventies led to the slow growth and volatility
that followed. Moreover, as environmental problems have grown in
seriousness, people have also become increasingly aware of the
long-term costs of short-term wealth. Concerns about drugs and
crime are the inevitable outcome of failing to meet the needs of
society’s most desperate people. The celebrated collapse of
communism and the end of the post-war political order have left a
void which could be filled, perhaps, by a major war.


---PAGE BREAK---

I know many people who are deeply pessimistic about the future;
even people who are well known and financially secure, people with
loving families, people who live in the wealthiest countries in the
world. To them, the future of the world has taken the image of
Manila, a truly unlivable city today: crowded, poor, rife with crime
and abandoned hope. But I am personally optimistic: I believe that a
better political vision is emerging. Scenarios help make that
possible; for one thing, they help people keep their visions of the
future realistic. For another, they permit everyone to envision his or
her own. I will not describe my future to you in this book; I will
show you how to see yours.
For in the end, every scenario is personal. I have been mulling
over the findings about a “human growth hormone”—a drug which,
as reported in the New York Times on July 7, 1990, appears to
reverse the effects of aging in people past middle age. The following
day, the Times ran an editorial: “This is not the fountain of youth,” it
said, in effect. “It’s not that big a deal.” The Times had written a
similar editorial back in October 1903, criticizing early efforts to
build heavier-than-air flying machines. The technology, they said,
was theoretically impossible. Two months later, the Wright Brothers
launched their plane at Kitty Hawk.
If this growth hormone works without major side effects, it could
have 
dramatic 
global 
effects. 
Consider, 
for 
instance, 
the
demographic effect: suppose the average United States life span
changes from 72 to 100. We have already seen that amount of life
span increase—30 years—since the turn of the twentieth century.
Now the life span ceiling might rise to 150. There would be large
numbers of people at 110, fewer at 120, and an equivalent number
of 100-year-olds to those who are 70 today.
It sounds like science fiction, but I take the idea of the growth
hormone seriously because I have followed news about genetic
engineering since the early 1980s; this news report fits well with
early intimations I saw that such a hormone could exist.
Nonetheless, I do not say, even to myself, that such a hormone will
exist. I am willing to admit only that it could—and that it would be
wise to think about its ramifications in advance. The implications


---PAGE BREAK---

are profound. Population forecasts would be immediately made
wrong; demographic projections depend on the birthrate and on
average life spans (the death rate). If those assumptions are off by
30 percent, it could mean a population growth curve rising
exponentially from previous projections. If the hormone extends the
childbearing age for women, it could dramatically increase the
birthrate as well.
If the hormone appears first in wealthy countries, those that use
more natural resources, it could accelerate environmental disaster.
Conversely, it could increase pressure for environmental quality.
The long-term consequences of the greenhouse effect would be a
problem not just for the next generation, but for ourselves. We
would be our own posterity. People will want better health, because
the hormone does not eliminate vulnerability to disease, and they
will now care about making their livers, their lungs, and their hearts
last longer. Few will want to spend their last fifty years in a
wheelchair. Pressure to cure Alzheimer’s disease will increase. The
existence of the growth hormone will spur some people to
investigate long-term health insurance; they’ll need to know where
to get it if the drug becomes available.
But the most important effects of the growth hormone, for me,
concern my own life. My wife Cathleen and I, both in our forties,
recently had our first child. Amid our joy, there’s a small sadness:
“When my son is 15, I’ll be 59; when he’s 20, I’ll be 64.” But if I
knew I would live to 120, being 60 would seem comparatively
young. “When my son’s 60, I’ll be 104. Big deal!”
Many policymakers would dismiss the growth hormone as a
source of idle speculation. They could easily be caught unawares by
its effects, as they were by the danger of global warming, which was
first brought to public attention in the early 1970s. Global warming
is another issue that takes its meaning from the context of your own
life. If you’re the president of an automobile or energy company, it
might mean dramatic extra expenses, and equally dramatic
marketing and research opportunities. If you’re a student, it could
mean different choices in what form of education to pursue. If


---PAGE BREAK---

you’re starting a family, it could mean choosing a different
community to live in.
I don’t mean to suggest that you spend all your waking hours
considering arcane possibilities. The trick is finding those
possibilities to consider which are significant. As Paul Valéry
suggested (in a 1944 essay), the unpredictability of the world has
made this sort of practice an imperative, even in daily life:
Unpredictability in every field is the result of the conquest of the
whole of the present world by scientific power. This invasion by
active knowledge tends to transform man’s environment and man
himself—to what extent, with what risks, what deviations from the
basic conditions of existence and of the preservation of life we
simply do not know. Life has become, in short, the object of an
experiment of which we can say only one thing—that it tends to
estrange us more and more from what we were, or what we think
we are, and that it is leading us … we do not know, and can by no
means imagine, where.
Not just our livelihoods, but our souls are endangered—unless we
learn to distinguish the significant aspects of the future. The
scenario method works in this respect. It is specifically based on our
own personal urgencies (or on a company’s institutional urgencies).
It uses our individual needs as a filter. But unlike Valéry my
experience says that it is possible to study and imagine where we
may be headed. By imagining where we are going, we reduce this
complexity, this unpredictability which (as Valéry saw) encroaches
upon our lives.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

THE SMITH & HAWKEN STORY: THE PROCESS OF
SCENARIO-BUILDING
            Starting a small business, particularly an innovative one,
involves most of the same critical long-term questions as starting a
new venture in a large company. Though scenarios have been used
mostly by huge companies such as Shell and AT&T, small businesses
are even more vulnerable to the kinds of surprises and uncertainties
that often overwhelm the plans of giants. What will future
customers want? What will happen to costs, to technology, to
distribution systems, and so on. Beginning in 1977 I was involved
with a few friends who were starting a small business. Working
together as a team we used scenarios to think about how the
business environment might develop for a fledgling mail-order
garden tool company such as Smith & Hawken.
The business began with a real need: better garden tools. The
company actually had its roots in a nonprofit organization, Ecology
Action, led by John Jeavons. In the United States, they were actively
promoting an old European method of organic gardening called the
French Intensive Method. This method involved deep and hard
digging, but poorly made American tools tended to break easily
under the stress. Fortunately, Allen Chadwicke, the Englishman who
had introduced the method to Ecology Action, also knew that in his
home country, a land of serious gardeners, you could find good tools
from a well-established toolmaker known as Bulldog Tools. But how
should they make them available in the United States? Ecology
Action, as a nonprofit organization, was not set up to become a
garden tool importer and retailer. An earlier commercial venture in
Ohio with Bulldog Tools had already failed.
Fortunately, a close friend, Paul Hawken, was on the board of
Ecology Action. He agreed, somewhat reluctantly, to start a business


---PAGE BREAK---

to import and sell the tools in the United States. Paul quickly drew
in our friend Dave Smith, the manager of a local food cooperative in
Menlo Park, California. Paul had a varied background: he had
founded the Erewhon natural foods distribution company, and
subsequently written a best-selling book, The Magic of Findhorn,
about a remarkable commune in the north of Scotland. Paul and I
were on the board of the Portola Institute together, where he had
helped another nonprofit with a successful business. Paul had also
worked with us at SRI International, helping to write scenarios.
A small group of us added our money to the money Paul invested
and I went off to England with a $25,000 check. Claringdon Forge,
which made tools for Bulldog, is located in Wigan, one of the old
British industrial centers. I toured the place. The fellow who made
the forks was working on the same forge his father had worked, as
had his grandfather before him, during the Industrial Revolution.
The fellow who selected the wood for the handles hit the white
American ash rods on a block of wood and listened to the sound. He
had been doing that for nearly fifty years. He had been breaking in
his successor for the past ten years. I went to the head of their
export business, put our check on the table, and said we were
willing to pay in advance and that if we could sell the first
shipment, we wanted the North American rights. He told me that
two other people had tried the same scheme and failed because they
did not know how to market such high-priced products in the
United States, but neither of them had offered to pay in advance. So
he took us up on the offer.
Smith & Hawken received the first container of tools, drew up a
modest catalogue, and sold most everything. The second catalogue
was bigger and more beautiful; the third won design awards. And
the company took off. Smith & Hawken sold two hundred thousand
dollars the first year, reached a million dollars in annual sales
within three years, and grew to 10 million dollars annually within
five years.
During the formative stages of Smith & Hawken, Paul and I were
engaged in an intensive discussion on what the scenarios we were
developing might tell us about the future of a small mail-order high-


---PAGE BREAK---

quality garden tool business. In the late seventies, a time of great
economic turbulence, we were seeing a very high level of
uncertainty. What would make sense for Smith & Hawken in any of
the wide range of possibilities five or ten years in the future? Having
begun the business it now became incumbent upon us to think more
deeply about where we were really headed.
We had one main thing to investigate: the likeliest human needs
during the 1980s and 1990s. Just gathering the background data for
such a question would have required exhaustive amounts of reading:
everything from economic market projections to daily newspaper
reports. Fortunately, I had asked some of the same questions a few
years earlier, in scenarios for the Weyerhaeuser lumber company.
They, too, were thinking about entering potential new businesses.
We had noticed several intriguing trends: for one thing, more
consumers were demanding higher-quality goods and services.
Products with planned obsolescence built in—American-made
appliances, for instance—were suffering from rapidly dropping
sales.
These new customers were, by and large, baby boom customers—
Americans who had come of age in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
In the mid-seventies Paul and I could be sure of their numbers
because all the adults of the eighties and nineties had already been
born (allowing for some uncertainty due to immigration). We, of
course, were members of the same group. We had an intuitive feel
for their needs and desires. We assumed that the uniqueness of that
group’s tastes would remain, only grow and mature. It would be the
major factor behind the success of any business we started. But
there were many things we couldn’t know for sure. For instance, we
did not know what policies a Republican presidential administration
would institute. Nor did we know the future of the global economy.
The Smith & Hawken Scenarios


---PAGE BREAK---

Scenarios often (but not always) seem to fall into three groups:
more of the same, but better; worse (decay and depression); and
different but better (fundamental change). The Weyerhaeuser
scenarios had fit that pattern. There were three very different
possible images of the American economy in the 1980s:
•  One image was a world of high economic growth and increasing
wealth, in which young people (the maturing baby boom) made a
lot of money, bought houses, and spent money on those houses. It
was a world in which consumption and materialism were driving
forces. Social problems would emerge, but governments and
businesses would always be able to hire experts with the right
technologies to solve them; meanwhile, individuals would act
primarily for themselves. We called this the “Official Future.”
Instinctively, we felt it was unlikely. Back then, our friends assumed
that some form of collapse was imminent. They saw Volkswagen
Beetles as the cars of the immediate future—not BMWs.
Nonetheless, we considered this future carefully, because one
always has to ask the question: “What if the mainstream
assumptions and plans turn out to be correct?”
•  In the depression scenarios, the economy went down instead of
up. This world would be marked by a continuation of the serious
economic troubles of the 1970s—and worse. We imagined an
underlying plot in which the 1970s were symptomatic of a far
greater period of decay. Prosperity would gradually decline,
evolving into poverty. Growth would be very low or negative.
Famine would develop in the Third World. Environmental crises
would loom. Oil prices would rise endlessly. Natural resources, such
as minerals and forests, would become scarce as the planet reached
and surpassed its natural limits to human population and
consumption. Thus, we used the depression scenario as a tool for
thinking about surviving in hard times.
•    The third scenario was built around the idea of a fundamental
social change—a shift in values that would amount to a profound


---PAGE BREAK---

transformation of Western culture. Ideas had begun to circulate
about living more simply and environmentally benignly, about
holistic medicine and natural foods, about pursuing inner growth
rather than material possessions, and about striving for some kind of
planetary consciousness. Although what we called the “inner-
directed” portion of the population was small, its values appeared to
have potential for spreading quickly through the wider public—
especially the second half of the baby boom, which was just then
coming of age. In this scenario, economic growth would not be as
dynamic as that of the Official Future, but it would not matter.
Quality of life, not quantity of goods, would be emphasized. “Right
livelihood” would be more important than status symbols.
It was essential to look at the hypothetical worlds described by
these scenarios from as many angles as possible. If the BMW was the
car of the Official Future, and VW bugs (or old Chevy vans)
represented depression transportation, then the transformation car
would be a Honda. A Honda isn’t cheap; it’s even luxurious in some
ways. But it is small, benign, efficient, and affordable, especially if
you plan on keeping the car for a decade or more. In the depression
scenario, used-car lots and do-it-yourself car repair would be good
businesses. In the official scenario, it would be wise to invest in
Mercedes dealerships. In the transformation scenario, for which
Berkeley and Cambridge were more accurate models than Wall
Street, high-quality car maintenance was a logical thing to sell. So
was the kind of top-notch backpacking and mountaineering
equipment made by North Face and Patagonia.
We also saw that the differences between the scenarios made it
very easy to pick the wrong business. In the prosperity scenario, the
market for inexpensive, durable sandals would expand far less
rapidly than in the transformation scenario. Macy’s—the high
middle—would be hurt in the depression scenario, but Nordstrom,
Neiman-Marcus, and Wal-Mart would do well. (There would still be
enough rich people to support a select group of high-end stores.) In
the transformation scenario, traditional marketing and distribution
services might find themselves pinched as people (and businesses)


---PAGE BREAK---

sought alternatives. For instance, a bank that required people to
shuffle through its bureaucratic forms too much would suffer.
In those days, you could go into a local hardware store and buy a
shovel or garden fork for ten or fifteen dollars. Bulldog Tools, when
you factored in shipping and retailing costs, would have to sell for
two or three times as much. They would, however, last much longer
under heavy use than an ordinary implement. Another critical
question to ask was whether there would be a large enough number
of people willing to pay that much for a product that was not a
fancy power tool.
It was clear right away that in all three scenarios the baby boom
was more of a factor than ever. A large number of people were
entering the right age group to buy homes and set up households.
Many would become amateur gardeners. We also began to realize
that the other significant age group, those people reaching
retirement age, would be natural customers for such a product,
because gardening has traditionally been a popular retirement
activity. Their numbers, like those of the baby boom members, were
predetermined. We knew they would be plentiful.
In the first scenario—a prosperous economy—many people in the
baby boom would indeed have the money. But would they buy
houses? We guessed that life in the city would become increasingly
difficult, businesses might leave urban areas, a second wave of
babies would begin, and many people would be likely to buy
suburban, semi-urban, or small-town property—the kinds of places
where people have gardens. Even if the prosperity remained urban,
its beneficiaries would be able to afford second homes in the
country. All of which suggested a substantial increase in gardening,
especially status gardening—having a beautiful garden to go along
with a beautiful home. This phenomenon resonated with a trend we
had been tracking, and which Paul would later describe in his book
The Next Economy: the Europeanization of the American consumer.
Paul meant that as the American economy developed and became
more affluent the tastes of customers would become more
sophisticated and demanding. Indeed the economy as a whole was
moving from a grounding in massive industry and energy to a basis


---PAGE BREAK---

in information, skills, and efficiency; people would buy fewer
things, but of higher quality.
In the depression scenario, in a world where there were a lot of
potential customers who were not making much money, it was
reasonable to expect many of them to practice a more serious kind
of gardening. They would garden to escape from a dreary world. If
they used Jeavons’s double-digging methods, they could produce
very high yields in their backyards. Their gardens would recall
Depression homesteads and the Victory gardens of World War II.
Flannel shirts, overalls, and workboots rather than designer jeans
characterized the market in this world.
But why would people buy expensive tools in hard times? We
reached the conclusion that they could not afford the luxury of bad
tools. A carpenter can’t afford a shoddy hammer; a high-quality drill
is no longer a luxury, but a necessity. If you are trying to bring a
crop in, you don’t want to go out and buy a new shovel every
couple of months when the old one breaks. The imported garden
tool business, while it would not do as well as it would under a
prosperity scenario, was robust enough to survive even in a
depression.
In the social transformation scenario, the society would not be
fabulously wealthy, but a large number of people would be fairly
well off. It would become important to find pastimes which were
pleasant and contributed to a better world. People would literally
seek to “cultivate their gardens,” as Voltaire’s Candide had put it. In
this more contemplative world, gardening would again be an
important activity. It would be an act of contemplation and healing.
The garden would be a place for meditation, and a potential source
of healthy food. Many people would grow their own produce
because of concern about pesticides and they would use such
organic methods as French Intensive. Again, good tools would be in
order.
The new business would prosper the most, we felt, in the Official
Future scenario. But in all the scenarios we could think of, it was
likely to survive and even succeed. And it fit other important
criteria. Smith & Hawken should be a socially responsible business,


---PAGE BREAK---

one that contributed something useful and valuable to the world as
well as generating profits. At the worst, it was clear that there
wasn’t much harm in it.
But there were more useful questions. The importance of one
factor emerged from our scenario process: the U.S. balance of
payments. Because we were contemplating an import business, the
strength of the dollar was crucial. It was, in fact, directly linked to
our profit margins. We looked at our scenarios again and asked
whether a three- or four-dollar pound, which would wipe out our
profits, was likely in any of them. We concluded that even a
depression scenario would affect the United Kingdom, most likely,
as much as the United States. An extremely weak dollar was
unlikely; when the world is in trouble the dollar seems more secure
to most countries than their own currency.
The next key question concerned the approach for selling the
tools. Retail and direct mail were the only two serious options.
When we looked at the retail business through the lens of the
scenarios, we saw that it could mean serious problems. If oil prices
went up even more (as we thought they would in the Official
Future), it would affect the suburbs. Shopping malls would be
awkward places. Overhead would be killing. In the depression
scenario, the deterioration of cities could turn out to be a problem.
And selling garden tools in the city didn’t make a lot of sense.
Though retail was seriously considered, the most important concern
was the earlier failures in selling expensive garden tools, which led
Smith & Hawken to believe that the ability to target possible
customers via mail order was an important advantage.
But in all three scenarios, there were good reasons why mail order
would do well. In the prosperous world, people would be very busy
and under enormous time pressure; mail order is a quick and easy
way to shop. In the depression scenario, capital- and inventory-
intensive retail operations would have a hard time surviving. And in
the social transformation model, mail order makes more sense for
the Whole Earth Catalogue community.


---PAGE BREAK---

The Results
Reality turned out to be a combination of all three scenarios. On
the surface, the 1980s played out fairly close to our prosperity
future. The lifestyles of growth and wealth we imagined were very
similar to the “yuppie” lifestyle of the 1980s. However, the Reagan
era was also a time of large-scale homelessness, a deteriorating
natural environment, and widespread social problems. Although the
quest for financial security and material possessions became a
dominant value, the quest for meaning did not disappear—and the
need for some constraints on industrial excesses in response to ever-
worsening environmental crises seemed to be growing. There were
three scenarios because there were, in effect, three Americas. Smith
& Hawken sold little to the depression America (if it had been more
dominant, we might have sold more to it), but sold very well to the
other two cultures.
As it turned out, over-the-counter retail business has done better
than expected (though the experiences of such companies as The
Sharper Image and Banana Republic suggest the serious pitfalls on
that path). Smith & Hawken now has a small retail business which
does very well in northern California. However, the company was
not hurt by the mail-order decision; indeed, focusing on mail order
allowed Smith & Hawken to grow in a coherent fashion. The future
of the dollar, on the other hand, did follow the expected path;
during the 1980s, it strengthened substantially. Even now, the
“weak” dollar is still stronger than most global currencies. Had we
been wrong about the dollar, it would have hurt the business
dramatically—but the scenario process had provided the means for
testing our assumptions about it.
The Process of Scenarios


---PAGE BREAK---

There is a wonderful book by novelist John Gardner called The Art
of Fiction, in which he never describes exactly how to write a story.
Rather, he says, here are some of the techniques you can use, some
of the helpful things you can think about while writing, and some of
the methods by which you can practice writing. But there is no
prescription for an effective story. Scenarios are much the same.
Nonetheless, a scenario has a recognizable process. For the origins
of Smith & Hawken the process went something like the following:
we started by isolating the decision we wanted to make: “There was
a clear need to meet, but what would lead to a successful business,
where others had failed?” To investigate that issue required an
investment in time and research, revisiting our earlier work, and our
on-going scenario development work. As thinking and exploration
continued, the questions were constantly refined. “What might
happen to future customers and suppliers? How much could they
afford and what would tools cost?”
In the meantime, we thought about the key factors that would
affect decisions. Some of these were what scenario-planners call
“predetermined elements,” factors we could count on. The size of
the baby boom population was certain. Much more uncertain was
their range of economic opportunity: whether they could afford to
buy houses and what kinds of homes they would want. Paul and I
spent most of our time thinking about such factors, and trying to
decide which factors were critical. Consumers’ values were deeply
important, for example. While potential crime rates would have
mattered more if we were considering careers in law enforcement,
as prospective garden tool retailers, Smith & Hawken could afford
mostly to ignore them except as they affected the quality of urban
life.
Most significant was the future of the economy, so the focus was
on that. And it was clear, from experience studying history, that
several types of “plots” were possible. (Chapter 8 of this book
describes those plot lines in detail, and how to apply them to
specific situations.) Three emerged—the Official Future, the
Depression, and the Transformative Economy.


---PAGE BREAK---

All that, in a sense, was preparation. The true work took place in
the last step, rehearsing the implications. How would such a
business fare in each of the three worlds? That is also the most
interesting part of the scenario process, the part that yields the most
surprises. Is the balance of payments a real worry? Were there other
aspects to the decision which, for one reason or another, had not
been seen until now? Often, this step reveals interconnections that
were not apparent before. Questions about the relative strength of
the dollar and the pound are typical. You start looking at a small
garden tool business and realize you have to care about what is
happening in the global economy.
Scenario thinking is an art, not a science. But the basic steps are
the same—whether for a small business, an individual, or a large
corporation. Typically, you will find yourself moving through the
scenario process several times—refining a decision, performing
more research, seeking out more key elements, trying on new plots,
and rehearsing the implications yet again. The order of the steps
may be muddled; in some cases, you may start with a plot line first
and ask yourself, “If this plot is to take place, what decisions am I
likely to want to make?” Or you could start with a new finding
based on research, as I did in the last chapter with the human
growth hormone: “If this possibility becomes a fact, what scenarios
could it set in motion?”
Scenarios are not conceived of one at a time. You develop a range
of two or three potential futures, allowing you to address an array of
possibilities and rehearse your responses to each of them. At the
same time, more than four scenarios tend to be too complex; you
cannot keep track of their ramifications in your mind. Using
scenarios is not a matter of memorizing “Plan A” and “Plan B,”
because in the real world, A and B overlap and recombine in
unexpected ways. It is a matter of training yourself to think through
how things might happen that you might otherwise dismiss—to get
to know the shape of unfolding reality. To have at hand the answer
to the question, “What if …?”
You cannot create scenarios from recipes—but you can practice
creating scenarios. As with any art, some people have a knack for it,


---PAGE BREAK---

but anyone can learn the basic practice, and improve. Helping you
do so is the purpose of this book.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

THE SCENARIO-BUILDING ANIMAL
            People have an innate ability to build scenarios, and to
foresee the future. This has been suggested in the work of two well-
respected neurobiologists, Dr. William Calvin and Dr. David Ingvar.
According to their theories, our drive to tell ourselves stories about
the future may well be “hardwired” into the human brain—closely
linked to our abilities to speak and construct language. Planning
ahead in other animals is a hormonal process, in which hoarding
behaviors are triggered by, for example, shortening daylight hours.
But we humans are capable of planning decades ahead, able to take
account of extraordinary contingencies far more irregular than the
seasons.
Dr. William Calvin, author of The Cerebral Symphony and The
Ascent of Mind, offers a compelling explanation. The part of the
human brain that controls speech, he says, is also the part involved
with ballistics. Ballistic prowess—the ability to hit animals with
thrown rocks—was apparently an important survival skill for early
humans. Calvin posits that the abilities to think ahead and to make
small talk are side-benefits of marksmanship. Anyone who has ever
fired an arrow or spoken before a large group will confirm that a
key aspect of both ballistics and language is preplanning—
performing enough of a mental “dry run” in order to line up all the
sequences of fine muscle movements required to perform the
activity.
Calvin’s hypothesis makes intuitive sense to me. I have always
marveled at the sight of a great quarterback such as Joe Montana,
dropping back, looking across the field forty yards away, seeing the
opposing linemen closing in on him, and two or three receivers
running downfield amid a dozen or so other people. The
quarterback picks one of the receivers; while running himself, he


---PAGE BREAK---

lofts a spiraling pass and drops it into the receiver’s arms.
Essentially, Montana has made a prediction about where he and his
receiver would be several highly unpredictable seconds later. The
equivalent problem in military ballistics—designing a machine to
hurl a long-distance projectile from a moving source to a moving
target—is so difficult that it took the first real computers to produce
radar-guided anti-aircraft guns during World War II. With all the
advances in robotics and computer control systems in the last
twenty years, no human-designed system can yet duplicate the feats
of Joe Montana.
To 
achieve 
those 
feats, 
Montana’s 
mind—conscious 
and
unconscious—must have an extraordinary ability to look ahead. We
may not all have his level of skill, but each of us has the same
neurological connection—between the ballistic-calculating abilities
of the human brain and such other capabilities as imagination and
foresight. This is closely tied to (or may, as Calvin suggests, have
helped bring about) our capacity for self-awareness. We human
beings can run through a motion in our minds alone, with our
muscles detached from the circuit, and then run through it again for
real, with the muscles actually carrying out the commands. We can
simulate the past and future in our minds, practicing different acts
and judging which is best. While hiking, for instance, we may hear a
climber above us. It is part of our nature to imagine an accidental
rockfall loosed by his or her boots, and therefore to stay out of the
fall line.
It takes more effort, perhaps, to string these small intimations into
scenarios. But we do it. For instance, we don’t merely foresee the
words we are about to speak. We construct sentences in our head,
and often practice them inwardly, before uttering them. In dreams,
Calvin asserts, we spin entire scenes in our sleep—in a sense, a
dream is our unconscious rehearsal of a possible future. If this book
seems to present a formal, overly explicit methodology for
constructing scenarios, please remember that these techniques are
an extension of a skill which people are extremely well equipped to
exercise. Once you get used to the idea of scenarios, using them
comes more easily.


---PAGE BREAK---

Some people are immediately great at building scenarios. Others
need more practice. But this difference in proficiency has nothing to
do with peoples’ character. It’s the result of differences in training,
experience, and intuition. Social scientists often have a hard time;
they have been trained to stay away from “What if?” questions and
concentrate on “What was?” Accountants and engineers typically
have a hard time because their training is deterministic. An
accountant’s columns and rows must add up to a single answer for
any accountant who tries it, or the work is “wrong.”
In contrast, a cultural anthropologist knows clearly that what he
or she sees in a particular village will be different from what
another cultural anthropologist sees. The anthropologist is more
attuned to uncertainty and multiple points of view, and can more
easily accept the practice of scenarios. The same is true for
historians. In business, the most attuned practitioners are people
who have made mistakes—people who have gotten it wrong, and
want to find other ways of dealing with their problems. Older
business people are often more sensitive to the process.
Anyone can create scenarios, however; but it will be much easier
if you are willing to encourage your own imagination, novelty, and
even sense of the absurd—as well as your sense of realism.
Memories of the Future
The stories we tell ourselves are powerful. David Ingvar, a
Swedish neurobiologist, has written of scenarios as “memories of the
future.” Ingvar studied the behavior of alcoholics, trying to
understand the biochemical and psychophysiological processes
operating in alcoholism. He concluded, as had William Calvin, that
the mind constantly tells itself stories of the future. Sometimes these
are stories about the next few seconds. At other times, they are
stories about the next hours or weeks, from walking across the room
to get a cup of coffee to paying the rent. Many of these are


---PAGE BREAK---

subconscious or at the edge of awareness; sometimes they bubble up
and we remember something we had planned to do. In his earlier
work with brain-damaged patients he had observed that their
inability to perceive the flow and interconnection of events was a
function of their inability to imagine these micro-scenarios of the
future. They could not understand the meaning of events. They had
a hard time making choices and, as a result, acting.
To Ingvar, alcoholics suffer, in part, because their scenario-
spinning processes break down. Because of a neurophysiological
reaction to the drink, they lose their connection between
imagination and action. Since they no longer use their imagination
as much to look ahead, they lose their sense of the continuity of
time. They become disoriented. The alcohol then helps them to feel
comfortable in their disorientation. Thus, we often hear people say
of an alcoholic, “He [or she] has lost touch with reality.”
Consider the plight of someone close to an alcoholic (or an addict,
or anyone who has lost touch in that way). It does no good to plead,
preach, or nag; the other person may be trusted, but the alcoholic
has no mental picture of tomorrow. Ingvar argues that alcoholics are
literally unable to recognize the future as it unfolds in front of them.
They cannot easily imagine what might happen to them under
different situations: “What would happen if you could no longer buy
alcohol? Or if you could no longer perform your job? Or if your
body began to deteriorate?”
We all, of course, share that same blindness to reality as well. Arie
de Geus, a pioneer in thinking about organizational learning, tells
the story of a tribesman who was transported from a remote
mountain wilderness (a society that had not yet discovered the
wheel) to a large city. When he returned, he reported that the most
significant thing he saw was somebody using a wheelbarrow to
carry more bananas than he had ever thought possible. He literally
did not see the significance of automobiles and skyscrapers. He was
not prepared to see them, any more than an alcoholic is prepared to
take note of the damage done by the addiction. But the tribesman
was well prepared to see an unprecedented load of bananas.


---PAGE BREAK---

Historian Barbara Tuchman puts it this way: “Men will not believe
what does not fit in with their plans or suit their prearrangements.”
What sorts of things are reasonably healthy Westerners—
presumably the readers of this book—unprepared to see? It varies
from individual to individual, but there is no shortage of examples.
In 1975, I led a team at SRI looking at potential future crises for the
office of the White House science adviser. Our results were to be
presented to the President’s Science Advisory Council, a group of
highly distinguished scientists and businessmen. They were led by
Dr. William Baker, then head of Bell Labs, and Simon Ramo, the
founder of TRW; nuclear physicist Edward Teller; Edwin Land of
Polaroid; Charles Townes, the inventor of the laser; Donald
Kennedy, later president of Stanford University; and Carl Djerassi,
an eminent pharmaceutical entrepreneur, inventor of the “pill.” The
White House did not want America to be taken by surprise again, as
the country had been by the oil price crisis.
So our team looked at a number of potential scenarios. Among the
problems we anticipated, for example, was a much more stressful
society. All of the scenarios led to much higher stress in the social
environment—from crime, unemployment, inflation, psychological
instability, or even the stress that comes from too much success. We
plotted how these types of stress would probably lead to second-
level unwanted effects: drug abuse, alcohol abuse, cancer and other
health problems, homelessness, and social violence. We painted a
picture, for instance, of street criminals with increasingly high-
powered weapons, leading to the equivalent of armed forces in our
cities by the 1980s.
The study was a miserable failure. The distinguished panel of
scientists attacked each problem, one by one. “It’s impossible,” they
said each time. “We won’t let those problems come up.” They meant
both “we” as a people and “we” as a government. Today, crack
dealers routinely patrol inner-city neighborhoods with Uzis.
We also did scenarios for the Department of Transportation,
which ended in even bigger disaster. What might happen, we asked,
if they didn’t build enough highways or public transportation? They
could end up with massive gridlock in urban areas. Our project was


---PAGE BREAK---

singled out by Senator William Proxmire for one of his “Golden
Fleece” awards because no one would be stupid enough to do that
he said. He ridiculed the process of considering these “implausible”
possibilities. 
I 
concluded 
that 
the 
federal 
government 
in
Washington, D.C., was systematically unable to think about the
future. By definition all of their policies must be successful and they
have foreseen every problem. To think about any other possibility is
to imply the impossible, that they are less than all-knowing and
powerful.
You can see the results of a similar resistance among American
military leaders. I will show in Chapter 5 that it was possible to
foresee perestroika and glasnost in the early 1980s, and, indeed,
American intelligence and military agencies heard the prediction at
least several times. But their leaders could not accept it. They had
imagined every conceivable scenario about the Cold War—gradual
arms buildup, new technologies, a freeze imposed by one or more
nations, broken arms agreements, even the Armageddon of nuclear
war. But they never asked themselves: “What if we won?”
After America did win the Cold War (or, at least, our purported
enemies lost it) the U.S. military leaders had no idea of what to do.
They had prepared no strategy for success. Thus, they now find
themselves foundering, trying desperately to find new enemies.
Some suggest fighting the drug lords, or turning the troops loose to
“battle” environmental problems. (Never mind the fact that
environmental problems can’t be “solved” through military
methods.) As I write this in August 1990 the military is rapidly
building a new presence in Saudi Arabia, but is unable to implement
the President’s goal of driving the Iraqis out of Kuwait. The new
military to cope with the Saddam Husseins of today and tomorrow
will be very different from the military needed to contain a hostile
superpower.
But the Pentagon brass are not the only group refusing to see
reality; people who talk about the “peace dividend” have not
considered whether bringing thousands of newly unemployed
soldiers back to the United States would create any social problems.
It’s not clear whether there will be social problems as a result. One


---PAGE BREAK---

plausible scenario suggests a severe skilled labor shortage in the
United States during the 1990s, which many returning servicemen
could help fill if other conditions are right. What’s important is that
people are refusing to think about the possibilities.
Chains of Perception
Scenarios are not about predicting the future, rather they are
about perceiving futures in the present. In contemporary psychology
one finds different theories describing how and why people deceive
themselves about reality. Denial, for example, is the first of the
psychological stages that we undergo to protect ourselves from bad
news, such as the death of someone close to us. To Elisabeth Kübler-
Ross, author of On Death and Dying, denial was the first stage of
reaction, followed by anger, bargaining, despair, and ultimately
acceptance.
When decision-makers begin to look at the future, denial acts as
an automatic shut-off valve: “I can’t consider that.” With his book
On Thermonuclear War: Thinking About the Unthinkable, Herman
Kahn made his early reputation as a futurist through his public
willingness to consider what most people were denying in the early
1960s: that nuclear war might actually take place between the
United States and the Soviets. By raising the possibility publicly, he
helped people see realistically what they had at stake, and arguably
inspired many of the most successful disarmament initiatives.
William Proxmire’s ridicule was another example of denial. Too
often, he fought not to cut unnecessary spending, but to deny
unconventional thinking.
Stories can be a powerful way of avoiding the dangers of denial.
In theater, the “willing suspension of disbelief” is what the play
prompts from an audience. Everyone in the theater knows that he is
seeing actors before a painted backdrop, but—for the purposes of
emotion and understanding—the viewers react as if they are seeing


---PAGE BREAK---

the real world. A good scenario, similarly, asks people to suspend
their disbelief in its stories long enough to appreciate their impact.
You know that a scenario is effective when someone, pondering an
issue that has been taboo or unthinkable before, says, “Yes. I can see
how that might happen. And what I might do as a result.”
“Scenarios deal with two worlds,” wrote Pierre Wack. “The world
of facts and the world of perceptions. They explore for facts but they
aim at perceptions inside the heads of decision-makers. Their
purpose is to gather and transform information of strategic
significance into fresh perceptions. This transformation process is
not trivial—more often than not it does not happen. When it works,
it is a creative experience that generates a heartfelt ‘Aha!’ from your
managers and leads to strategic insights beyond the mind’s previous
reach.”
Tell Me a Story; the Power of Narrative
Anthropologist Mary Catherine Bateson offers the story of her
father, philosopher Gregory Bateson, who used to tell a joke about a
man who asked a computer, “Do you compute that you will ever
think like a human being?” After assorted bleeps and blinks, the
answer appeared: “That reminds me of a story.”
It is a common belief that serious information should appear in
tables, graphs, numbers, or at least sober scholarly language. But
important questions about the future are usually too complex or
imprecise for the conventional languages of business and science.
Instead, we use the language of stories and myths. Stories have a
psychological impact that graphs and equations lack. Stories are
about meaning; they help explain why things could happen in a
certain way. They give order and meaning to events—a crucial
aspect of understanding future possibilities.
Stories are an old way of organizing knowledge, but their place in
the world has been less visible since the rise of scientific philosophy


---PAGE BREAK---

during the Enlightenment. Theories about, for example, the way
gases respond to heat and pressure were provable, always correct,
and often simple. Even outside the sciences, the paradigm for truth
was that it should be law-like, preferably reduced to the form of a
solvable equation. However, since complexity has emerged as a
driving force in the way the world works, the dominant belief in a
deterministic and reliably quantifiable truth has begun to yield.
There are now many ways of knowing. Our need for realism and
proof is as strong, but we can find and express that in this different
way. If the planners of Three Mile Island had written a story about
how things could go wrong, instead of a numeric analysis of
possible fault sequences, they would have been better prepared for
the surprise they actually encountered when their complex machine
went astray.
Stories have many advantages. They open people to multiple
perspectives, because they allow them to describe how different
characters see in events the meaning of those events. Moreover,
stories help people cope with complexity. In a famous essay called
The Hedgehog and the Fox, historical philosopher Isaiah Berlin
compared Tolstoy’s War and Peace with conventional “scientific”
histories of the Napoleonic invasion of Russia. Those histories
presented only a succession of events. Tolstoy, by contrast, wrote
history as a novel, using story-telling to arrange the facts in a way
which gave them meaning.
Scenarios are stories that give meaning to events. This does not
mean that they contain fictional characters, although sometimes we
write scenarios with fictional characters to experiment with the
ambience of the settings we are trying to imagine. “Isao Okimura
was just about to board the new hypersonic Orient Express on his
way from Tokyo to San Francisco,” began one such scenario I wrote,
about the possibilities of future widespread mergers between
Japanese and American corporations. But inventing characters is
neither necessary nor, in many cases, helpful: the point is to imagine
attitudes of key players who will affect future events.


---PAGE BREAK---

Scenarios Are Myths of the Future
Often, these key players are large collections of individuals in the
form of institutions. The attitudes they embody are themselves
stories—or, more precisely, myths. Indeed, histories with meaning
that are shared very widely are often expressed as myths. The
phrase “American Dream,” for example, is a myth of our time. It
embodies a mesh of feelings and beliefs, some of them
contradictory, well known to Americans and to everyone else in the
world. This myth influences goals in business and daily life (for
instance, a decision to emigrate to the United States), and values
passed on to our children. The “Myth of the Melting Pot” is one part
of the American Dream, symbolized by the Statue of Liberty.
Capitalism and democracy are other aspects, embodied in Horatio
Alger and the Constitution. Values such as individualism and
materialism are woven into the fabric of the mythos. What is the
U.S. Constitution but the formal story of the political utopia the
founding fathers designed?
The Japanese also have a national myth—based on resilience and
self-reliance. Few Americans have paid enough attention to Japan to
see it. In American business and government circles, the Japanese
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) is seen as a
masterful organizing force that mobilizes Japanese scientific and
engineering enterprise in a way unmatched by other countries. It is
a conspiratorial kind of mythology—unseen forces moving beneath
the surface of events.
That’s wrong. MITI is more of an expression of the underlying
myth of Japan, a story that includes its history of rebounding back
after repeated crises have struck its islands. The “four devils” that
the nation has faced are earthquakes, great fires, hurricanes, and
unwise leaders—cataclysms outside the population’s control that
often flattened them temporarily. A history of doing what is
necessary to survive, even after extensive damage, is deep in the
Japanese culture. People in Japan save money not because they are


---PAGE BREAK---

trying to take over the world, but because they know they might
have to rebuild after disasters. They value education as a form of
cultural continuity and defense against future threats. All these
cultural norms emerged over Japan’s long history; they can be
understood only as part of a story about Japan, just as the American
Dream is part of a story about the United States.
How do these two national myths affect behavior? Consider the
oil price crisis of 1973, in which a sudden jump in oil prices affected
both nations dramatically. The Japanese reacted with their myth of
resilience. Realizing that they were no longer living in a world of
cheap energy, their leaders (with the support of their people)
quickly understood that they would always depend on others for
their energy lifeline. So the Japanese made themselves the most
energy-efficient industrial economy on the planet in less than three
years. That meant a severe recession in the Japanese economy while
they rebuilt the capital structure. By 1976, their energy-efficiency
had improved enormously.
The United States reacted differently. Politically, American
leaders fought to preserve the country’s “manifest destiny.”
Corporate leaders refused to believe that this would be any more
than a temporary setback in the “Land of Opportunity.” Individuals
reacted, at first, with anger (at gas lines, at the Arabs, at the oil
companies). Then, each according to his or her means and
inclinations, we separately set about making our lives more energy-
efficient—or not. The United States remains more vulnerable to oil
crises than Japan despite the fact that Japan imports all of the oil it
needs. The American myth was not “worse” than the Japanese;
arguably, our attitudes about melting pots and individual fulfillment
will serve us well in the years to come. But in this instance, the
Japanese myth led to more economic success. The trick, in a
situation like that, is to recognize the various myths in play.
Myths are a particular type of story. James Robertson, author of
American Myth, American Reality, offers the best definition I’ve seen:
Myths are “the way things are” as people in a particular society
believe them to be; and they are the models people refer to when


---PAGE BREAK---

they try to understand their world and its behavior. Myths are the
patterns—of behavior, of belief, and of perception—which people
have in common. Myths are not deliberately, or necessarily
consciously, fictitious.
The sources of myths are not easy to recognize in their own times.
Indeed, the notion of studying myths through analytical means is a
product of the modern era. The ancient Greeks probably did not
think of their stories of Zeus and Hermes as myths. No one in 400
B.C. Athens would have said, “That’s a very nice way to explain the
prevalence of thunderstorms.” Few probably realized that the stories
of Zeus’s many wives originated as cultural “glue”; when the horse-
riding, war-making, worshipers of the patriarchal thunder god, Zeus,
invaded the Peloponnesian peninsula, they conquered countless
isolated valleys, home to matriarchal, agricultural worshipers of
various earth goddesses. So Zeus simply married the local goddesses
via mythical tales, and the conquered cultures joined the cultural
family.
As James Robertson points out, American myths have similar
roots. The story of George Washington and the cherry tree, for
instance, solves a contradiction deep in the American character: the
conflict between rebellion and innocence. A culture based on
revolution must condone certain acts of violence. Yet America is
also the land of the new, the young, and the innocent. The cherry
tree story—violence against the father’s possession followed by
honest admission and the father’s praise—fulfills the wish of every
rebellious child that rebellion and independence will be met with
approval and will result in being once again enfolded in the arms of
the father. The literal truth of any of these stories—whether, for
instance, George Washington really chopped down that tree—is far
less important than its insight into the way Americans see their role
in a moral universe. Years later, American movies such as The Wild
One, Rebel Without a Cause, The Graduate, Beverly Hills Cop, and even
the Star Wars trilogy played out the same theme, as did American
behavior in the energy crisis.


---PAGE BREAK---

Organizations have myths too—universally believed stories about
their past and future. AT&T’s view of “universal service” is an
example. Beginning with that great servant to humanity Theodore
Vail (goes the story), AT&T developed an overriding vision to reach
out and touch everyone—to provide the same telephone service to all
Americans even in the most remote locations. This gave AT&T a
kind of organizing myth similar to the American folktale of Johnny
Appleseed; telephone people were not just operators or technicians,
but people working to plant the seeds of communication. When you
look at AT&T’s challenges today, it becomes clear that they are
losing their old myth. The old goal of universal service clashes with
the world after the breakup of AT&T and the need to become a
competitive, high-technology company. Now people at AT&T find
they don’t all share a clear myth for the future. They are in the
process of trying to rediscover their vision. Any scenario about the
future of AT&T should help people understand the likely results of
this clash of mythologies.
Thus, in writing scenarios, we spin myths—old and new—that
will be important in the future. The “global teenager” of Chapter 7,
for instance, is a mythic figure, representing no individual teenager
in the world today, but symbolizing almost 2 billion of them. These
myths in scenarios help us come to grips with forces and feelings
that would not otherwise exist in concrete form. They help us
describe them, envision them, bring them to life—in a way that
helps us make use of them. Story-telling in the form of myths can
reveal something about what we feel, hope, expect, fear for the
future.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

UNCOVERING THE DECISION
            In 1983 I proposed to my superiors at Shell that we
undertake a study of the future of the Soviet Union. They questioned
its relevance. “The Soviets are a minor factor in our business,” they
said. “They export a little oil and gas, but we need to pay attention
to much bigger competitors. They’re not on the agenda.”
“They will be on the agenda,” I insisted. “Their oil and gas
reserves are among the largest in the world, rivaled only by Saudi
Arabia. With the international oil industry facing fewer and fewer
opportunities for large profitable oil and gas finds outside the
Middle East, the possibility that the Soviet Union might invite
foreign firms to participate in their oil industry could [and did]
become a significant possibility. Furthermore, in a few years, you
are going to have to make a big decision about whether to go ahead
with the Troll gas field.” The Troll gas field was a deposit of natural
gas under water one thousand feet deep, in the North Sea off the
coast of Norway, which Shell had found and was trying to decide
how to develop.
“It is going to take a platform fifteen hundred feet high to get that
gas out,” I said, reminding them of what they already knew but,
perhaps, had never heard put quite this way before. “That platform
and its satellite wells are going to cost 6 billion dollars. It will be the
biggest moving object ever built, the single most expensive machine
ever built. The field will furnish natural gas to sell to Europe. The
other supplier of natural gas to Europe is the Soviet Union. And the
Soviet gas is much cheaper than any gas we can provide from Troll.
However, for obvious political reasons, the Europeans have made an
informal agreement that no more than 35 percent of their markets
will be available to the Soviet Union.”


---PAGE BREAK---

The Troll project would be hurt if cheaper gas from the U.S.S.R.
were allowed to capture a larger share of the European market.
Thus, I asked myself under what plausible circumstances might that
limit cease to exist? Under what conditions might the Soviet Union
open its most treasured resources for development by such
multinational giants as Shell and Chevron. It could happen only if
somehow political relations between the Soviets and the NATO
nations changed for the better. The possibilities seemed remote
indeed, but I knew I had to consider them—because now it was a
potentially 
important 
factor 
in 
multibillion-dollar 
decisions
regarding such projects as the Troll gas field and the long-term
exploration program.
An end to the Cold War was an unthinkable idea in 1983 during
the height of “Evil Empire” rhetoric from Ronald Reagan and (more
significantly for London-based Royal Dutch/Shell) Margaret
Thatcher. Yuri Andropov, former head of the KGB, had just come to
power. The words glasnost and perestroika were unknown in the
West. Mikhail Gorbachev was an obscure official in the Communist
party. Yet we were fortunate at Royal Dutch/Shell. We had evolved
a discipline that allowed us to examine our old mind-sets so that we
could bring forth our prejudices and assumptions—and think
carefully about whether those mind-sets would keep us from seeing
the right future. But what helped focus our attention on useful
subjects was paying attention to those situations that made us
uncomfortable or which we did not really understand.
For each of us, decisions loom in the near or immediate future.
Your responses to them will shape your life and business, possibly
for years to come. Consider for a moment: what are your
equivalents of the Shell Troll platform? What decisions await you
about jobs, relationships, business, investments, finance, new
products, markets, R&D strategy, or simply living? And then—what
hidden questions should you be asking to help you make those
decisions?


---PAGE BREAK---

The Large Shadow of a Small Decision
For decisions to take on meaning it helps for them to become
tangible. It is easier for a distant general to send his forces into
battle than one who has to look them in the eye. My experiences in
Shell helped me make the nature of our decisions tangible for me.
The consequences of our decisions are important, but until I worked
for Royal Dutch/Shell, I never realized how big the consequences of
a single decision could be. Everything at Shell seemed created by a
race of giants. The cost of everything, life and machines, verged on
the extreme. After I had been at Shell for seven months, I was
invited out to an existing drilling platform on the North Sea. This
one produced mainly oil, but it was an example of the type of
platform that we were considering building for natural gas.
I traveled by plane to Aberdeen, a small city of gray granite and
red roses on the northern coast of Scotland. Aberdeen is Shell’s
control center for its North Sea operations, and the control room is
as complex and high tech as the NASA manned space flight center in
Houston. On the wall, you see electronic charts of a vast maze of
pipelines across the bottom of the North Sea. There are dozens of
platforms displayed on the screen, and indicators demonstrating the
flow of oil and natural gas through the network. I was taken out to
the airport and before boarding a helicopter I was handed a bright
orange survival suit. Insulated and sealed, bulky and uncomfortable,
it covered all of me but my face. The water in the North Sea is
unbearably cold; if anyone without a suit falls in, he is dead within
twenty minutes. And because choppers do go down, the suit is a
necessity.
After more than two hours of skimming over the choppy North
Sea, we saw the platform from the chopper windows; it seemed to
me to be a few miles away. It looked about the size of an apartment
building. As we kept moving closer, the building kept looming
larger  …  but it still seemed to hover a few miles away from us.
Eventually, we began to glimpse its true size; the size of a small city.
Finally, we landed on a helicopter pad, on top of the platform, and


---PAGE BREAK---

took off our survival suits. As we looked out we saw four similar
platforms across the sea. “How far away do you think those are?”
our guide asked us. I guessed a mile. “The closest one,” he said, “is
ten miles away.”
Several hundred people live on an offshore platform at any given
moment. They typically stay two weeks. There are dormitories,
racquetball courts, and hospital wards on every platform. To ferry
people and materials back and forth, there are more helicopter
flights every day over the North Sea than flights in and out of
London’s Heathrow Airport. Boats circle each platform constantly,
twenty-four hours per day. Their only purpose is to pick up people
who fall overboard. And people do fall.
A single platform takes years to build, years to plan before that,
and years before that to confirm the discovery of oil or gas. Yet
every one of these sites, having cost literally hundreds of millions
and now billions of dollars—not to mention the lives of people who
work there—can be made absolutely worthless by a collapse in the
price of oil! It put tremendous pressure on the decisions made about
those platforms, decisions made by a group of six to eight people
who comprised the Managing Directors of the Royal Dutch/Shell
group of companies. Their decisions influenced the production of
about 8 percent of the world’s production of oil. These men (so far,
in Shell’s history, they have been men), in turn, used scenarios as a
tool to help them articulate exactly what those decisions should be
—and then to make them. What my colleagues and I did together at
Shell thus had enormous consequences—not just for the platform,
but for the world.
Kees van der Heijden, a tough-minded, creative Dutchman, was a
close collaborator and friend of mine at Shell. He had an exceptional
ability to understand the minds of Shell’s managers. He led the team
that developed a set of scenarios in 1989 that were a profound
expression of the concerns and aspirations of Shell’s top
management. Their vision of a “sustainable world” scenario for how
the planet might learn to live within the limits of ecosystems proved
pioneering.


---PAGE BREAK---

It was a privileged position to be in. Seeing one decision writ
large made me see the importance of all decisions. The choice of a
career, a spouse, a place to live; we make them casually, at times,
because we do not know how to articulate the choices. Suppose, for
example, you or perhaps your children want to pursue a career in
science, and have been drawn to the promise of biotechnology. How
would you learn whether or not that would be a viable field in the
future? You might seek out one or two knowledgeable people to ask
their advice; you might try some background reading. Ultimately,
you would guess. The results of your decision would be chancy.
I believe that people often persuade themselves that their
decisions do not matter, because they feel powerless to make the
best decision. Some of us feel that, no matter what we do, our
decisions won’t matter much. We don’t plot the course of North Sea
oil development—only our own lives. The world is too big, and we
are too small. But I believe that we know at heart that decisions do
matter. I am not the first to suggest that we ourselves are arguably
the sum total of the decisions we have made. That sum, in turn,
gives us whatever power we have to affect the world. Journalist
Michael Ventura puts it this way:
If you look at your life on the level of historical time, as a tiny but
influential part of a century-long process, then at least you can
begin to know your own address. You can begin to sense the
greater pattern, and feel where you are within it, and your acts
take on meaning.
In order to make effective decisions, you must articulate them to
begin with. Consider, for example, the choice of a career in
biotechnology. A scenario-planner would tackle the decision
differently. It depends, he or she might argue, on another set of
questions: What is the future of the biotechnology industry? (That in
turn depends on:) What is the path of development of the biotech
industry? (Moreover:) What skills will have enduring value? (And:)
Where will be a good place to begin? The hardest questions will be
the most important. What is it that interests you about


---PAGE BREAK---

biotechnology in the first place? What sorts of things about yourself
might lead you to make a decision with poor results? What could
lead you to change your mind?
Articulating Your Mind-set
People often do not realize that their decision agendas are usually
unconscious. Thus, the first step of the scenario process is making it
conscious. Each of us responds, not to the world, but to our image of
the world. This “mind-set” includes attitudes about every situation
in our lives and every person we come across. In many cases, these
mind-sets have been built up, slowly, from childhood and may not
have much to do with actual reality. A bigot, for instance, has a
derogatory mind-set about a certain ethnic group of people. The
mind-set is so powerful, as we saw in the last chapter, that it can
actually influence people to ignore reality. Bigots have been known
to “forget,” for example, that someone they knew was of the
offending race or culture, and let a slur slip out. “Sorry; I didn’t
mean you.”
Mind-sets tend to keep us from seeing the appropriate questions
to ask about a decision. Thus, every scenario effort begins by
looking inward. You begin by examining the mind-sets which you
personally use—consciously or unconsciously—to make judgments
about the future. Think of this process as a form of research. Instead
of gathering information out in the world (which we’ll discuss in the
next chapter), you gather information from within yourself.
The French poet and philosopher Paul Valéry wanted to learn
how to think clearly about the future, and took the matter of
examining his own mind-set very seriously. His method, which I
recommend as a potentially fruitful exercise, was to awaken every
morning before dawn and to write down the first things that came
into his mind. Like Freud, who was to pioneer the similar
psychotherapeutic technique of “free association,” Valéry recognized


---PAGE BREAK---

that these spontaneous, often nonsensical-seeming ramblings offered
clues to his habitual mind-sets.
I use an exercise which helps me consider all my possible mental
models relating to a particular decision. I view my decisions through
very different lenses. We think of “optimist” and “pessimist” as
descriptions of people, but they are actually popular labels for well-
known, radically different attitudes about the future. We all
recognize the “Dr. Pangloss” for whom the world is the best it can
be and can only get better, for whom every decision will pay off.
And we remember times in which we based our own decisions,
correctly or not, on our convictions that the market would respond
favorably, the harvest would be rich, or the mother lode would be
found. We also recognize the “Cassandra” for whom the world is
always on the brink of disaster, who sees the future as the source of
inevitable payments due. There is, finally, the “status quo”
mentality—a belief that tomorrow will be more or less the same as
today. Nothing is really new, nothing much changes. They’ve seen it
all before.
I find it useful to view the decision I am making from all three
points of view. What I am really after is compensation—a way for
the optimist within myself temporarily to set aside the rose-colored
glasses and look carefully at the traps on the path to success.
Conversely, the pessimist within me needs a way to look for
unexpected breakthroughs and triumphs that might occur. And the
status quo mentality needs to prepare itself to recognize change
when it does occur, and not just assume its insignificance.
It is worthwhile sometimes to designate an hour or an entire day
for self-observation regarding your attitudes toward the future.
Whenever you think about the possibility of borrowing, based on
your confidence about your ability to pay back the debt later, when
“circumstances improve,” note that optimistic tendency. It may or
may not be grounded in reality; but you should consider the
possibility that it is not. Whenever you decide not to take a chance
because of your fear of obstacles, visible and unforeseen, note that
pessimistic tendency. The object is to make your stance to the future


---PAGE BREAK---

—which may change from moment to moment, situation to
situation—visible to you.
Having determined your outlook, deliberately examine the
possibilities of other outlooks. The key is to examine the pitfalls and
opportunities made visible by each viewpoint. Consider population:
most people think of the staggering growth of world population
with foreboding—as the source of what Paul Ehrlich now calls the
population explosion. When starting a scenario process about
population, however, you would consider: “Is there any optimistic
aspect to this problem?” One serious thinker, Julian Simon, did
exactly that; his book The Ultimate Resource is a compelling
argument that the population explosion, if handled wisely, could be
an enormous boon. More people means more intelligence and more
productive energy.
You cannot just examine your view of the world once and leave it
at that. Our mind-sets change, without us hardly noticing. And our
attitudes about each new problem are different. In fact, one effective
approach is to compare your mind-set today with attitudes you had
last year—or last decade. “I used to think small cars were ugly,”
many Americans said in the late 1970s. Automakers produce better-
looking small cars today.
Finally, in an organization, you may want to do what my
colleagues at Shell have done: to articulate and discuss their mind-
sets overtly. The phrase they use is “mental models.” One planner
may say, for instance, “I have a mental model of the United States
Government as a timid, bureaucratic entity, unwilling to commit
itself to any policy, and I expect it to act that way in the future.”
Another planner may reply, “I don’t agree. I think the government is
acting with consistent judgment.” Both will then try to spell out the
events that lead them to perceive the U.S. Government as they do,
and 
hopefully, 
between 
them, 
to 
reach 
a 
new, 
clearer
understanding. This attention to the mind-set of the decision-maker
points to another important quality about Shell. While the scenario
method was an important tool, the real key to success was the
quality of the people in Shell who used that tool. It was their ability
to rediscover the world that gave scenarios value.


---PAGE BREAK---

Decision-Articulation on a Global Scale: Royal Dutch/Shell in
the 1980s
This Troll platform decision was only one of many on the Shell
agenda in the mid-1980s. All of them provoked us to examine our
assumptions about the world. Oil prices had been high for nearly
ten years, and especially high since the late 1970s. Oil-producing
fields were a valuable asset. Thus, this was a period of “drilling on
Wall Street,” when many firms bought oil companies at high prices
to gain their oil fields. Chevron bought Gulf; U.S. Steel bought
Marathon; and Mobil bought Superior Oil. Should we participate?
Simultaneously, Shell was developing oil and natural gas fields in
the North Sea, at a high cost to us. The Troll platform was just one
such project, albeit the most expensive. Conventional wisdom
suggested moving full-steam ahead. But would we be wise to follow
an exploration and development program based on a path of
inevitably rising prices?
Articulating the decisions meant looking at the assumptions
inbred in our organization. I already described one such assumption
—that the European 35 percent limit on buying Soviet natural gas
would continue. Another assumption was that the Arab-dominated
OPEC consortium would continue to act as a unified block of
nations, keeping the price of crude oil from their fields high. That
would justify any investment we chose to make in drilling for oil.
Since many of our most influential top executives were involved in
exploration and production, they unconsciously wanted the price of
oil to remain high because they wanted to keep on drilling. Their
enthusiasm for the adventure of big oil made them innately
optimistic about new projects. Therefore, we set about looking at
the downside of our assumptions. Was it conceivable that the price
could fall? What events might trigger the price fall?
Our answers surprised us. After conducting our research on both
oil-producing nations and the Soviet Union we discovered that there
was a plausible way in which the prices of oil and gas could fall.


---PAGE BREAK---

OPEC’s unity could well collapse, and demand for oil, in an age of
increasing conservation and energy-efficiency, could dwindle. That
could cause the price to collapse.
Similarly, a small team asked what could make the Soviet Union
dramatically change its policies. The answer was clear: a failing
economy might simply make it impossible for the Soviet Union to
afford its rigid system. We saw that the Soviet economy was facing a
major crisis: its productivity was declining, and its birthrate had
declined twenty years before. Thus, its population was aging
rapidly; its labor force was dwindling. To continue to keep any
semblance of a standard of living, the Soviet Union had only two
alternatives: either muddle through, or open up.
In 1983, we presented the Royal Dutch/Shell managing directors
with two scenarios: one called Incrementalism, and the other called
the Greening of Russia. By that time, we knew enough about the
Soviet Government to say that if a virtually unknown man named
Gorbachev came to power, you’d see massive economic and political
restructuring; an opening of the West; arms control; declining
tensions in the West; and major shifts in international relationships.
It was not that Gorbachev, as an individual, would cause the
changes. Rather, his arrival in power would be a symptom of the
same underlying causes.
Shell has a habit of presenting its global scenarios to government
agencies, in part to glean their reactions. Every Soviet expert but
one told us we were crazy. The exception was Heinrich Vogel of
Germany. The CIA said, “You really don’t know what you’re talking
about. You just don’t have the facts.” In retrospect, people have
credited our research, but the CIA certainly had access to all the
data we did. Our insight came solely from asking the right
questions; from having to consider more than one scenario. If we
had to pick only one, we might have been just as wrong as the CIA.
We ourselves did not know for certain that things were moving
toward our “Greening” scenario until Gorbachev was elected. But
having more than one scenario allowed us to anticipate his arrival
and understand its significance when he ascended to the leadership.


---PAGE BREAK---

Within Shell, these scenarios brought to managers’ attention the
potential indicators that could signal a change in political climate.
When the possibility of Soviet competition in the gas market became
real, it was already in Shell’s decision-making process. Today it
looks as if the 35 percent limit will indeed be a thing of the past by
the time the Troll gas fields come onstream. Among Shell
management’s responses was an extra effort to bring down the costs
of the project. We also avoided overinvesting in new oil fields, or in
purchasing other companies at premium prices. When the oil price
fell, in 1986, Shell was able to buy oil reserves at half the price that
we would have had to pay six months before.
Most importantly, Shell continued to ask the right questions about
its decisions. We focused on questions that challenged the company
mind-sets. The price of oil had not risen and fallen so dramatically
since before World War II. If it could do so now, did that mean that
oil and gasoline would become commodities on world markets? If
so, how could that affect our business? For one thing, it would mean
that there would be a good business in trading oil, in the fashion of
commodities investors. Designing a trading system can take years,
but the scenario had allowed us to see that such a system might be
necessary. By the time the price of oil collapsed Shell had designed
such a system, and was trading two and a half million barrels a day.
Since most oil is equivalent, no matter what the brand, a price
collapse also meant we would have to sell it for less—unless we
could find a unique way to enhance ours. This led to other questions
about what we could offer uniquely. Shell began early to research
an environmentally clean, high-performance gasoline, with the
intention of selling it more profitably at a higher price.
Refining the Focus
You may have noticed that our decision-making at Shell moved
constantly between narrow questions, related to specific situations


---PAGE BREAK---

(“Should we invest in a new offshore platform?”), and broad ones,
related to the world at large (“What is going to happen to the Soviet
Union?”). This is typical. Scenario-builders should consider both
types of questions: otherwise, it’s easy to lose sight of issues that
could be important.
Broader scenarios are similar for many companies; narrow
scenario questions are specific to each situation. Narrow scenarios
are usually the place where valuable insights regarding particular
organizations and missions can be found. For example, at SRI
International during the 1970s, my colleagues and I produced a set
of scenarios for a paper company that was considering building a
new paper mill for coated papers—the kind that national weekly
news magazines are printed on. We wanted to know whether or not
there would be increasing demand for such magazines. What
production capacity would they need to meet that future demand?
We asked broad questions: would consumer income rise? Would
consumers spend more of that income on reading? How quickly
could we expect to see new computer printing and communication
technologies, and what effect would those technologies have? After
we did broad, global scenarios about those kinds of questions, then
we concentrated on more highly focused scenarios about the
publishing world. We looked at high-end magazines versus low-end
magazines, the volume of paper used by new printing and
distribution technologies, and the rapidity of development of
competing electronic media.
Frequently, people develop scenarios for a small, focused situation
and discover that it is affected by much larger issues. Worse still,
they may not see those larger ramifications. Many people foresaw
the emergence of synthetic fuels in the late 1970s as an energy
source. It was thought that America might begin running out of oil
by the mid-1990s. There was enormous investment; companies
opened for business in the Rocky Mountains. The scenarists got all
the small questions right: would these new companies be able to
begin research? Would they produce viable energy? But the
scenarists failed to anticipate that the global context of the energy
industry would be upset. When the price of oil fell, there was little


---PAGE BREAK---

market for expensive, environmentally problematic synthetic fuels,
and the industry collapsed. They had looked too narrowly, and
didn’t see that the industry was changing from scarcity to
oversupply; from a sellers’ market to buyers’ market. This made
their narrower questions irrelevant.
Small businesses must pay particular attention to broad questions.
Smith & Hawken, you may recall, asked its narrow focus questions
(“Mail order or retail?”), but some of its key questions were broad:
“Where will the economy of the United States be in ten years?”
However, it would be a misperception to say that a small business—
even my own business, Global Business Network—should think
about large-scale problems the way that Shell management thinks
about it. A large publishing company such as Doubleday, for
example, must think about its suppliers—not just paper companies,
but also authors. It must also plan for changes in distribution—if
chain bookstores dominate the market, that will mean one type of
book will succeed, while neighborhood bookstores would suggest a
different type. And they must also concern themselves with readers
—with literacy rates, for example. Theoretically, a small book
publisher, such as North Point Press in Albany, California (with a
staff of twenty-five people), should concern itself about the same
things. But I can assure you that the people at North Point do not
spend much time on these questions. They are more concerned
about the problems of the here and now.
Like the founders of Smith & Hawken, it is indeed useful for a few
people at North Point to be aware of larger uncertainties and plan
for them. But it is unlikely that they will need to plan for them
formally, with the responsibility for planning shared among dozens
of people, in the manner of Doubleday, Shell, Volvo, or Inland Steel.
Large corporations need a way of articulating these things so a
number of people can talk about them together. By contrast, North
Point’s editor-in-chief can work with his gut feeling. For individuals
and small businesses, scenarios are a way to help develop their own
gut feeling and assure that they have been comprehensive, both
realistic and imaginative, in covering all the important bases.


---PAGE BREAK---

In small businesses, most issues—even if they touch global
concerns—are expressed locally. But they do need to understand
their social context. A mom and pop grocery store had better be
prepared for the arrival of a 7-Eleven chain store next door, but
their concern should be next door—not, “What will we do if 7-
Elevens emerge all over America?” With small businesses, there is
often another factor—the will of the business person. Sometimes,
the appropriate question is: “If this business changes in such and
such a way, do I want to be in this business any more?” Articulating
the decision should also focus on events where you have no control.
“What if I choose to quit my job?” is not an appropriate question for
a scenario. You can change the scenario simply by changing your
decision. You could ask, instead, “What events would plausibly
happen that might influence me to quit?” Or, “Under what
circumstances might I lose my job?”
It’s all part of a process of self-reflection: understanding yourself
and your biases, identifying what matters to you, and perceiving
where to put your attention. It takes persistent work and honesty to
penetrate our internal mental defenses. To ensure the success of our
efforts, we need a clear understanding of the relationship between
our own concerns and the wider world around us. To achieve that,
it helps to have a constant stream of rich, diverse, and thought-
provoking information. The ways and means of finding those
information treasures is the focus of the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

INFORMATION-HUNTING AND -GATHERING
            Why do scenarios work? Because people recognize the
truth in a description of future events. The story resonates in some
ways with what they already know, and then leads them from that
resonance to reperceive the world. Observations from the real world
must be built into the story. The only way they can emerge there is
for the storyteller to sample evidence from the world before
spinning the tale.
The scenario process thus involves research—skilled hunting and
gathering of information. This is practiced both narrowly—to pursue
facts needed for a specific scenario—and broadly—to educate
yourself, so that you will be able to pose more significant questions.
Investigation is not just a useful tool for gathering facts. It hones
your ability to perceive. Even your specific purpose in any particular
research project is tagged to your inbred assumptions. You seek out
those facts and perceptions which challenge those assumptions. You
look for disconfirming evidence.
I described in the last chapter how Shell’s decision about the
North Sea Troll platform led us to wonder whether the Cold War
might thaw. We therefore sought out facts which might disconfirm
the conventional bias that the U.S.S.R. could never change. We
began looking for evidence of new political ideologies in Russia, and
found none. Instead, we found obscure essays published in 1983 by
the Institute of Economics of Novosibersk, describing the economic
dangers facing the Soviet system. Abel Agenbegyan of the same
institute was one of the principal architects of perestroika. His
information was new to me, but it had the ring of authority. It
resonated with other signals that my colleagues and I at Shell had
begun to pick up. Once we had seen the article, we picked up more
—because we were better attuned to find them.


---PAGE BREAK---

Flexibility of perspective is critical. You simultaneously focus on
questions that matter to you, and keep your awareness open for the
unexpected. Like a hunter, alerted to the presence of prey by the
snap of a broken twig, you learn to pick out a key piece of vital
information in the dizzying flood of words, images, sounds, and
numbers that most of us swim in. Most of us have built up a set of
strict filters to keep from drowning. We pay attention only to what
we think we need to know. Being a scenario-planner, therefore,
means becoming aware of one’s filter and continually readjusting it
to let in more data about the world, but without becoming
overwhelmed.
Futurists sometimes talk about having their “radar” out. The
metaphor is striking: a radar device sends out a high-frequency
signal and waits for objects to bounce the signal back. When
something unusual shows up on the display screen, you pay closer
attention. In information-gathering, you take a similarly active role:
sending out signals to see what comes back. But you also do more. I
regularly try on different “frequency” settings. “If I were a Soviet
economist,” I ask myself, or “If I were a teenager in the world
today,” or “a computer designer”—what information would I be
paying attention to? Then I look for it. I might search for news
about the greenhouse effect, for example, with the mind-set of a
scientist; then search for news on the same subject with the needs of
a politician in mind; and finally look again as if I were an
environmental activist.
You may wonder how I keep track of all the material I gather. I
have no elaborate filing system; no data base, for instance, and no
millions of articles in folders with tags recording their location. I
used to maintain such a system, and found that I never used it. I
hardly ever went back to the files. Instead, I concentrate on
educating myself; on passing information through my mind so it
affects my outlook: on tuning my attention as if it were an
instrument. Sometimes, admittedly, I let articles and reports pile up
in stacks; then I sift through the stacks to find what I need. And
sometimes I must go back and re-create all the research I did several
years before. But that, in itself, is valuable, because in the fields I


---PAGE BREAK---

care about, the facts have changed since I last went to look for
them. Don’t worry about your files; worry about your perceptions.
Targets: What to Look For
Every scenario requires specific research. Some subjects, however,
emerge again and again in your work. These are topics to which I
pay constant attention.
•  Science and Technology: This force (for science and technology
really comprise a single force) is one of the most important drivers
of future events. It literally shapes the future. Politics can change,
but a scientific innovation, once released into the world, cannot be
taken back. Nor can its impact be legislated away or forbidden by
the chairman of the board. Thus, keeping track of new
developments in physics, biotechnology, computer science, ecology,
microbiology, engineering, and other key areas is a special duty.
In 1984, I saw references to studies that revealed a variety of
metals had shorter lives than previously expected. Being an
aeronautical engineer by training I realized that this could make a
big difference in the aircraft industry. Airplanes experience great
stress on their materials. We immediately contacted friends at
Boeing to find out if the news applied. It was very significant for
them: as airlines discovered they had to turn over their fleets sooner,
sales of airplanes would climb dramatically. But it would also be
significant for us: one of Shell’s big markets is airline fuel. The
newer the airplane, the more efficient it is; the less fuel it requires.
A newer global fleet would mean a significant change in fuel
demand. We needed to know how rapidly the fleet would turn over.
There were, of course, other effects we could foresee—more
efficient, better-designed, quieter airplanes. Airfares would not rise
much, because of the exigencies of airline financing. There could be
danger, however, in airlines that did not modernize their fleet soon


---PAGE BREAK---

enough, and learned the hard way—by having planes fall out of the
sky.
I pay particular attention to new technologies that could change
lives and spur businesses—such as the growth hormone described in
Chapter 1. Another example is the computer interface called “virtual
reality,” which has been brewing for years outside the mainstream.
People can wear clothing with built-in sensors, and computer-
display eyeglasses, to create the illusion of being inside a computer-
created world. They can see, touch, and even manipulate surreal
objects that feel as tangible as real objects, but exist only as bits
inside a computer program. This technology is headed for center
stage in the design and entertainment industries, and portends
changes in the way science practice is conducted. The very meaning
of reality itself will begin to change. What can be imagined will be
experienced. Putting people inside artificial worlds tends to
profoundly affect their sense of “reality,” which can be a
psychologically turbulent process—just as the advent of television
was forty years ago.
Science news researchers gradually learn to know when new
technologies seem credible, and when they’re overhyped. Previous
failures in a field such as cold fusion should make you justifiably
suspicious of new developments, but should not close your mind
entirely to the possibility of a breakthrough yet happening.
Fortunately, there are many credible sources of science news that a
lay person can follow. I describe the ones I use later in this chapter.
•    Perception-Shaping Events: Rising levels of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere have been detectable since the early 1970s. But they
were ignored—until one day, in the unusually hot summer of 1988,
James Hanson, a NASA meteorologist, testified before Congress on
long-term climate changes as the result of pollution. It was a slow
news day and his presentation was widely reported. Suddenly, the
prospect of global warming was debated by millions, placed on
national magazine covers, and began dramatically to influence
policy. Margaret Thatcher’s recognition and acceptance of the global
warming problem, for instance, inspired dozens of British companies


---PAGE BREAK---

to begin changing their pollution policies. Global warming was a
problem before 1988, but it was not a public issue; now it was an
issue because it was perceived to be a problem.
I am always interested in public perceptions—particularly in signs
that public perception is changing. Changing public beliefs can pivot
the direction of history more swiftly and irrevocably than money or
military power. Consider, for example, the perception by Americans
during the 1970s and 1980s that we were an overtaxed nation. The
reality—that our government was not so much overtaxing as
mismanaging—had less effect on events than the perception of
excessive taxation, which was one of the direct causes of the deficit
problem facing the American economy in the early 1990s.
Perception-shaping events can also have powerfully subtle effects.
In the early 1970s, Richard Nixon suspended U.S. exports of
soybeans to Japan as part of a process of trade retaliation. Few
Americans were aware of the “soy shock” that followed in Japan.
But for a people who used soybeans as key ingredients in their diet,
the loss of a major supplier precipitated a sense of crisis and injury.
The Japanese felt they could no longer trust the United States. They
set up their own farms in Brazil so they would no longer depend
upon such an unreliable source. They could not understand why the
United States had done them such harm. And now we have a hard
time understanding why they are slow to take us on as trusted
industrial suppliers.
While I don’t regard television network news as a great source of
information about events, I tune in to TV regularly as a source about
what people believe is happening. Television images not only reflect
those beliefs, but help shape them. TV’s snapshot images are shared
by millions of people worldwide. They provide a window on the
public agenda. That’s not just true of news. In the early 1970s, “All
in the Family” showed that mainstream culture was ready to deal
with socially relevant issues. Before that, the most relevant program
was “The Mod Squad.” Another interesting social indicator on TV is
“America’s Funniest Home Videos.” It shows not just what people
are perceiving, but what they’re producing. One recent segment had
an Irish couple, the Houlihans, performing a Yiddish routine in a


---PAGE BREAK---

vaudeville sketch. Not only did it show the ham in Americans
coming out, but it indicated the fruits—and the limits—of the
“melting pot” myth in the 1990s.
I look at poll data as well. Some of it is the expensive, privately
commissioned kind. Much of it comes from the newspaper. For
example, after the Valdez oil spill the San Francisco Chronicle
reported a field poll showing a 30 percent jump in opposition to
offshore drilling. But was this evidence of a dramatic change of
perception or a brief blip?
And I talk to people about perceptions. In recent years, I have
encountered many corporate executives who were personally
convinced by evidence about global warming. Exxon’s very public
catastrophe at Valdez also shocked them; Exxon had always been
perceived as one of the most respectable, best-managed companies.
Suddenly, managers at nearly every company I visit believe that
there are real environmental problems, and that their companies
must respond to them. In turn, they want to know about public
perception. “What does it mean to be a good environmental
citizen?” they ask. “What does the public really want? How would
anyone know if a company were a good corporate citizen or not?
What is proper corporate behavior?” The answers are not obvious,
but 
public 
perception 
of 
corporate 
environmentalism 
will
dramatically affect company policies during the years to come.
How do you know in advance when something is going to be a
perception-shaping event? By watching the first reactions of the
broader society. Does it touch a responsive chord? When the
response is particularly deep and wide, a more profound paradigm
shift can occur—a deep change in belief systems. The shift from
public belief in divine creation to public belief in evolution took
place exactly that way. At the beginning of this century, anyone
interested in the future of education would have wanted to keep
track of that shift.
•    Music: If television suggests what people are perceiving, music
shows what they are feeling. It is a window onto freedom in the
future. Anyone who had listened to Bob Dylan’s music in 1964 could


---PAGE BREAK---

have seen the early signs of the political events of 1968 coming.
Before that, as Michael Ventura has pointed out, the debut of Elvis
Presley in 1956 foretold the emergence of an international
community of youth, with its drive to influence attitudes about war,
civil rights, ecology, feminism, and higher consciousness. “The
thread that ran through all those movements of the sixties,” writes
Ventura, “is a fundamental challenge to the old Western split
between the mind and the body.” Ventura traces the roots of
Presley’s music (the “long snake,” as he calls it) back to nineteenth-
century voodoo, when slave Irish and slave African culture melted
together in the hot Caribbean. And he traces it forward to today’s
rock-and-roll—a music that emerged from our own most subjugated
subcultures and is still subverting our loftiest institutions.
You may think that popular music affects only kids. But those kids
are all over the planet, and the effects last their entire lives. I once
went to a Paul McCartney concert that was, in effect, one big Beatles
sing-along full of people in their forties. The psychedelic mind-set of
“Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds,” and the delicious view of the
world in “Here Comes the Sun” deeply affected the culture.
Today, I pay attention to rap music and world music—the fusion
of ethnic threads from all over the equatorial world. I don’t for a
moment think that business people will have to start putting “rap-
speak” on their employment applications, but rap music will
dramatically affect business nonetheless. These are not love songs;
they are songs of anger. That rage may begin to surface, with some
still unknown racial event as the final trigger. (This book was
written several years before the Rodney King riots in L.A. that gave
expression to that anger.)
At the same time, there is more acceptance of ethnic music by
white media than ever before. An interesting example of World
Music is the sort gathered by Peter Gabriel on his Passion Sources
recording—a collection of songs that inspired his soundtrack for the
film The Last Temptation of Christ. It includes music from Egypt,
Ethiopia, Senegal, Morocco, Guinea, Armenia, Iran, Turkey,
Pakistan, and India. Even though some of these countries have
warred bitterly, the music presents a different feeling: mutual


---PAGE BREAK---

respect, serenity, and enthusiasm. The use of state-of-the-art
recording studios and telecommunications made the album possible;
it suggests that a remarkable transformation is taking place.
Historic, indigenous cultures could become elements in a new type
of global culture, not dependent on Western values, but available to
worldwide audiences through Western and Japanese technology.
If rap music suggests a growing schism, world music suggests an
emerging unity. They point out the angry and hopeful emotions of
the future. Listening to the music sensitizes you to recognize those
emotions when they surface in later events. These contradictory
threads are always present but the tapestry of real life takes its
varying hue from the dominance of one or another of these threads
at any moment in time.
•  Fringes: Not long ago in a conversation, Pierre Wack described
going to Tsukuba, the Japanese science city outside of Tokyo, and
seeing an exhibit in which videoscreens simulated seeing the world
as different animals saw it. Through a “bee’s eye” you saw hundreds
of tiny images. As a “frog,” you saw movement only across your
field of vision; the eye had no depth perception. Most interesting
was the horse. Since the eyes are mounted on the side of a horse’s
head, the sharpness in the video screens was exactly opposite that of
a human being. Humans see peripheral objects, at the corners of our
eyes, as blurred and distorted; but we see the center in sharp focus.
Horses, at least according to this Japanese representation, see the
peripheral as sharp. When they look at the center, the place where
their eyes meet, the image is distorted and elongated.
As Pierre said, the horse has a built-in width of vision that we
lack. Even though it moves forward its attention is toward the side.
Scenario researchers train themselves to look at the world as horses
do; because new knowledge develops at the fringes.
People 
and 
organizations 
often 
organize 
knowledge
concentrically, with the most cherished, vital beliefs at the protected
center. At the outer edge are the ideas which the majority rejects. A
little closer to the center are the fringes—areas not yet legitimized
but not utterly rejected by the center either. Innovation is the


---PAGE BREAK---

center’s weakness. The structure, the power, and the institutional
inertia all tend to inhibit innovative thinkers and drive them to the
fringes. At the social and intellectual fringes, thinkers are freer to let
their imaginations roam, but are still constrained by a sense of
current reality. The great innovators start at the fringes: Albert
Einstein was a patent clerk in Geneva who couldn’t get a university
teaching job. Ho Chi Minh toiled in Paris. The two “Steves” who
founded Apple Computer had roots, respectively, in Eastern
mysticism and the “hacker” outlaw computer subculture.
To see the direction that future Einsteins, Hos, Jobses, and
Wozniaks might take fifteen years from now, you must pursue the
fringes today. The danger in some of this exploration—nosing
around the docks of Shanghai or the crack houses of Manhattan—is
very real. But it risks only your time and your sensibilities to attend
an off-off-Broadway performance, a rap music concert, an outlaw
scientists’ conference, or a lecture by an unconventional thinker.
It risks even less, and in some ways is as valuable, to read about
fringes. If you read the CoEvolution Quarterly magazine in the mid-
1970s, you encountered a new idea called “the Gaia hypothesis.”
Two scientists well known within their fields for being at the fringes
—atmospheric scientist James Lovelock and microbiologist Lynn
Margulis—proposed that the earth was a single, vast, self-regulating
organism. The idea has recently emerged as an increasingly useful
way of thinking about the global greenhouse effect.
Having encountered an idea early at the fringes, you can
recognize it and use it better—if it finally emerges from obscurity.
Amory Lovins argued in the mid-seventies that improved technology
could reduce energy consumption even while the economy
expanded. The energy industry saw him as an extremist; it saw no
further than its image of him as a hippie conservationist who
tinkered with solar power in Colorado. But Shell paid attention to
his ideas as early as 1973, and pressed him to push the ideas
further. Amory’s insights helped us anticipate that oil demand might
not come back, even after the economy bounced back in 1982. The
reason was energy-efficiency; people had more money, but spent
less of it on oil. This knowledge from the fringe was one of the


---PAGE BREAK---

sources of insight that led to Shell being one of the few energy
companies to foresee that OPEC would face an oil price collapse as a
result.
Today, one of the most useful fringe areas is “nanotechnology”—
the self-reproducing machinery, no larger than molecules, but with
enormous power to (for example) transform all industrial processes;
imagine making goods from the atom up out of materials we have
specially designed for operation at the molecular scale. Eric
Drexler’s book about nanotechnology, Engines of Creation, originated
far from orthodox science, but has already influenced what many
scientists believe will be possible soon. Whether or not they believe
nanotechnology is possible (opinion is divided), they now realize
that machines operating far beyond direct human control are not
just possible, but probably inevitable. Drexler’s book raises cogent
questions about the ethics and values in a world of such machines,
and by watching out for signs of nanotechnology, you could be
witness to the birth of a powerful new discipline.
Is it possible to create an atlas of the fringe? Alas, the fringe
changes and even varies depending on the situation. Few people
would consider management consultant and Harvard Business
School professor Michael Porter “fringe”—his book The Competitive
Advantage of Nations has influenced governments. Yet to traditional
economists, he’s dangerously outside their main stream. The Sierra
Club may still be “fringe” to a few, but many environmentalists see
it as a conservative center. And it’s the fringe environmentalist
groups, such as Earth First, which are redefining the political
landscape. Even traditional institutions have fringes: NASA had a
group of weirdos in the 1960s who all went away into small
computer companies. Xerox had its Palo Alto Research Center, from
where the Macintosh was born. The Office of Naval Research used
to sponsor regular interdisciplinary conferences where, for example,
I first heard molecular engineering mentioned.
It’s difficult to predict which fringe elements will remain in
obscurity, and which will change the world. During my years at SRI,
I was not the only futurist who watched UFO enthusiast groups.
Ultimately, they offered no insight about the future. Meanwhile,


---PAGE BREAK---

Michael Murphy, the founder of the Esalen Center in Big Sur,
California, was quietly paving the way for glasnost. As the gathering
point for many “New Age” therapies, Esalen is about as fringy as
you can get. Michael himself was not interested in politics but,
beginning in the 1970s, he traveled through Russia investigating
experiments in superhuman bodily feats, which is the subject of
serious research there. Along the way, he realized that he was
building a channel for what he called “citizen diplomacy,” through
which individual Americans and Soviets could meet. Many of those
meetings, in turn, influenced some of the Soviets who began to
transform their country.
Gradually, as you investigate the fringes, you develop a sense
about which people are intellectual pathfinders and which are
crackpots. You can sometimes recognize the pathfinders by their
energy and humor. In the early 1970s, fringe political group leaders
began to bemoan the sudden “apathy” among the teenagers who
followed them. Meanwhile, telephone network “phone phreaks”
were surreptitiously exploring the ins and outs of the country’s
communications system. As personal computers emerged, the
numbers of these electronics enthusiasts exploded. They joined
small groups with such names as the People’s Computer Company
and the Homebrew Computer Club. Steve Wozniak, of Apple, and
Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft, both began as phone “phreaking”
teenagers.
When you look at fringes, don’t let your preconceived notions
keep you from the right information. The spiritual descendants of
the early “phone phreaks” were a group of teenagers called the
“Legion of Doom,” who took their name from characters in Marvel
comic books. The Secret Service began to seize their personal
computers and floppy disks, implying that they were sponsored by
Communists and threatening national security. The raid was
instigated by BellSouth, one of the largest local telephone
companies in America. The Secret Service was asking, in effect, the
wrong scenario question: “How can we prevent this information
from leaking out?” By seizing those disks, the Secret Service agents
thought they had something of value; but the same files were


---PAGE BREAK---

already endlessly circulating in hundreds of other computers around
the country, having been exchanged through telephone lines.
The best question to ask would be: “What can we learn from the
experiences of these teenagers about the changing nature of the
phone network, and about the real dangers facing it?” That doesn’t
necessarily mean letting kids go “scot-free” after committing crimes
(although none of these kids tampered with the phone network or
let a virus into it; rather, they explored its hidden features).
Ironically, the day the New York Times broke the story of the Secret
Service raid, it also reported that the U.S. Army was recruiting
hackers for electronic warfare.
Tactics: Where to Look
Everyone’s list of research tactics is personal and probably
different. This is mine, refined over twenty-five years of practice.
•  Remarkable People: In 1984, a Royal Dutch/Shell study on the
future of Japan brought me to that nation for several weeks, to visit
a series of Japanese intellectuals and planners. My Japanese staff
members and I quickly perceived a uniformity of view in these
people. They came from different segments of life, but they shared a
common perception about the near future—that Japan, despite its
prosperity of recent years, had many serious problems that would
weigh heavily on it. The values of Japanese youth appeared to be in
serious decline; the society was aging rapidly; they were paying the
price of rising protectionism; and they had no clear sense of how to
cope with their new global economic role. They expressed fear of a
slow-growth economy and decline in international influence.
The last man we talked to was Kishida Junnosuke—chairman of
the editorial board of the Asahi Shinbun, the biggest Japanese
newspaper. I told him about the list of problems that we had heard


---PAGE BREAK---

over and over. “That sounds right,” he said. “Those are indeed
critical problems.”
“Then are you pessimistic about Japan’s future?” I asked.
“I am optimistic—of course.” That jarred me; he was obviously
sincere. Seeing my confusion, he told me that the Japanese had two
words for optimism. “Rakutenteki describes the feeling you in the
West call ‘optimism,’ which in Japan is thought of as the optimism a
young man feels looking toward old age. When you are very young
you have no responsibilities, and when you are old you have no
responsibilities. But in between, there are sixteen different words for
‘duty.’ This is a Utopian kind of optimism, a faith in a world of the
future in which all problems are solved, taken care of.” The message
was not lost on me so far: he was implying, quite politely, that many
Japanese see this naive optimism in Americans.
“Our second word for optimism is Rakkanteki,” Mr. Kishida
continued. “It means having enough challenges to give life meaning.
In that sense, I am very optimistic about Japan’s future.” In Japan, I
came to realize, people accepted their problems as challenges to be
met. Through meeting them, people would grow and improve. I
thought of the infrastructure problem in the United States, which
most governments have ignored, hoping it would go away. Yet our
highways and roads are literally disintegrating, and it will take
hundreds of billions of dollars to repair the damage. We don’t see
that as a challenge to be overcome, as we did the space race, but as
an ugly unsolvable problem to be denied.
When the yen went up in 1985 and Japanese industry found itself
in an adverse position, many observers feared that their economy
might collapse. But the country quickly adapted to a high-yen
world, in part because they saw it as a challenge to be overcome. At
Shell, though we recognized the pitfalls that faced Japan, our
scenario for its future was optimistic. We used the concept behind
Rakkanteki in our presentations to explain why we felt the
challenges the Japanese faced were likely to be met successfully.
People, especially unconventional thinkers, are a key source of
information. You may remember from Chapter 1 that Pierre Wack,
who first led the scenario-planning team for Shell, felt that, to see


---PAGE BREAK---

the future, he had to go out and talk to what he called “remarkable
people” with their fingers on the pulse of change. These are not
usually the conventional thinkers you read about in the New York
Times. Unconventional people often are found in unconventional
locations and roles. In my life they have included a neurobiologist
from Santiago, a computer scientist in Boston, an economist in Paris,
a rock star in a studio in the English countryside, and an ecologist at
an advanced high-technology research project in the Arizona desert.
These are not necessarily bohemian or esoteric individuals. They
may have quite conventional lives. But their thinking is unorthodox.
I warmly remember a bureaucrat, enmeshed in the organization of
the European Community, who taught me to see the EEC as not just
another government agency, but a bold redefinition of the idea of
what Europe, and governments, should be. It was the European
alternative to the massive wars it had fought over the past two
centuries, where conflicts could be dealt with by dialogue and
procedure rather than the battlefield.
Some of the thinkers are luminaries whom I have sought
specifically for their “official” insights, and learned that their
“unofficial” ideas were just as valuable. In 1987, for a project on the
future of the stock market for the London Stock Exchange, I
interviewed Peter Drucker, the well-known writer and authority on
business management and the future. He was then in his late
seventies. He has a gravelly voice and an Austrian accent, and is a
wonderful 
storyteller. 
We 
talked 
about 
the 
technological
transformation of securities trading from face-to-face encounters on
trading floors to electronic transactions on computer display
screens. I was intrigued to hear Drucker say that he had started his
own career, in the early 1930s, as a stockbroker in London. “The
market is really about relationships,” he remarked. “It’s about
people coming together, getting to know and trust one another.”
We had been concerned about planning for new electronic
systems and the rules of the new electronic marketplace. Drucker
was telling us also to pay attention to maintaining the underlying
network of personal relationships, which the London Stock
Exchange directors and I might have taken for granted. This turned


---PAGE BREAK---

out to be a key insight. We began planning how to re-create that
fabric of relationships that would be disrupted when the web of
trading floor, hallway, and lunch conversations were replaced by
computer terminals in offices scattered around the world. The
honesty of the market had been assured less by the rule books and
more by people’s knowledge of each other born of the web of
relationships built up in trading on the floor of the exchange.
Meanwhile, around the same time, my colleagues and I were
starting our own consulting company, Global Business Network.
Drucker’s remarks clarified, for me, the importance of maintaining
our network of relationships. Without them a cumbersome
regulatory process was almost inevitable. Indeed in recent years the
London financial community has been struggling to unburden itself
of the complex tangle of rules born of the Financial Services Act,
which had been intended to diminish regulation.
Sometimes a remarkable person is a specialist whose insight
illuminates vistas outside his specialty. At Shell, we received a key
insight about planning from Professor Alan Wilson, a paleontologist
at the University of California at Berkeley. On a visit to the campus
my colleagues and I looked him up and he helped us understand the
role of intelligence and learning in the evolutionary processes. The
role of communication played by gregarious songbirds as compared
with loners turned out to furnish a useful way of thinking and
talking about the ways planning works as a process of learning.
If you are a mid-level manager, an entrepreneur, or a small
business owner, however, how do you gain contact with the unusual
thinkers who are capable of sparking insights? How do you find
people who challenge your preconceptions? Fundamentally, you use
the same methods we used at Shell. You read and contact (usually
by writing) the authors of challenging articles or books. You seek
contacts through friends. You use computer networks (which I’ll
describe later in this chapter). You take courses—especially on
interdisciplinary 
subjects—and 
you 
attend 
meetings 
and
conferences. I have sometimes met valuable people by attending
book-signing parties, and striking up a conversation afterward.


---PAGE BREAK---

An individual or small business person has several advantages
which we at Shell did not. Since we represented a multinational
corporation, many people expected us to pay for their information.
The same person will often talk for free to a courteous, considerate,
well-informed individual; especially to someone who can ask smart
questions. An individual can also focus questions onto narrower,
more local topics, and can seek out remarkable people nearby whom
larger corporations would probably miss.
Most importantly, you have something to offer in return. The
most remarkable people understand that their ability to be
remarkable depends on their skill at listening to others. A few years
ago writer Art Kleiner interviewed the late W. Edwards Deming,
founder of the “quality movement” first in Japan and then in the
United States. What was the greatest pleasure he took in his work?
“Learning!” the ninety-two-year-old Deming thundered, and steered
the conversation to what his interviewer could tell him.
The scenario process itself gives you something to bargain with.
At Shell, we often used our scenarios to communicate a new view of
the world to outsiders and customers. I would give talks to airlines,
for instance, about our scenarios on airline fuel and the future of the
fleet. These insights were something we could easily trade for
information. A small business or individual can do exactly the same
thing. Thus, when contacting someone for a conversation, it is often
useful to put a hint of your own work and insights into the letter.
To some readers, this emphasis on personal relationships may
seem contrary to their normal business practice. Normal business is
about products, services, and the exchange of cash. But in an
economy where knowledge and information directly improve the
bottom line, personal relationships become much more important.
They are the source not just of facts, but of judgment. Don’t
evaluate such people by how often they are right, but by how often
they nudge you to look at something in a new way. Cultivate
people, for instance, with whom you disagree deeply but can talk
amicably. You’re looking for people whose remarks will catalyze
your better understanding, as Kishida’s and Drucker’s remarks did
for me.


---PAGE BREAK---

•    Sources of Surprise: Make the time to read outside your
immediate specialty—if necessary, taking time from more “active”
tasks. Stick bookmarks in promising places, then graze the marked
passages later. Allow yourself to become enthralled once in a while.
Almost anyone’s reading habits can be broadened. Over the years,
as a scenario-planner, I have made deliberate attempts to broaden
my own, reading across as many disciplines, subjects, and social
strata as possible, seeking out things that would not ordinarily be
my idea of interesting reading matter. I can’t visit all the fringes, but
I can read about all of them. I buy books even if there is a remote
chance they will be useful. Which means that I skim many more
books than I read. I rummage through my stacks of new books often,
looking for things that draw my attention. And when I find
something that does appeal to me, I make sure to read it thoroughly.
I also make semi-regular pilgrimages to my local branch of the U.S.
Government Printing Office, where by browsing the shelves I have
found little gems such as the Insider’s Guide to Demographic Know
How.
What I look for in my book reading is surprises—perceptions that
are new to me, and then become part of my own perception.
Popular science books can be invaluable this way: The Cerebral
Symphony by William Calvin (about the biological origins of
consciousness); The Dreams of Reason by Heinz Pagels (about the
role of computers and complexity in the modern world); and Chaos
by James Gleick (about a recent paradigm shift that cuts across all
the sciences). Occasionally I get a jump on the popular books: the
role of chaos in complex systems was already visible in the mid-
1970s in the writings of an obscure Belgian mathematician named
René Thom. Another important book for me, Terry Eagleton’s
Literary Theory, led me to understand the value of looking at how
people extract meaning from information.
I read some fiction avidly—novels by Robertson Davies, for
example—but do not find most novels, even science fiction novels,
useful in scenario research. The ideas are not surprising enough.
Occasionally there is an exception. Neuromancer by William Gibson,
with its dark and pragmatic vision of a “cyberpunk” society,


---PAGE BREAK---

influenced my thinking about the social ramifications of new
communication technologies. The nihilistic future culture which
Gibson described—of people fighting underworld guerilla wars by
“jacking in” to intricate computer networks—gave me standards for
judging the potential underside of the computer revolution. That, in
turn, helped me realize that the phone companies had more to gain
from cultivating the insights of young “hackers” (as described
earlier in this chapter) than from shutting them out.
As important as reading books is knowing what books have been
published, if only to get a feeling for the intellectual current of the
day. I haunt bookstores and read book reviews—if nowhere else, in
the weekly New York Times Book Review. I usually peruse the three
or four pages which Publishers Weekly devotes to new nonfiction. I
chose to live and start my business in Berkeley in part because of
the great bookstores.
I also depend upon people as pointers to books. Michael Ventura,
whose essays I’ve quoted in this chapter, came to my attention at
the suggestion of a friend, Jon McIntire, until recently the manager
of the rock band the Grateful Dead. Jon literally walked up to me
and said, “Hey, you’ve got to read this book.” Published in 1985, it
was already going out of print. The last essay was particularly
excruciating, in the “I wish I’d written that” sense; called “The Next
200 Years,” it was the best writing I’d read about the future in a
long time.
•  Filters: Every good magazine editor is a clarifier—someone who
wades into a muck of new ideas and fringe suggestions and reshapes
it in a coherent form, filtered for readers to use. My opinion of a
magazine rises or falls with my opinion of the quality of the editor’s
filter. In the best magazines, the material is still somewhat raw and
unpolished, but digested enough not to waste my time.
You don’t need to subscribe to a magazine to benefit from it. A
visit to any decent public library can enable you to sample dozens of
very different views of the world in the space of an hour. Obscure
scholarly journals are less interesting than the cornucopia of
specialized publications. Routinely pick up a dozen magazines from


---PAGE BREAK---

a newstand and scan them. Include magazines you would not
otherwise read: an audiophile magazine, a literary journal, a
gardening magazine, a car magazine, a political magazine opposing
your own opinions, a magazine about a hobby you don’t have, a
fashion magazine. Don’t be afraid to throw in a random-impulse
purchase: odd magazines could turn out to be the most cost-effective
research dollars you spend.
I don’t normally look at Metropolitan Home, for example, but I
picked it up to browse last year, almost at random, and noticed an
article on “LA Design.” That article was a useful window on a new
multicultural society emerging in L.A. I saw photographs of single
dwellings that fused Asian and Latin references, high technology,
“MTV”-style 
youth 
culture, 
and 
Western 
materialism. 
It
foreshadowed what I would later recognize in our “Global
Teenager” project described in Chapter 7.
To offer a sense of the range of publications one might read
regularly, I assembled the following list. It includes my regular
sources for mainstream and fringe illumination. I also gathered
suggestions over a computer network from Global Business Network
members and present those here as well. This, of course, is a early-
1990s list. No one’s perception of a magazine stays constant, as the
comments about Omni will note. Magazines rise and fall over time.
Some disappear altogether and are occasionally resurrected. The
Saturday Review followed just such a trajectory.
•  Discover is a popular science magazine which “has a scoop now
and then,” says Kevin Kelly, editor of Wired.
•    The Economist is, in my opinion, the single best source of
information about what is happening in the world. I always told my
staff at Shell that I wanted Shell managers to read news in The
Economist six months after they heard about it from us. When that
happened regularly, I was happy. It was a great challenge. They set
a very high standard. Occasionally The Economist covers speculative
and imaginative issues brilliantly, but it is a very mainstream
publication. They’re willing to take on topics that others won’t.


---PAGE BREAK---

Regrettably, I know of no credible fringe-oriented business
magazine.
•    Electric Word was a magazine of the early nineties, “about the
externalization of language and almost everything else.” It was
subsequently transformed by its editors into Wired magazine.
According to executive editor Kevin Kelly, “Wired is about what the
new technology means to our lives, from art, business, politics,
culture, and education, to our personal relationships.”
•    Foreign Affairs, the mainstream journal of thought about
international relations, read by actor Peter Coyote and businessman
J. R. Frey.
•  A small periodical called Future Survey is quite good. It’s literally a
newsletter, with consistently interesting abstracts of books, and
pointers to magazine articles. I often find small, valuable nuggets
summarized there.
•  Granta—“published in London, each issue is a book-sized journal
of unusually perceptive, high-quality writing and thinking,” says
writer Art Kleiner. Peter Coyote also suggested this magazine.
•  Harper’s is a relatively mainstream magazine which is very useful
for surveying the fringes, because it culls material from unusual
sources.
•  The Manchester Guardian Weekly is a good source for news stories
as seen from three of the most interesting newspapers in three of the
most important countries. “It includes excerpts from the Manchester
Guardian, Le Monde, and the Washington Post,” says J. R. Frey.
•  Mondo 2000 is about new forms of mind-altering electronics and
similar ideas emerging from underground culture now.
•    As Jon McIntire puts it, “The New Yorker, amazingly enough,
breaks news from time to time in a very thorough way.”


---PAGE BREAK---

•  Mark Satin’s New Options, says Kevin Kelly, “has the best pulse on
the American grassroots political future.”
•  The British New Scientist has an excellent filter. Important science
news will often appear here first, while it is still navigating its way
out of the fringes. It is also an excellently written magazine, with a
good grasp of the policy implications of new technologies.
•  I read the New York Times Tuesday science section every week for
its in-depth coverage of three or four important science stories.
•  I never read Omni myself, but others do. “I’ve changed my mind
about it,” says writer/editor/Whole Earth Catalog founder Stewart
Brand. “It’s a mainstream Mondo 2000. Omni’s bonding of science
and science fiction I once excoriated, but they were right and I was
wrong.”
•  Esther Dyson’s insider computer newsletter, Release 1.0, is “one of
the best future gazers,” says Kevin Kelly.
•  Scientific American is not where I see new ideas, but where I see
new ideas moving to the mainstream. If an idea moves from the New
Scientist into Scientific American, I know it’s being taken on board the
mainstream and will have a large impact.
•    Science is the most authoritative science magazine. It covers
energy, the environment, economics, biology, psychology, and
information technology—dense, but accessible to any intelligent
layperson.
•    Technology Review is the “best on social consequences of new
technology,” says Kevin Kelly.
•    Howard Rheingold, writer and former Whole Earth editor,
recommends the Utne Reader—a digest whose editors scan
thousands of small and alternative magazines. I personally find Utne
too well cooked, too unfocused, and too uncritical. Nonetheless, the


---PAGE BREAK---

Utne Reader is worth scanning if only because it’s the only magazine
of its kind.
•  The Washington Spectator is, says Peter Coyote, “heir to I. F. Stone’s
Weekly.”
•    Finally, there is the Whole Earth Review, formerly called the
CoEvolution Quarterly—a magazine which I have written for, and to
which many Global Business Network members have close ties.
Nonetheless, I am often surprised by its contents. There’s a rawness
to Whole Earth which is appealing, and an acute intelligence that has
been there for a long time, through a half-dozen different editors. Its
contributors, often readers of the magazine itself, poke into new and
strange phenomena.
In many cases, publications are too ephemeral to recommend. I
receive a fascinating newsletter on interactive media that, two years
from now, will be of less interest because interactive media will be
in everyone’s living room (as the explosive growth in the World
Wide Web and commercial on-line services on the Internet have
since shown).
Our own preconceptions sometimes keep us from paying attention
to ideas that challenge conventional wisdom. We need to break
through those preconceptions without opening ourselves completely
to new ideas. If we open completely, we’ll drown in such trivia as
crystal power and pyramid effects. The distinction between that sort
of thing and, say, Mondo 2000, is subtle. Filters whose opinions you
trust are crucial for telling the difference.
Filters act on your behalf, discarding everything but the
information that might be of interest to you. This kind of mediation,
traditionally performed by editors and publishers of newspapers,
books, and magazines, is a growth industry as the tide of data
swells. I follow the work of some agencies, for example, that do
nothing but monitor and interpret information: the U.S. Congress
Office of Technology Assessment, for example. Their main client is
Congress (which arguably doesn’t use them as it should), but they
make their interpretations available through inexpensive reports,


---PAGE BREAK---

from the Government Printing Office. It’s like having a cut-rate
think tank at your disposal.
Universities serve as filters. A good local political science or
economics department will sponsor speeches or symposia. Some,
like the University of California, publish articles and newsletters
that they send to interested neighbors. I’ve come to appreciate the
National Public Radio network as another prime filtering source,
with a catholicity of tastes and a willingness to talk to the fringe. I
listen regularly to their “All Things Considered,” “Monitor Radio,”
and “Fresh Air” programs. And I’ve come to love CNN; I see it as
providing the texture of our times.
The most beloved filters are friends. Information-hunters and -
gatherers seem to work best in groups. As people sift, they forward
news and ideas to other people who would find it interesting. If you
have a dozen or more friends who reroute key items of information
to 
one 
another, 
the 
total 
amount 
of 
information-sifting
accomplished is much greater than the sum of the parts.
But strangers can be filters too. I was walking down the street one
day in Palo Alto, California, and a man came up to me and said,
“How’s the future?” I looked blankly at him. “You’re Peter Schwartz,
aren’t you? You write about the future, right? You’re interested in
computers and kids, aren’t you? You ought to read a book called
Mindstorms by Seymour Papert. You’d really like it.” He turned and
walked away. He was absolutely right on all counts. I still haven’t
the faintest idea who he was.
And there is, of course, a filter within yourself. When a book, or
magazine article, or idea makes you uncomfortable, notice your
exact reaction. If you’re bored, move on. If you feel threatened, stay
with it and see what troubles you.
•    Immersion in Challenging Environments: Travel is the single
best way to immerse yourself in unfamiliarity—to force yourself to
adopt an alien point of view, albeit temporarily. It forces you to ask
questions about why people live the way they do. What created
their relationships, goals, and values? What are they trying to
accomplish? When traveling, I make a conscious effort to encounter


---PAGE BREAK---

difference. I take local transportation, and walk unaccustomed
streets and routes. Because I usually have to work in urban offices, I
deliberately visit factories or villages. I seek out friends of friends,
or other nonbusiness contacts, and provoke conversations with
shopkeepers and cab drivers.
Visitors to India these days discover that there are three separate
cultures to see there: 350 million people there live in the Stone Age;
250 million live in the nineteenth century; and 100 million live at
the technical edge of modern society with nuclear power plants,
satellites, and advanced computer systems. This 100 million people,
a population twice that of England, reached its proficiency only
during the last twenty years. To a scenario-planner, this means that
the future of India is not that of a typical developing nation. India
could be one of the next great military powers; already it has the
fourth-largest military in the world, with aircraft carriers,
submarines, bombers, and long-range missiles. One could envision
China and India in an all-out war for control of Tibet.
Another scenario has India becoming the world’s most proficient
producer of computer software. It’s not an accident that Hewlett-
Packard has set up a programming center outside of Bombay.
Consider the number of Indian mathematicians in American
universities. They are the tip of a much larger iceberg. The most
important advance from Bell Labs in ten years was produced by an
Indian mathematician. When you travel in India, you can see
evidence of a five-thousand-year-old Tamil mathematical tradition.
In Delhi there is a museum of ancient astronomical instruments,
including a giant protractor three stories high, which they used to
measure the movements of the heavens. They didn’t have lenses or
telescopes, but they understood the mathematical movements of the
planets centuries before Copernicus.
I particularly love to visit countries which shock my American
sensibilities. On my last trip to Japan, a cultural anthropologist
named Steve Barnett (former head of product planning for Nissan in
the U.S. and now with GBN) took me past two buildings that have
occupied my mind ever since. One, a four-story artifact in the
Roppongi district of Tokyo, towered over its one- and two-story


---PAGE BREAK---

neighbors. It had a stone front, with giant arches and gothic
windows, modeled (I later found out) on a sixteenth-century
Florentine palace. But out in front of the stone was a cast-iron frame
(in the style of the very modern Pompidou Center in Paris), visible
to the street, and giant cast-iron stairs, such as those of a
nineteenth-century factory. The stairs were designed to lead
nowhere, and to distort perspective in a distinctly hypermodern
fashion. The building was a deliberate architectural joke. The
Japanese culture, it is often argued, is becoming an incoherent
jumble of influences picked up from all over the world.
Nearby, Steve and I found ourselves walking down an alley past
another building—a tiny, one-story nightclub, painted black. Its
walls were a densely packed collage of tires, parts of cars, and
bicycles, protruding from the concrete. A young Japanese man in his
mid-twenties stood in the doorway, wearing thin wire-rimmed
glasses and a long black coat. It looked intriguing enough that we
tried to visit. Without speaking, the man now blocking the door
refused to let us pass. As we walked away, a long black Japanese
limousine pulled up, and three tough-looking young men stepped
out of the car. No one smiled or spoke; the doorman stepped aside
silently and let them by.
We had seen two hidden sides to Japan, lurking behind the
Toyota/Sony/Matsushita face. The first was the intense playfulness
of Japanese society, even in such ponderous fields as architecture.
The second was the high-technology, dark side of Japanese
gangsterism. I found myself imagining those men running a black
market in semiconductor chips, or selling biotechnological methods
for changing identities. Any scenario in which Japan influences the
rest of the world had better include these two elements as part of
the influence.
Visiting Singapore, I realized what a powerful force for economic
growth exists in the workers of Asia. In the driven eyes of the
workers, in the instant factories stacked in vertical concrete high-
rises, and in the quick response to the whims of tastes halfway
around the world, I could see the aspirations of wealth aborning.
These people will make it, no matter what happens.


---PAGE BREAK---

You need not travel all over the world to expose yourself to
differences. You can encounter the Third World right down the
street, or stumble onto a pocket of the twenty-first century around
the corner. In the past, gathering information meant going to
centers of culture and commerce—Paris, London, New York,
California, Tokyo. Today, just as power is universally less
centralized, so are information and culture. For instance, one of the
major sources of new thinking is Salina, Kansas—home of the Land
Institute and a branch of ecological philosophy which gets little
media attention on the coasts. But even Kansans won’t find the
sources of ideas there unless they consciously look with a receptive
mind.
One of my most fruitful scenario trips was to a friend’s house in
Big Sur on the California coast, on the opening day of the 1984
Olympics. I had been out of the U.S. for about two years at that
point. My friend suggested we watch the ceremonies and reached
for his television guide—not the ordinary TV Guide, but a new, inch-
thick magazine called Orbital Satellite. Page after page covered
hundreds of options for every time slot: international broadcasts,
network feeds, cable relays, and local programs. The listings
mingled with ads for satellite dishes, receivers, tuners, and motors,
all made by companies that had not even existed two years before.
An entire outlaw industry had sprung up almost overnight—literally
in the two years I had been gone. The guide itself was produced by
a hippie commune in Tennessee. That visit opened my mind to a
future of proliferating, fragmenting media, no longer dominated by
the reigning “big three” television networks, which were just about
to begin a long slide into dramatically diminished audiences.
•  Networked Sensibilities: At Royal Dutch/Shell, we had a tough
time sharing ideas among the scenario-planners who were scattered
in 120 countries, in every imaginable time zone. So we decided to
open up the community and make it a network instead of a
bottleneck. We acquired the services of a computer conferencing
system, equipped around fifty of our planners with computer
terminals, and taught them to use them. When we brought outsiders


---PAGE BREAK---

into some conferences, making it possible for a planner in London to
query a scientist in California (while others could still monitor the
conversation), everyone in the network was enriched. Knowledge is
the only kind of wealth that multiplies when you give it away, and
computer conferencing can be used as an engine for generating and
multiplying that kind of wealth. Shell continues to experiment with
computer networking.
To a computer novice, the idea of hooking up a computer and
telephone seems daunting, but there is no more personal way to use
a personal computer. You enter text for other people to read. They,
in turn, sign on at their convenience and reply with their comments.
It is the most efficient, effective way to reach people; you need not
struggle to find a time to talk, and you can ask a question of dozens
of people at one time. By navigating the networks, you can find
experts on any field: toxic waste disposal, preparing for a career in
education, azaleas, Middle East architecture. Some of these people
will be strangers whom you would never meet otherwise. You will
not see them personally, only their ideas and words (although many
computer network users end up meeting and becoming friends).
Computer network users now number over fifty million worldwide,
including a large population of opinion leaders, scientific
researchers, technologists, and writers. They form a round-the-clock
network of consultants. The Whole Earth Software Catalog described
the online culture this way:
Good writers have charisma. Mediocre writers improve. Pushy or
insensitive writers get ignored. People learn to articulate their
emotions more explicitly to avoid being misunderstood. Race,
gender, shyness, disabilities, age, and physical presence all lose
importance. You come to feel as if everyone is always accessible.
But you also learn not to pressure people—they’ll just shrug and
ignore your message. The key impression is one of civilization—or,
more precisely, a new way of being civilized.
A modest disclaimer: By now the reader may have guessed that I
am fascinated by and am an enthusiastic user of new technologies.


---PAGE BREAK---

My enthusiasm may creep in as a bias. I do pay close attention to
new technology both because of its larger impact on the world
around us and because I want to use it myself. However, by working
in teams that bias can be tempered by attention to social and human
spheres, including the impact of technology on people’s lives as well
as life in societies which are not built around Western technologies.
The Global Business Network: Designing an Information-
Hunting and -Gathering Company
In 1987, when I left Royal Dutch/Shell, I sought out Jay Ogilvy,
who was then the Director of Research of the SRI Values and
Lifestyles Program. Essentially, we wanted to create a new type of
company which would do for many clients what Pierre Wack had
done for Shell: to plug them into a network of remarkable people, to
include them in a highly focused and filtered information flow, and
to reorganize their perceptions about alternative futures through the
scenario method.
We suspect that many companies will take the form of an
information-gathering company during the years to come. The
advantages—high information, pleasant contacts, little office
politics, low expenses, and a flexible workforce—are just too great
to resist. When we began there was not anything quite like what we
wanted to create in the research and consulting world. There were
informal 
networks 
of 
professionals 
on 
subjects 
such 
as
organizational development, but they rarely tackled projects
together. Such mainstream consulting companies as McKinsey, Bain,
and our old alma mater, SRI, were closed; they drew tight walls
around their people. Occasionally they hired technical experts, but
the last thing they wanted to do was network; they saw it as giving
away their jewels. On the other hand, we saw this new “Global
Business Network” as a company based on openness. People would
share their insights and knowledge, and take away our insights and


---PAGE BREAK---

knowledge in return. Some companies would hire network members
to tackle special projects; others would simply pay to participate.
That much was obvious to us; deciding how to organize it, and how
to make our network available to client companies, required a lot
more thought.
But we did not have much time. Almost immediately, we had our
first few clients: the International Stock Exchange, AT&T, and
BellSouth. We served them in a conventional consulting role:
developing strategic scenarios. But we gradually realized that this
work gave them less value than our original idea of a network.
Alone, they were hiring our time. As part of a network, they could
develop their own understanding.
Part of the inspiration had come from the experience of the
Learning Conferences. In 1986, Shell’s Planning Coordinator Arie de
Geus was attempting to understand the nature of learning in
complex systems such as Shell. He was trying to improve Shell’s
capacity for using planning as a tool for corporate learning. He
began a project with executives at AT&T and Volvo, who were all
interested in organizational learning; how did a large institution
achieve proficiency in adapting and changing? If we brought them
together with individuals who were aggressively thinking about the
nature of learning, some creative understanding would emerge.
We organized a series of face-to-face and computer conferences,
in which leading-edge researchers in learning could talk to each
other. As organizer and convenor, we brought in Stewart Brand,
who had founded the Whole Earth Catalog and CoEvolution Quarterly
(now the Whole Earth Review), and who was then working on a book
about the MIT Media Lab. When he visited prospective participants,
such as computer learning pioneer Seymour Papert, biologist Peter
Warshall, artificial intelligence pioneer Marvin Minsky, or
anthropologist Mary Catherine Bateson, they would invariably say,
“Why would a big corporation be interested in my work?” Our reply
was, “These vast organizations were beginning to function like
organisms as their complexity began to approach that of biological
systems.” These large companies had large problems; seemingly
esoteric ideas seemed to hold solutions. An organization at the scale


---PAGE BREAK---

and complexity of Shell, for instance, functions very much like a
brain. It has the same unconscious sense of values, myths, and
psychology. Papert’s research in cognitive science and individual
learning might directly help people who wanted to make large
organizations operate more effectively.
We held two meetings each year—Learning Conferences—
deliberately 
scattered 
around 
the 
world—in 
a 
Cambridge,
Massachusetts, supercomputer company, a Volvo factory in Sweden,
at the Tucson “biosphere” (a project for creating an artificially
sealed ecological environment, as a sort of model for space
colonies), and in Costa Rica. Each environment was chosen because
people were trying to build learning institutions. Costa Rica, for
example, is a remarkable example of political and social learning. Its
quality of life—as measured in mortality rates, per capita gross
national product, individual incomes, literacy, and education—is far
superior to its Central American neighbors. One reason is the fact
that they renounced war forty years ago; they are the only Central
American nation with no military. They invested, instead, in solving
their social problems, and managed to do so effectively: they have a
very modest police force and virtually no crime. The Learning
Conference attendees deliberately sought out people (including
President Oscar Arias, and the director of a Costa Rican department
store) who could explain the details of how this happened. But the
trip brought more than conversation; the participants had to go and
see the day-to-day life for themselves to appreciate the possibilities
of a peaceful Central American country.
The meetings did not “work” in the sense of creating any tangible
product. Rather, they led to understandings and collaborations, for
both the corporate clients and the participants. Among the more
interesting collaborations that resulted was a partnership between
Chilean neurobiologist Francisco Varela and computer scientist
Danny Hillis (designer of the “Connection Machine,” a massively
parallel computer) to simulate the learning processes of the immune
system to better understand how such auto-immune diseases as
AIDS work.


---PAGE BREAK---

As we began GBN, the Learning Conferences gave us another
model, and encouraged Stewart to join us as a principal. Not long
after that, Napier Collyns, a former colleague from Shell and a
master at creating and nurturing networks, came aboard. Our fifth
partner was Lawrence Wilkinson, an alumnus of Oxford and the
Harvard 
Business 
School, 
who 
was 
president 
of 
a
filmmaking/animation studio in San Francisco. The simple truth was
that, as individuals, we each wanted the network for ourselves. By
selling it to client companies, we could make it more formal, and
expand it beyond what any of us could individually afford.
Some of the first members of GBN were old friends from Shell;
Francisco Varela, the paradigm-busting neurobiologist, for example,
had been involved in our research into planning and learning in
companies and the natural world. We also sought out other people
whose diversity and depth would enrich the network, much as we
had done at Shell. Our first corporate members were also diverse:
AT&T, Volvo, Inland Steel, UNOCAL, Shell, BP, Pacific Gas and
Electric, the International Stock Exchange, Statoil, ABB, and
BellSouth. We met in Stockholm to discuss the future of the global
environment with a group that included environmentalists,
European industrialists, pollsters, and environmental policymakers.
A different mix of people met in San Francisco to discuss the theme
of “people in the nineties.” Yet another group met in London and
considered the integration of Europe. Meanwhile, we built up our
own set of conferences on the Whole Earth ’Lectronic Link (WELL)
computer network, and set about encouraging and abetting our
members to join in and take part.
We wanted to make GBN feel convivial, like a club that people
could join. Thus, we could not organize it according to the hierarchy
of a traditional consulting firm. We retained some elements of a
conventional organization: accounting, bookkeeping, office chairs,
and photocopiers. But there was no “boss” in the traditional sense.
That’s possible, in part, because we do much of our administration
via computer conferences, which allow us to stay in touch while
traveling and reinforce the feeling of equals. Online, we can not
dominate with our physical presence or cut someone else off in mid-


---PAGE BREAK---

sentence. That ethic carries over into face-to-face meetings. By
contrast, I have visited consulting firms where everyone talks only
about “what the CEO thinks.” Before long, the entire organization
ossifies. I could not imagine trying to control a Stewart Brand, a Jay
Ogilvy, a Lawrence Wilkinson, or a Napier Collyns—all substantial
figures in their own right—nor, I’d guess, could they imagine trying
to control me.
Disagreements are handled by “dissensus-avoiding.” If no one says
“no” very loudly, we move ahead. I may come in and ask to hire
someone new, buy a computer, or start a project; if no one says,
“Schwartz, that’s really stupid,” as Stewart wisely often does, I’ll
move ahead and do it.
We deliberately priced the basic cost of membership in our
network at one year’s salary for a research assistant. I have found
myself saying to CEOs, “If you can get your ‘r.a.’ to do a better job,
then that person is remarkable—lock him or her up.”
Each of the techniques of hunting and gathering became
institutionalized in our practice. We scoured newsletters and
publications for quotes and recommendations, and sent out two
books every month to members. Stewart, who is arguably one of the
world’s most cogent “filters,” took on the job for GBN. Every week
he comes to the office with a stack of papers and says, in effect,
“Read this. It’s the best I’ve found this week.” Our clients, we found,
most appreciated the filtering in our entire operation. They feel
assaulted by a steady stream of conventional consultants and experts
for hire, and can’t be sure who is worth paying attention to. Some of
our pointers were to members of GBN, others to nonmembers whose
books or writing we recommended. We never counseled that Global
Business Network should be an executive’s only set of filters. People
who travel this route know that several networks of people serve as
a more effective filter than one. People in the same network often
think too much alike. Being part of several networks not only opens
up diverse arenas, but allows you to cross-check the insights that
emerge among people from vastly different places.
For our own research, we used travel inventively; when we
needed to investigate the “global teenager” (see Chapter 7), we


---PAGE BREAK---

joined with Whole Earth Review to send writer Will Baker and
teenage photographer Amon Rappaport on a worldwide expedition
to interview teenagers and confirm or challenge our ideas.
With our atmosphere of openness, clients began to contribute not
just as information users, but as sources. Some of our corporate
members are remarkable in their own right, and would not dream of
missing a meeting because they are deeply engaged in the dialogue.
We often find that member companies begin talking to each other
and begin joint projects. This sort of collaboration across industrial
boundaries is becoming more common; for example, Shell and PG&E
began working together to provide compressed natural gas (CNG) as
an alternative fuel to gasoline.
Scenarios are part of our regular work; we produce sets of
scenarios on the world economy, for instance. But like the scenario
approach of this book, GBN’s scenarios are meant to involve people
—to lead to understanding rather than a set of statistics. In one
meeting, we suddenly asked, “What might happen if Gorbachev
fails?” Angela Stent, a Sovietologist based at Georgetown University,
invented a scenario on the spot called “Brezhnev Plus.” The U.S.S.R.
would not go all the way back to the policies of the Brezhnev days,
but it would revert to a heavy bureaucracy with an active black
market: a lot less glasnost, a little less perestroika, and a healthy
underground marketplace that would become a driving force in the
Soviet economy. It would resemble Mexico. This was very different
from the conventional wisdom scenario—that the U.S.S.R. would
revert all the way to aggressive Stalinism. She and Richard Cooper,
who had been an assistant secretary of state for economic affairs,
began debating the internal and external forces that could push the
Soviet Union in either direction. In that same discussion was Bo
Ekman, former head of planning of Volvo, who had recently been
trying to cut deals in the Soviet Union. From that intersection of
perspectives—a scholar, a government policymaker, and a
businessman—emerged a view of the world that couldn’t have been
found in any individual’s vantage point.
Along the university model, we plan to take in fellows from
various companies, who would spend a period of several months in


---PAGE BREAK---

our offices and attend all of our meetings, becoming (in effect) an
in-house filter themselves.
GBN is a small company, with around thirty employees. Other
principal relationships involve far-flung members and contributors,
who are paid on a project-by-project basis and often participate with
nothing in exchange but the contacts and information they receive.
This approach has allowed us to move from consulting into media,
taking advantage of opportunities to produce television programs.
Napier, who holds a history degree from Cambridge University in
England, compares GBN to a European-style university, with the
same style of dialogue and debate, but held among people from
many different disciplines who live scattered around the world.
Unlike many universities, there is no “party line”—no attempt to
control viewpoints or information. That would negate the purpose
of the network, because it would keep out the unthinkable ideas
which we hope to uncover.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

CREATING SCENARIO BUILDING BLOCKS
            In the days when pharaohs ruled Egypt, a temple stood
far up the Nile, beyond the cataracts in Nubia, in what is now the
northern deserts of the Sudan. Three tributaries joined together in
that region to form the Nile, which flowed down one thousand miles
to produce a miraculous event each year, the flooding of its river
basin, which permitted Egyptian farmers to grow crops in the hot,
rainless midsummer.
Every spring, the temple priests gathered at the river’s edge to
check the color of the water. If it were clear, the White Nile, which
flowed from Lake Victoria through the Sudanese swamps, would
dominate the flow. The flooding would be mild, and late; farmers
would produce a minimum of crops. If the stream appeared dark,
the stronger waters of the Blue Nile, which joined the White Nile at
Khartoum, would prevail. The flood would rise enough to saturate
the fields and provide a bountiful harvest. Finally, if the stream
showed dominance by the green-brown waters of the Atbara, which
rushed down from the Ethiopian highlands, then the floods would
be early and catastrophically high. The crops might drown; indeed,
the Pharaoh might have to use his grain stores as a reserve.
Each year, the priests sent messengers to inform the king of the
color of the water. They may also have used lights and smoke signal
to carry word downstream. The Pharaoh then knew how prosperous
the farmers in his kingdom would be, and how much he could raise
in taxes. Thus, he knew whether he could afford to conquer more
territory. As Pierre Wack (who often told this story at Shell) would
say, the priests of the Sudanese Nile were the world’s first long-term
forecasters. They understood the meaning of predetermined
elements and critical uncertainties.


---PAGE BREAK---

The process of building scenarios starts with the same thing that
the priests did—looking for driving forces, the forces that influence
the outcome of events. In this case, one such force was the rain. It
fell upstream on the Nile’s tributaries, and affected the balance
between them. That, in turn, influenced the fate of thousands of
people whom the Pharaoh might conquer that year. There was a
second driving force, as well—the dependence on Nile flooding to
grow crops. Had the Egyptians had irrigation canals and fertilizer,
they could have planted crops further out in the desert. They would
not have had to worry about the river flow at all.
Driving Forces: What We Know We Care About
Every enterprise, personal or commercial, is propelled by
particular key factors. Some of them are within the enterprise: your
workforce and goals. Others, such as government regulation, come
from outside. But many outside factors, in particular, are not
intuitively obvious. The color of the water’s stream made it easy to
guess its effect on the floods downstream; if all the rivers were the
same color, the priests might never have understood. Similarly, the
impact of government regulation on businesses is obvious, but there
are many less obvious external factors as well. Identifying and
assessing these fundamental factors is both the starting point and
one of the objectives of the scenario method.
In other words, driving forces are the elements that move the plot
of a scenario, that determine the story’s outcome. In a mystery
story, the motive is a driving force; indeed, much fictional detective
work consists of figuring out a credible driving force for an
otherwise unexplainable murder. In adventure stories, one driving
force is the quest that propels the journey. Another is the opposition
—a villain, force of nature, or opposing tribe that resists the hero’s
quest. In Romeo and Juliet, the romantic love of the two young
principals is one driving force. Another is the concept of filial


---PAGE BREAK---

responsibility which binds them. The third is the rivalry between
the families. Without all three forces, there would be no story.
Without driving forces, there is no way to begin thinking through
a scenario. They are a device for honing your initial judgment, for
helping you decide which factors will be significant and which
factors will not.
As a business executive thinking about the future of your
company, you know that interest rates, energy prices, new
technology, the behavior of the markets, and your competitors’
actions all come from the outside to affect your business. But how
do you find the significant driving forces among them, and the
forces which underlie them? You start by taking another look at the
decision you have to make.
You will quickly see that some driving forces are critical to that
decision, while others don’t require much attention. Gravity and the
laws of physics affect everyone’s life. But you will rarely have to
ponder them for scenarios. Few forces could be more boring, for
example, than the fact that British Commonwealth countries speak
English—until you investigate the future of French Canada or
Pakistan. Trust your instincts; it is part of human nature to be
interested in factors that affect the decisions we need to make.
When the founders of Smith & Hawken tools (in Chapter 2) asked:
Should we open a small business? we looked first at what would affect
the outcome of our decision. Our answers were all driving forces:
the demographics of the United States; the availability of tools from
abroad (which, in turn, was driven by the balance of payments); the
importance of a home and garden in American values; and the
American economy. There were other driving forces in the world at
that time—for instance, the growing enmity among Arab nations—
which had little to do with our story.
Often, identifying driving forces reveals the presence of deeper,
more fundamental forces behind them. I described in Chapter 4 how
Shell planners asked: “Should we build a giant off-shore gas drilling
platform?” Among the driving forces we considered were the
European gas market and the European gas supply. What forces
influenced the European gas supply? One clear factor was European-


---PAGE BREAK---

U.S.S.R. relations. And what force influenced those relationships?
One was the totalitarian, seemingly rigid politics of the Soviet
Union.
Driving forces often seem obvious to one person and hidden to
another. That is why I almost always compose scenarios in teams.
Often, we begin this stage (after we have individually done our
research) by standing before a large sheet of white paper, and
brainstorming together. Several years ago, I did this with a group of
Pacific Gas and Electric executives. They were considering a
perennial power utility question: Should they invest in building
more power plants? Or should they instead try to reduce the need
for more power by promoting energy-efficiency? Both paths would
cost the same, and result in the same amount of available energy.
But they needed to know which driving forces existed, to make one
choice or the other preferable.
Some factors were obvious. Every executive in the room was
keenly aware of twenty-year-old environmentalist resistance to
nuclear power in California. After years of bitter antagonism, the
PG&E executives were now coming to accept the fact that the
movement would not go away, and that it would have long-lasting
political impact.
Less obvious was the force of immigration—the fact that
California was becoming a more multicultural society. If the
company promoted energy-efficiency, it would henceforth depend
more on the nature of its customers than on the economics of
nuclear technology. Promoting energy-efficiency would mean
communicating with millions of Philippine, Vietnamese, and El
Salvadoran homeowners. That meant the human capital of the
company had to change. There was not a single Tagalog speaker, for
example, among PG&E’s executive ranks—so far. If the company
chose energy-efficiency, it might need to hire some.
Another driving force was economic volatility. Everyone in the
room could see signs of distress: the stock market turbulence, the
U.S. deficits, increasing inflation, As large borrowers of capital, big
power projects are keenly sensitive to inflation and interest rates.


---PAGE BREAK---

The economic volatility increased the risk of massive investments—
it made the energy-efficiency side look better.
Finally, the company’s own growing appreciation of the
greenhouse effect was another driving force. PG&E had come to
realize that a large-scale investment in energy-efficiency—in which
it would help customers make individual investments in, for
example, insulation—would not only help its public relations, but
would stabilize California’s energy demands. Whatever happened to
oil prices or nuclear power, the state would be able to manage.
Ultimately, PG&E decided that it could handle the necessary cultural
change. The effects of this decision will increasingly change
California. In other words, PG&E’s decision will itself become a
driving force.
Whenever I look for driving forces I first run through a familiar
litany of categories:
•  Society
•  Technology
•  Economics
•  Politics
•  Environment
In nearly every situation, I find forces from each of these arenas
which make a difference in the story.
For example, consider a decision which many large book
publishing companies are making. Today, publishers print massive
overruns of popular “mass-market” paperback books. Bookstores
order more than they can sell, and place them on shelves for a few
weeks, knowing that a few books will take off as bestsellers. The rest
are returned to publishers, which refund their cost to bookstores
and pulp the books. It’s a wasteful, costly practice which puts
pressure (some feel unnecessary pressure) on writers, bookstores,
and publishers.


---PAGE BREAK---

But under what scenarios could that practice be different? To
answer, we need to analyze the driving forces which exist to keep
the practice going—and the potential forces which could influence it
to change:
•  Social: The continuing wave of population growth is perhaps the
strongest driving force of our time. It suggests a continuing market
for books, especially because people tend to read more as they get
older. Literacy in America, while hard to measure, is generally
considered to be declining: another growing force. A third force is
the increasing cultural diversity of America, which continues to
affect book publishing by opening new markets and changing the
demographics of old ones.
•    Technological: The continuous improvement and innovation in
electronic media may shrink the audience for books. It may also
have more subtle effects on the distribution of books; on the ability,
for instance, to build high-speed laser printers in bookshops that
download books over telephone wires, print them, and bind them
while people wait. Meanwhile, improvements in paper shredding
and recycling technologies may make it less expensive to shred
books.
•    Economic: The cost of transportation may add to the cost of
printing and pulping excess books. It, in turn, depends on the cost of
oil and on inflation. The 1980s brought another economic driving
force in some companies: the amount of debt added to publishing
expenses after a leveraged buyout.
•    Political: Laws affect every endeavor. One important ruling
affecting U.S. book sales is the Thor Power Tools vs. Internal
Revenue Service decision of 1981. By allowing the IRS to tax
publishers on their back inventory in warehouses, it added pressure
to destroy unsold books, instead of saving them to sell later. Another
might be restrictions placed by countries (such as Great Britain) on
importing American books for sale. Internal politics can matter as


---PAGE BREAK---

well. Thus a third political force would be the pressure within any
corporation 
to 
continue 
existing 
practices, 
rather 
than
experimenting with new ones. Book publishers have invested
heavily in developing and promoting these mass-market distribution
channels.
•  Environmental: The impact of ecological damage on human affairs,
and the increasing public perception of ecological harm. In the long
run the cost of paper and the resulting books will be significantly
affected by the growing pressure to restrict logging practices.
Having identified driving forces, I usually step back to sort
through them. Which are significant and will actually influence
events? Which are irrelevant? The international restrictions on
imports, for example, can be ignored for this domestic book
publishing problem—unless it’s plausible to think that these
restrictions might change, and books returned from bookstores can
be shipped profitably to other countries.
Some forces are clearly significant: the cost of transportation, and
declining literacy rates. But their effects may be ambiguous.
Declining literacy rates, for example, could imply a shrinking
market for paperback books—or a growing market, compared with
hardback books. To learn which effect it will have, you will
probably have to return to the hunting and gathering phase,
researching whether book outlets are expanding in the United
States. If they are expanding, are mass-market outlets growing more
quickly or slowly than independent specialty shops?
You may not immediately see any influence from some forces, but
don’t rush to discard them. Environmental influences, for example,
seem remote from book publishing considerations; but conceivably a
forest shortage would raise the price of paper. Even more
conceivably, a perceived deforestation crisis could lead to public
pressure for more efficient publishing. A few farsighted publishers,
realizing that more efficient practices would save money for them in
the long run, might find themselves promoting environmentalism
for the most self-interested reasons.


---PAGE BREAK---

As individuals, or even as companies, we have little control over
driving forces. Our leverage for dealing with them comes from
recognizing them, and understanding their effect. Little by little,
then, as we act within society, our actions contribute to new driving
forces which in turn will change the world once more.
Warning: Ambiguity Ahead
After “identifying and exploring the driving forces,” one must
uncover 
the 
“predetermined 
elements” 
and 
the 
“critical
uncertainties.” There is a temptation to assume that these are all
separate categories, painted in three distinct colors. That, alas, is not
the case. (I say “alas” because then scenarios would be much easier
to explain. However, they would also be much less illuminating to
use.) There are overlaps among them. But you mull over them for
different purposes, in different ways. Weaving together these
conceptual building blocks you are deepening your understanding of
the world by considering the elements of your scenarios. Once your
understanding of the dynamics and patterns of the situation is
clearer, then you go on to write the scenarios.
Some scenario-builders—including Pierre Wack—refuse to give
definitions for any elements at all. They believe that any definition
would trivialize the subtleties of the process. Scenario creation is
not a reductionist process; it is an art, as is story-telling.
I am willing to try to offer a few definitions. But as I go on to
describe the other two building blocks—predetermined elements
and critical uncertainties—I warn you not to focus on the
definitions. Focus, instead, on how you perceive elements in various
situations. There is indeed something almost mystical about human
understanding of events. If you have trouble distinguishing driving
forces from predetermined elements, and those from uncertainties,
think of a story important to your life and business. Create an image
of the elements in that story. They will come to you. For example in


---PAGE BREAK---

my business the spread of sophisticated desktop electronics is a key
driving force. I can be sure that over the coming decade our
technological capabilities will continue to accelerate as new
computing technology becomes ever smaller, faster, and cheaper.
However, I can’t be sure how rapidly that new technology will
appear on the desktops of the companies we work with. My strategy
will be governed by the intersection of the predetermined elements
of accelerating technology and the critical uncertainty of the pace of
innovation in the giant multinationals we work with.
Predetermined Elements:
What We Know We Know
Put yourself now in the position of a priest on the river, watching
the water turn brown and green. To warn the Pharaoh of a
devastating flood required supreme confidence. Being wrong was
breaking a religious sacrament and would also, no doubt, have
meant losing one’s life. They had that confidence, however, because
the fate of the floods that year was predetermined. Nothing could
change its impact on the crops, even though the impact would not
be felt for months later. The priests may or may not have known
why the color of the water affected the power of the flood. They
may or may not have been aware of the driving force—the rainfall
pattern which caused one river, or another, to dominate. But they
knew the predetermined elements of flooding as well as they knew
anything.
The modern era has its predetermined elements as well. General
Motors and American Telephone and Telegraph both tried to
reshape their businesses during the 1980s. Both lived out their
troubles in a public, almost humiliating way. Analysts have
predicted deeper troubles for both. Yet their situations are very
different. General Motors could collapse from its current troubles,
but AT&T could not. It has a guaranteed flow of cash from its long-


---PAGE BREAK---

distance telephone network. It so dominates the long-distance
market, and that market is so profitable, that any time AT&T’s top
management need capital they can merely slow down their long-
distance equipment maintenance. Soon, they have enough cash to
cover their crisis and speed up their maintenance again. Thus, in
any scenario we can think of for AT&T during the next few years, its
survival is assured. In order to imagine AT&T failing, you have to
imagine something happening to destroy that predetermined flow of
money. Imagining such a change, in turn, would mean looking more
closely at the forces that drive the system.
Predetermined elements do not depend on any particular chain of
events. If it seems certain, no matter which scenario comes to pass,
then it is a predetermined element. In 1982 at Shell, we came to
believe that there would be a substantial United States Government
budget deficit throughout the 1980s. We reached that conclusion
after examining the prevailing American political logic of the day.
The two largest components of the American government budget,
defense spending and Social Security, were rising uncontrollably.
The American public supported both increases. Four months after
Reagan took office, he tried to propose a slight delay in cost-of-
living increases for Social Security. The proposal was defeated in the
Senate, one hundred votes to none. The third biggest budget
component—interest payments on the deficit itself—could not be
controlled.
Other governments might have raised taxes, but American anti-
tax feeling was (and remains) too strong. The origins of this anti-tax
feeling, incidentally, probably stemmed from another driving force:
the reality that, for most middle-class Americans, purchasing power
had hardly changed in ten (now almost twenty) years. The Reagan
administration cut everything it could: space, education, welfare,
transportation, non-defense research, infrastructure maintenance.
The net result of the cuts was insignificant in a 200-billion-dollar
deficit. America was caught in political gridlock: Americans wanted
to cut taxes and increase spending. If that continued, interest on the
deficit would have to become the largest single element of the
budget. The government would be forced to borrow abroad. As a


---PAGE BREAK---

result of that, the dollar would eventually fall, interest rates would
rise, and government bonds would be devalued.
That, ultimately, is exactly what happened. The Japanese bought
the U.S. bonds, let them be devalued, and have supported the U.S.
deficit ever since. Once our assumption was in place we could agree
to assume a big deficit in every scenario we wrote for the 1980s.
This contradicted every economist we talked to; they all said the
deficit could not be sustained past 1984.
Identifying such elements is a tremendous confidence builder—
not in the U.S. political system, but in your own decisions. You can
commit to some policies and feel sure about them. There are several
useful strategies for looking for predetermined elements:
•    slow-changing phenomena: such things include the growth of
populations, the building of physical infrastructure, and the
development of resources.
•  constrained situations: for example, the Japanese must (and will)
maintain a positive trade balance because they have 120 million
people on four islands who do not possess the resources to feed,
clothe, warm, or transport themselves.
•  in the pipeline: today, for example, we know almost exactly how
large the teenage population of the nineties in the United States will
be. All of them have been born already. They are all in the pipeline
already. The only uncertainty is immigration and we have a pretty
good feel for that now … it will be high.
•  inevitable collisions: in the deficit discussion above the inevitability
of an enduring federal imbalance was created by the collision of the
American voting public’s absolute refusal to provide the government
with higher taxes at the same time that they also refused to forego
any public benefits. Once the gridlock was created there was no way
out.


---PAGE BREAK---

The most commonly recognized predetermined element, of
course, is demographics, a slowly changing phenomenon. As soon as
the baby boom began, it was obvious that its members would
eventually age. The effects of this aging are still unclear, and many
members of the “Don’t trust anyone over thirty” generation denied
that they too would one day be gray. Deep in their hearts, however,
the baby boomers knew of the inevitability. “Will you still need
me,” they asked, “will you still feed me, when I’m sixty-four?”
I first realized the impact of the aging of the baby boomers in the
early 1970s, while creating a scenario on new businesses for the
lumber company Weyerhaeuser. We knew that, no matter what
happened, there would be a massive opportunity in houseplants.
Our three scenarios were similar to those we used to inform Smith &
Hawken (as described in Chapter 2), but the outlook was even
better for houseplants than for high-quality garden tools. If the
economy boomed, baby boomers would invest more in their homes;
along with the paintings and furniture, they’d buy plants as “indoor
landscaping.” If the economy collapsed into violence and
incoherence, houseplants would allow frightened nature lovers to
avoid the risks of going outside. Finally, if a social transformation
took place, houseplants would be as much a part of it as meditation
and health food. Reality turned out to be a combination of all three
scenarios. Weyerhaeuser went into the commercial nursery business
with considerable success. And I came away with a new
understanding of how the marketplace of things and ideas in
America was about to change.
Demographics also made it clear why perestroika was inevitable.
The Soviet Union experienced a sharp decline in births during and
immediately after World War II. During the 1960s and 1970s the
original “baby bust” was echoed by an even greater decline than we
saw in the United States. In the mid-eighties therefore it was certain
that the U.S.S.R. would experience a decline in its labor force as
fewer and fewer young people came of age. That would begin to
turn around in the early nineties, but a short-term decline was
predetermined. Gross national product depends on the size of the
labor force, and the level of productivity. The Soviet Union’s


---PAGE BREAK---

productivity was declining, and people were trying to get out of, not
into, the U.S.S.R. When the labor force shrank, it meant the collapse
of the Soviet economy.
Pundits kept asking why Gorbachev was having so much trouble
jump-starting the Soviet economy. Demographics made it clear that
he wouldn’t succeed until after 1991. At that point, the number of
twenty-year-olds would begin to rise once again.
Predetermined elements are fearful sometimes because people
tend to deny them. The chickens coming home to roost is a
predetermined element. So is the next payment on our loan, or a
project deadline that we hoped might never arrive. Gridlock is also
predetermined. To calculate the amount of gridlock in 2000, look at
the number of people of driving age. Multiply it by the average
number of cars per person in America. Then calculate the increase
in highway mileage, based on construction projects started in the
last five years. (It takes at least five years, and usually more, to
build an urban highway.) Even if tomorrow the United States
embarked on an unprecedented effort to build highways and mass
transit systems, it would be too late; we can be certain that seven or
eight large urban areas in the United States will be frozen with
traffic gridlock. In Chapter 9, we will look at other predetermined
“challenges,” as the Japanese would say.
Critical Uncertainties: Dwelling-places of Our Hopes and Fears
For five thousand years, the waters of the Nile rose and fell
predictably. The dynasty of the pharaohs declined; other
governments emerged and they too declined, but the means for
predicting floods remained basically the same. Then, in the early
1960s, the Aswan High Dam was built. It was a remarkable feat of
engineering, five hundred miles downstream from where the fierce
Atbara joined the Nile. Now if priests had still kept vigil at their
temple (or government clerks a monitoring station at the same


---PAGE BREAK---

locale upstream), they would have lost their ability to foretell.
Whether the water was blue, white, or green-brown, the result
would be the same: the flow would reach the Aswan Dam and stop.
The fate of the flood plains below is now in human hands.
One could perhaps, based on a knowledge of Egyptian politics,
make an educated guess about the flooding level. It would now
depend on two competing driving forces: the farmers’ same need for
water, and a new need by Egyptian consumers for electricity from
the dam. Regulating the dam was a political act, subject to pressure
from both sides. The flooding, as a result, became an “uncertainty.”
If you wanted to know how much money the Egyptian Government
could raise in taxes from farmers this year, you could not simply tell
from the color of the water. You had to find out what the people in
the dam’s control tower would do.
In every plan, critical uncertainties exist. Scenario-planners seek
them out to prepare for them, an approach that hearkens back to
old military scenarios: “We know they have to come from the east,
General, but we don’t know if they’re traveling up the mountain or
through the forest. Here’s what we’ll do in either case.”
A critical uncertainty for Smith & Hawken was the degree to
which the U.S. economy would recover from the shocks of the
seventies. Although we knew the approximate numbers of our
potential market, we didn’t know how many of them would be
prosperous enough to buy imported garden tools. In the Shell
scenario, we knew the demographic pressures on the Soviet
Government. We didn’t know how responsive their political system
could be.
Critical uncertainties are intimately related to predetermined elements.
You find them by questioning your assumptions about predetermined
elements: what might cause the price of oil to rise again? What might
AT&T do to lose its domination over the long-distance business, and
its resulting cash cow? Shell’s scenarios, for example, still include
the U.S. deficit as a predetermined element. But Shell also asks:
what might happen to change the deficit? It would have to involve
drastic cuts in defense spending and Social Security. Thus, the
American debate over military cutbacks and the “peace dividend” is


---PAGE BREAK---

a critical uncertainty when considering scenarios for the late 1990s.
Another critical uncertainty is real income growth in America. If it
returned to the levels of the 1960s, people might feel more generous
about taxes.
We’ve already seen such “miracles” take place in recent history. In
the 1970s, futurists said that oil reserves would be exhausted by the
1990s. They were right about the predetermined elements:
population growth and an on-going level of energy consumption at
the current price. There was, however, an uncertainty that few
futurists considered: would people (and institutions) be willing to
change their habits if the price of oil rose? People and institutions
did, and that change made a critical difference.
If gridlock, for example, becomes too onerous, could a similar
change of habit occur? Would businesses institute flexible hours en
masse? Would they allow “telecommuting?” Would real estate prices
decline enough that people could afford to move closer to work? Or
would car telephones and fax machines turn the automobile, stuck
in traffic, into a portable office? We cannot know for sure, and any
look ahead at gridlock could include two scenarios: one where many
cities are paralyzed, and one where commuting undergoes a
transformation.
I sometimes think of the relationship between predetermined
elements and critical uncertainties as a choreographed dance. You
cannot experience the dance just by knowing the sequence of steps
that must take place. Each dancer will interpret them differently,
and add his or her unpredictable decisions. Similarly, for example,
you cannot completely know the nature of a labor force from the
population demographics. It is uncertain how many people will
pursue a job. This figure has varied a great deal in recent years,
especially as more and more women began working. If boom times
break out and incomes rise quickly again, will more women (or
men) elect to raise families and drop out of the labor pool?
Or consider the publishing industry again. The readership
population is mostly predetermined—it depends on demographics.
Increasing competition from electronic media is also predetermined.
Literacy is also a crucial element—but it is far from predetermined.


---PAGE BREAK---

It depends on decisions made about education during the next few
years. Thus, the quality of education now will influence the print
media market in the next twenty years. Yet how many book
publishers have bothered to invest in improving education in any
significant way?
We might create two scenarios for the publishing industry,
depending on the degree of literacy. In Scenario A, a large number
of literate people spend some of their time reading. Scenario B is the
opposite; people become more oriented to television and radio
because reading is unable to hold their attention. There is also a
third possible scenario—even faster growth for print media, because
more people spend their time with a variety of media which
mutually reinforce each other in an increasingly closed and
mediated world.
Driving forces, predetermined elements, and critical uncertainties
give structure to our exploration of the future. Several times in this
chapter I have referred to the powerful impact of the baby boom on
my thinking. In the next chapter we explore the evolution of a new
set of forces that may re-create a similar experience on a global
level. In the story of the “global teenager” we will see all the
elements of the scenario building blocks at work.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

ANATOMY OF A NEW DRIVING FORCE: THE GLOBAL
TEENAGER
            While walking in Jakarta one day in 1987 I came upon a
remarkable sight; a vast bazaar of stalls, the nearest of which were
filled with all manner of electronic goods—from Walkmans to
computers to microchips to CDs. And every booth was “manned” by
a boy, hardly any over twenty, and many under ten, all dressed in
brightly colored polo shirts with insignias from Benetton and Ralph
Lauren. One sees these new teenagers everywhere. Do these signs
portend the emergence of a global culture in the coming decades?
Or are they merely superficial symbols of a global consumer society
masking a deeper and more enduring cultural diversity. We know
the numbers, we just don’t know their meaning. This chapter shows
how we come to develop scenarios by exploring driving forces,
predetermined elements, and critical uncertainties.
Most futurists and forecasters would agree, I think: we learned
about the power of driving forces, in part, by watching the impact
of the baby boom. The mountain of 40 million teenagers born in the
post-war decade and a half (the late forties and fifties) was one
driving force. The unprecedented post-war affluence in the United
States was another. The two forces combined with the explosion in
automobiles to create post-war suburbia—a new type of community
—to house this new mass of middle-class children. Dependent
minors, for the first time in recorded history, became an influential
economic force: arguably the most influential, if only because it
changed existing businesses the most. Smith & Hawken’s tool
company and Weyerhaeuser’s houseplant division are just two of
thousands of businesses that would not exist in the same form, or at
all, if it were not for the baby boom. The impact of these two


---PAGE BREAK---

driving forces on global politics, culture, and corporate life is still
going on so powerfully that no one can fully assess it yet.
Could any other demographic force be as powerful during the next
few years? A group of people, under the auspices of Global Business
Network, began to ask themselves that question a few years ago.
They were spurred by an entertainment industry client who wanted
to know, simply, Where would its major market be a decade hence?
They looked at demographic trends and discovered a new global
baby boom of such a size as to make the American baby boom seem
like a dress rehearsal. Once again, its fate is linked with other
factors—technological, political, and economic forces, some
predetermined and some wildly uncertain. The implications will be
exhilarating to some; already, they have led to some of the success
stories of the eighties such as clothing retailers Benetton and Esprit.
And they will be profoundly disturbing to others.
Barring widespread plague or other catastrophe, there will be
over 2 billion teenagers in the world in the year 2001. That’s five
hundred times the number of teenagers in America in the peak years
of the baby boom. All of these future teenagers are already born.
Most of them live in Asia and Latin America; a smaller but still
sizable and rapidly growing percentage live in Africa. In Europe,
North America, and Australia, meanwhile, there will also be a mini-
baby boom, but their percentage of the global teenager population
will be minuscule.
They called their scenario the “Global Teenager”—not just
because this new baby boom is worldwide, but because its members
will 
be 
far 
more 
interconnected. 
Satellite 
communication,
videocassette recorders, and the ubiquitous Walkman have
penetrated even poor countries. The results of this baby boom will
not be the same as the impact of the youth culture of the 1960s in
America; the world is a bigger and more diverse place, and the
social mood is different from what it was twenty years ago. But they
knew some of the certainties to expect, and many of the critical
uncertainties to watch out for.
For this scenario at GBN, they asked what would be the interplay
between this new global adolescent community and the evolution of


---PAGE BREAK---

the new electronic media? Their research was intensive, and yet by
necessity arbitrary. They could not hope to talk to more than a small
fraction of the first group of global teenagers. They looked carefully
at the experiences of companies which have sold to them—Benetton
and Swatch, for example. They asked cultural anthropologist Steve
Barnett to investigate further the crossover between cultural
diversity and marketing. They pored over the statistics that existed
so far, looking for patterns that might indicate critical forces—those
changes that would have a big impact on the situation. Finally, they
hired two astute observers to travel the world for them. They
interviewed teenagers from twelve countries about their ambitions,
and the pressures on their lives. One of the observers was Will
Baker, a veteran writer on cultural issues. (His book Backward had
covered the “horrifying impact of civilization,” as he put it, “on an
Amazonian tribal people.”) The other researcher was an American
teenager himself—Amon Rappaport.
The group at GBN did not focus, as I will later in this book, on the
plots or logics of scenarios. They wanted to know what driving
forces would be critical. As the baby boom appeared (or should
have appeared) as a factor in every scenario of U.S. behavior in the
1950s, 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, so the wave of global teenagers
will be a factor dwarfing other demographic factors in scenarios
starting from 1990, through the next fifty years or more.
The Nature of Adolescence
Human nature is predetermined—it changes only very slowly, if
at all. We know what adolescents are like. The years when people
come of age involve exuberance, exploration, confusion, and
rebellion against old structures. That’s as true of teenagers in
Bangkok, Nairobi, or Caracas as it is of teenagers in Los Angeles or
Paris. It will be exacerbated by a newfound sense of power which
teenagers will feel—power in their numbers. Adolescents tend to


---PAGE BREAK---

identify with each other anyway, set apart by and from other age
groups. The pressure of their numbers will be so immense that it
will reshape the world.
What they do with that pressure is a critical uncertainty.
Teenagers are not necessarily altruistic by nature; rather, they are
energetic and idealistic. In their travels, Will and Amon found that
idealism translated not into a political sensibility but into either
intense ambition or cynicism, both fueled by inflation and poverty,
contrasting with the media’s images of affluence. What flickered
between the lines, wrote Baker, was “a generalized feeling that the
circumstances of modern life are new and dire, that something like a
global crisis is underway, and that they—the young—must find
some original solution and the resources to apply them.” Twenty
years ago, if one had forecast a youth revolt in Latin America almost
everyone’s scenario would cast it as a move toward socialism, led by
the armies of Che Guevara. If a revolt takes place from this global
teenage population, it will most likely be entrepreneurial and
capitalist—the armies of some new, Third World equivalent to Steve
Jobs.
Or it may be literal armies. In the past, societies with large
numbers of adolescent males started wars. This option, unlikely on
the global scale, may take place in many locales. Already, Iran and
Iraq have a long-lasting demographic “hole” created by the millions
of deaths of young males in their protracted war. The Middle East’s
five-thousand-year history of conflict is unlikely to end in perpetual
peace any time soon. Injustice (Latin America and Africa) and
enduring enmities (India and Pakistan) will not go away, so conflicts
will endure and recur.
Technology
In thinking about the driving forces that will interact with the
sheer demographic impact of teenage numbers, a walk down the


---PAGE BREAK---

street with your eyes open quickly leads you to one of the areas we
noted earlier: the ubiquitous Walkman points you to new
technology. The power of the predetermined element of new
entertainment technology will make the experience of being a
teenager different from what it ever has been before. The
distribution of new types of communication devices, in particular, is
taking place so fast that by the time most of the global teenagers are
teenagers, they will literally be in constant contact with each other.
At GBN, we developed an image of the future which we called the
“Video Café.” We imagined two children of middle-class parents,
one in a rapidly developing country and the other in the high-tech
leader: seventeen-year-old Luis, a college student in Caracas, and
seventeen-year-old Hiroki, living with her family outside Kyoto,
going on an electronic “date” through an international broad
bandwidth video-conferencing network. It would be more than
seeing each other’s images; using camcorders, image synthesizers,
computers, and other cheap electronic video equipment, the two
teenagers would be part of a globally connected performance group.
They might have met in an online discussion of desktop video
techniques, and cemented their friendship with electronic mail. Luis
might be, for instance, a young video effects wizard; Hiroki, a
musician (which by ten years from now also, effectively, means
being a wizard electronics engineer). They might jam regularly with
other teenagers: visual designers from L.A., electropercussionists
from Lagos, and a rhythm vibraphonist from Turkey.
In the video cafés of the future, teenagers would do what you
might expect them to do in person: flirt, dance in image form, listen
to music, and (increasingly) be creative—the intense sexual energy
of teenagers would still be present even in this attenuated form.
There would be a constant insatiable hunger for fresh material—
new music, new images, new fashions. A few artists, in traditional
pop culture style, might appeal to everyone—almost all 2 billion
teenagers—but more of them would be specialists, tapping into
particular groups who have similar styles in common, but whose
residences would span the globe. In the twelve to twenty-two age
group 
worldwide, 
knowing 
several 
languages 
would 
be


---PAGE BREAK---

commonplace, and world travel would be a constant temptation. (In
many newly industrialized countries such as Taiwan and Korea,
parents would indulge their children, just as they did in America in
the 1950s and 1960s.) The answers to such questions as “Who are
you, where do you come from, and how rich are your parents?”
would be less important than “What do you know and what can you
show me?”
Some readers, no doubt, will find this scenario hard to imagine.
But it’s based on three very plausible ideas. First, that new
communications technologies are becoming so powerful and so
cheap that teenagers all over the world will be able to afford them.
Second, that the global teenager will want to communicate this way.
And third, that using these kinds of new media tends to change
peoples’ behavior and values.
The availability of the technology is predetermined. A “video
café” requires high-resolution television conferencing, digital
storage, a worldwide high-speed data network, and graphics/music
workstations. All of those exist in the marketplace but are not yet
universal or well integrated, but that will come with time. The
companies which make consumer electronics are interested in
pushing these technologies; especially, in the United States, Europe,
and Japan, they’ve invested millions in developing and marketing
them. It’s not certain that consumers will be interested in these
machines, but in the past, nearly every new communications
technology has caught on in some form. At worst, it takes a while to
catch on; as with laser disks. Or it sweeps the world in an explosive
wave, as the fax did in the eighties. In particular, there is so much
worldwide growth in youth-oriented consumer electronics (radios,
Walkmans, home music studios, desktop videos, computer games)
that we can confidently predict continued growth. By the time the
“video café” scenario takes place, people will buy home computers
the way they buy pocket calculators today. The two great obstacles
—price and familiarity—will no longer exist. And at the opposite
extreme some young people will spend what they might have spent
on a car on the new tool for “cruising,” the powerful interactive
video-computer station with full virtual reality capabilities.


---PAGE BREAK---

Will teenagers be able to afford them? That depends, in part, on
the uncertainties of the world’s economic future. However, some
formerly undeveloped countries have clearly prospering middle
classes: Venezuela, India, Korea, Singapore, Costa Rica. Whether a
country’s teenagers are rich or poor, however, they will use more
information technology than they do today, if only because it will
be more available and far less expensive.
Finally, on the issue of technology changing habits: we know from
current users of computer networks, video conferencing, and
interactive media that their attitudes about communication are
different. Reality is no longer so fixed; information is no longer
static; people feel as if they’re swimming in a constant flow of
images, text, and sounds. You can appreciate that feeling by
watching a few minutes of MTV; it reflects the ambiance of
interactive media. The next generation will grow up with a
pervasive sensibility based on electronic media, in which computer-
generated images and quick video cuts are a natural part of their
language. If it’s a style that 2 billion young people around the world
adopt for themselves (and every indication suggests they will), then
electronic media will become not just a means of communication,
but a generator of global style. Hollywood scriptwriters understand
that the aesthetic sensibilities of the young audience have been
shaped by sound bites and quick flashes of “Sesame Street” and
MTV. Every movie begins to resemble Top Gun, essentially a string
of rock videos about fighter pilots.
Moreover, since the next wave of telecommunications media will
flow in two directions, it will encourage active intelligence; people
won’t be able to take part any more simply by sitting back and
letting images flow over them. They’ll be talking, selecting,
ordering, criticizing, and (in some cases) creating. As computers
become more embedded in the new technology it will become
increasingly common to experience various forms of synthetic
computer-generated realities. These virtual realities will be
experienced in whole rooms or inside video eye-phones and will
create yet further realms of interaction in shared and mutually
designed realties.


---PAGE BREAK---

The biggest uncertainty about technology will be its effect on
cultural differences. Will it homogenize the world, as television has
begun to do? Or will the creativity inherent in the newest machines
(where people generate their own images and sounds) compensate?
In our research, we saw evidence for both trends. Every country will
be more like the mass-mediated world, but the mass-mediated world
will increasingly incorporate bits and pieces from every local
culture. To be truly hip in the world of the global teenager could
mean knowing how to recognize indigenous music from Senegal,
New Zealand, Uruguay, and the Yukon. The growing interest in
World Music is the first indicator of this trend.
There will be economic reasons for each nation to keep its unique
culture intact. Michael Porter suggests that a nation’s ability to
prosper (its “competitive advantage,” as he puts it) depends in part
on cultural uniqueness. A nation’s sophistication in a particular area
gives it strength, by challenging its industries to do better. Some of
the finest garden tools come from Japan, the home of highly
demanding Japanese gardeners. The global teenager may serve as a
significant force here; helping nations recognize each others’
uniquenesses, and doing their best (just by doing what comes
naturally) to preserve their country’s uniqueness—albeit in a form
which the electronic media can transmit.
Economic Fears and Hopes
In exploring the economic interactions of demographics and
culture we can see some of the longer term driving forces. As the
coming of age of the American baby boom helped shape the
American economy of the seventies and eighties, the global teenager
will help shape the world economy in the nineties and beyond.
While the presence of 2 billion global teenagers is predetermined,
their characteristics are an uncertainty. We do not know how
wealthy or literate they will be. There is a temptation, especially


---PAGE BREAK---

among industrial companies, to assume the worst. Many people, no
doubt, would find plausible this sentiment from Paul Hawken:
Young people that I have seen in the so-called Third World
countries remind me of a juggernaut—hungry and rapacious—
thrust into a world of tremendous uncertainty. Their need, demand,
for certainty is so great that almost anybody can pander to it in
ways that are quite destructive, both to their own culture—their
own inherent culture—and to the environment at the same time.
After a decade of Third World debt and inflation, Paul’s concerns
are real. Global teenagers will either be uneducated, unemployed,
undernourished, and in the end hopeless, street criminals—like the
Brazilian teenage hero of Hector Babenco’s film Pixote—or their fear
of poverty will fuel ambition that drives out every other
consideration. As a scenario-planner, this type of pessimistic image
always inspires the question in me, What would have to take place
for this image not to come true? The accelerating power of
education via the new technology could turn out to be an answer.
As it happens, there are three driving forces in the world which
might, together, be enough to catalyze that education. None of the
three have anything to do with a formal educational establishment.
The first is the ambition, already noted, among teenagers who want
to better themselves. The second is the presence of cheap
communications links; to play even a simple computer game is to
become familiar with the habits and mind-set of programming, and
there is every reason for programming education (and education in
other subjects) to travel via interactive telecommunications—
assuming that the teenagers of the next fifteen years want it. The
third factor is a critical uncertainty, derived directly from the
driving force of demographics. How will countries around the world
handle the overwhelming pressure for immigration?
Half of Mexico’s population, for example, is under the age of
twenty. In the next two decades its population will double, from 70
million to 140 million, even more dominated by people in their
teens and twenties. Many of these young people will not find jobs in


---PAGE BREAK---

Mexico. But across the border, the United States will face a labor
shortage, especially in entry-level positions. So will nearly every
country in Europe, Eastern and Western. When Will Baker asked
teenagers around the world, “What would you like to be doing ten
years from now?” he nearly always got the same answer: travel to
the United States. “Not a few,” he wrote, “foresee declining to
return.”
In past waves of migration, unskilled labor from developing
countries was welcome. Now, however, new jobs in the industrial
countries will require training and communication skills. Teenage
immigrants from developing countries will not be qualified unless
they’ve educated themselves. Immigration will add pressure to
learn, and will also provide some people with the opportunity.
Young Third World people will end up working in a car factory in
Sweden; then return to their own countries and create new
businesses of their own. Young software designers in India begin
work on contract for American banks in Chicago and end up on the
payroll at corporate headquarters.
“I think we are in for a new period of people movement,” says Bo
Ekman, formerly with Volvo (now head of SIFO, a large Swedish
research and consulting company). “[There will be] mighty waves of
migrations. How can we in Europe stop the pressure from Northern
Africa and Turkey and the sub-Sahara when 60 percent of their
population is younger than 20, unemployed and uneducated, and
we are crying for young people. It’s a highly dangerous situation
because the sentiment in Europe is becoming more anti-
immigration. There are new parties in virtually every European
country that have a racist agenda.”
Most industrialized nations (and most corporations) have not
learned to deal with cultural diversity. The demographic pressures
of the global teenager suggest that they will have to. Most
employers and heads of the hierarchy will still be white males, but
more than 85 percent of the labor force will come from young,
nonwhite men and women from diverse cultures. Managing
multicultural enterprises promises to be the single biggest challenge
that managers will face in the 1990s. The numbers are


---PAGE BREAK---

predetermined. The reactions of managers and employees are
critical uncertainties.
Seeing these driving forces will hopefully help managers realize
that the change in their workforce is not a temporary phenomenon.
It may in fact be a permanent change in perception, where teenagers
decide that national boundaries are simply irrelevant to their
ambitions. To migrate may no longer mean being oppressed; under
one scenario of the global teenager, migrators may outnumber those
teenagers who stay home!
All economic opportunities for global teenagers depend, of course,
on the robustness of the world economy. Right now, that is probably
the most significant critical uncertainty in the picture. As Chapter 9
will show, there are at least three plausible scenarios for the global
economy right now. We don’t know which will prove correct; but
only one spells disaster for the next wave of global teenagers.
New Markets
And what of the businesses who serve them (some of whom, not
coincidentally, paid for our study)? The global teenager will have as
great an impact as, arguably, the baby boom generation did in
America—as a new form of consumer. The elements that win over
global teenagers so far are:
•  A sense of identity with their generation: as blue jeans were the
universal style of the sixties, the styles of Benetton, where colors
change but patterns remain the same, suggest a cultural uniform.
•  Cost-consciousness: like all teenagers, the global teenager is not a
luxury consumer.
•  High technological awareness: the power of new technology is a
force for their sense of liberation and sets them apart from their
elders; how many parents ask their kids to program their VCR?


---PAGE BREAK---

•  Global identification: while their parents fight immigration from
other countries, global teenagers will embrace their peers from any
country.
The scale of international travel is an uncertainty. Depending on
economic conditions, teenagers may or may not be able to fly
around the world to see their compatriots of the video café. The
desire will almost certainly exist; telecommunications usually breed
the impulse to meet other telecommunicators in person. Charter
flights for teenagers and hostel-related tours, with several languages
spoken, could be a great business—particularly if those tours
involve picking up skills along the way. The market for such trips
could increasingly include not just North Americans, Europeans, and
Japanese—but Indonesians, Thais, Mexicans, and Brazilians as well.
Global youth travel could be a market. Global entertainment
certainly will. In every economic scenario—prosperity or depression
—the demand for global entertainment is high. Moreover, with new
production technology, costs of producing films and television grow
smaller as the audience grows larger; in a pie of 2 billion people,
almost any slice is large.
We’ve already seen how less media might be centrally produced.
Kids will make their own videotapes, their own recordings. Where
does that leave the entertainment industry? Some parts, such as the
producers of “America’s Funniest Home Videos,” will serve
essentially as filters, putting the best stuff over the air. Others will
serve as taste-setters, putting out films (for example) that carry the
taste of the global teenager one step further. Batman sweeps the
world’s teenagers and inspires an industry behind it. Admittedly
many of these films will be American and British, but it is possible
to imagine a scenario in which films from Japan, Latin America, and
India become equally important to the global teenager. The culture
may be worldwide, but it need not be homogeneous.
If I were contemplating a business, I would be looking at
opportunities in fashion, entertainment, travel, and communication
that might be created by this large demographic wave. Clearly, Levi
Strauss was one of the biggest beneficiaries of the U.S. youth culture


---PAGE BREAK---

of the 1960s. A similar array of opportunities will emerge all over
the world as a result of this new youth culture. Selling will be no
problem. “The youth of the world,” wrote Will Baker, “wants or is
capable of wanting every taste treat and fashion switch [marketers]
can devise: they want Levi’s, Cokes, cassette players, video games,
Benetton combos, Big Macs, skateboards, PCs, Yamahas, etc., etc. No
problem. Except they don’t have any money.… They scrimp for
months to buy a couple of blouses or some boots, a cheap watch.”
Political Change
The political agenda of the United States and Europe in the 1960s
was shaped by young people marching in the streets. Will the world
political agenda of the late-1990s be similarly shaped by the global
teenager? The political outlook of the global teenager is impossible
to predict today—as the political outlook of the 1960s in America
would have been impossible to predict in 1955. We know only that
hunger for freedom is a powerful force, pent up in many countries
for a long time. We are likely to see intense pressure worldwide for
democracy, and for an opening up of opportunities. Perceived
oppressors in Third World countries—be they Marxist or capitalist,
politicians or employers—may literally find millions of young
people fiercely battling against them, convinced (as another baby
boom was before them) that the whole world is watching.
Beyond that, anything is possible. Global teenagers could be
armies of nihilism and desperation, legions of entrepreneurs and
small business owners, waves of immigrants, majorities of “Green”
voters, brownshirts, or builders of young democracies. If they are
more or less unified politically (and there is reason to believe they
will be), their point of view will affect every government on the
planet. When we asked teenagers all over the planet what issues
concerned them most, environmental problems were at the top of
the list—even in the poorest countries visited. This suggests that


---PAGE BREAK---

ecological issues will dominate the world’s political agenda in the
decade ahead.
There is one key warning signal to indicate their likely direction:
how youth around the world see the Chinese pro-democracy student
protests and the Tiananmen Square massacre. Were the protests
morally empowering? Or were they naive and self-destructing?
Either way, the Tiananmen Square massacre was the first
government attempt to clamp down on the global teenager. It’s
fitting that the survivors within China kept in touch with peers
outside the country, through computer networks and fax
transmission.
If I were a young person going to school today, I’d ask myself
what was going on in Asia and equatorial countries (rather than
Europe) for interesting ideas. I would learn Japanese, Chinese,
Spanish or maybe Arabic rather than French or German. Old
boundaries between races may finally dissolve; the message of the
global teenager is that we are all interrelated. Indeed in the lives of
today’s global teenagers we have seen the confluence of several
powerful driving forces such as the predetermined impact of the
vast demographic wave underlying this emerging phenomenon, the
impact of new technologies, and the uncertainties of the global
economy that will shape the fate of these global teenagers. In the
next chapter we will examine how to weave such threads to form
the whole cloth of a story.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

COMPOSING A PLOT
            The French historian Fernand Braudel offered a coherent
way to understand the world. His three-volume history Civilization
and Capitalism 15th–18th Century described three different levels of
activity. First, there was the shifting political alliances which led to
an internationally linked economy. Those, in turn, reflected a new
set of economic cycles as the capitalist system emerged. And
beneath that was a constant, gradual evolution of the activities of
daily life: people going to markets and working in thousands of
communities in Europe. Each level—political, economic, social—had
its own version of what scenario-planners call “logics”: the plot
which ties together the elements of the system. All cycles have a
similar plot, a plot of rising and falling fortunes. All evolution works
pretty much the same way. And there is also a recognizable pattern
in the behavior of political alliances.
To explain the future, scenarios use the same sorts of logics. They
describe how the driving forces might plausibly behave, based on
how those forces have behaved in the past. The same set of driving
forces might, of course, behave in a variety of different ways,
according to different possible plots. Scenarios explore two or three
of those alternatives, based on the plots (or combination of plots)
which are most worth considering.
If you were a mainstream book publisher, concerned about the
future of your industry, your predetermined elements might include
the pressure to globalize the industry and combine it with other
media, such as film and television. We know the pressure exists,
especially as European publishers buy American companies. But
who might control that globalization, and under what terms? Under
one plot, the bigger the companies get, the more effectively they
serve readers, and the more they prosper. The Time-Warner


---PAGE BREAK---

corporation apparently believes this plot will lead them to success.
Under another logic, every move toward elephantine growth
provokes equally fierce resistance; corporations such as Time-
Warner might lose touch with readers, and end up less prosperous
than when the two companies were separate entities.
To find plausible plots you use the uncertainties that have seemed
so important. What factors might lead to success or failure for Time-
Warner? How well does media integration work?—Does it make
sense to license the movie of the book of the record of the magazine
of the poster—? How well has it worked when one company has
controlled all the media? How have most such conglomerates
handled the integration? Eventually, you would sketch out both
plausible plots, in a way that helped you foresee a good strategy for
either eventuality.
What is finding a plot line really like? Here is how it works in
nearly every scenario situation in which I have taken part. We
gather a team together that is aware of the decision that we are
considering. Each member has done his or her research. We sit
around talking for a day, developing ideas in response to these
questions:
•  What are the driving forces?
•  What do you feel is uncertain?
•  What is inevitable?
•  How about this or that scenario?
We get to a point where ideas are churning, and we break off for
the night. People go home. The next morning, someone walks in and
says, “You know, as I was lying there last night in the bathtub, I had
an idea for a scenario.” And he or she lays it out, nearly complete.
Someone else across the table says, “And here is the complement.”
This happens so often that many scenario-planners have learned to
include an overnight stay in their workshops.


---PAGE BREAK---

I often compare this part of the scenario process to writing a
movie script. Scriptwriters frequently begin with an idea: “I’d like to
make a film about car racing.” They develop characters: “One will
be a hot racer. I want him to race his childhood friend. Other
characters will include his girlfriend, and a crusty old mechanic.”
The characters are like the building blocks of scenarios. Having
decided upon them, they create a plausible setting for them: all four
characters have gathered at the Indianapolis Speedway. What will
happen next?
Now the scriptwriters consider several possible plots. Maybe the
story will be based on rivalry over the championship and the girl. If
so, conflict and competition will be its gist. But what if the real
thrust is the old man’s education of two young drivers? Then it’s a
plot about the challenges these young people deliberately face, and
how they learn to develop prowess. A more interesting movie might
combine both plots, or throw in a sudden and unexpected (but
possible) event: halfway through the movie, one of the car racers is
abruptly crippled.
Now imagine that you are one of the characters in such a movie,
at its start, standing at the gate to the raceway. You cannot know
which plot will unfold. Reality could go several ways. But if you
have the imagination of a scriptwriter, you can envision the
possibilities. That is what it feels like to be a scenario writer.
The Nature of Plots
We’ve all been to movies that are based on the story of a man
meeting a woman. It’s one of the oldest plots in the world. It can
either be handled sentimentally, in a manner full of clichés (as in
the movie Love Story), or in a wonderfully original and moving
fashion (as in A Man and a Woman). Either way, it’s the same story
—but what a difference! Scenarios, too, can be formulaic or moving,
depending on how you think about the plots.


---PAGE BREAK---

There are only a few plots relevant in scenarios. Most are derived
from the behavior of real-life economies, political systems,
technologies, and social perceptions. In most good scenarios, several
plot lines intersect, just as a good film often includes several
subplots. The scenario-planner looks at converging forces and tries
to understand how and why they might intersect—then extends that
imagination into coherent pictures of alternative futures. That’s
what gives texture to scenarios.
In this chapter, I’ll describe the plots which are most fruitful in
scenario-planning. One can apply each of them to a wide variety of
situations. Very often, the obvious logic for a specific scenario jumps
out. But sometimes, this first impression is wrong. At times, the
logics must be teased out of the environment. Recognizing them is
not a cut and dried matter. As I do with driving forces, I review the
list of plots when thinking through the action of any scenarios.
“Technology is clearly a driving force here,” I say to myself. “Will
that take effect with its usual evolutionary pattern, or could there be
an abrupt discontinuity?”
We have already said that one of the purposes of scenarios is to
help you (or your managers) suspend disbelief in possible futures.
To that end, you construct your plots as carefully as if you were in
the theater. The trick is deciding where, in the story, to start the
diverging alternative futures. In scenarios for a company, you
should design at least one alternative that frightens the management
enough to think—but not so much that they shut down. Ask them to
consider a future of shrinking markets, or even a hostile takeover
with which they might have to deal; but not a sudden nuclear war
that would destroy the city. On an individual level, you might create
a scenario for a member of the family becoming ill (“What will we
do if we have sudden medical expenses?”) but not for the entire
family being wiped out in a bus crash. Your goal is to select plot
lines that lead to different choices for the original decision. What
plots might make you do something different?
Note that the characters in scenarios tend to be either driving
forces or else institutions: nations, companies, regional bodies.
Individuals rarely shape the cultural shifts, political alliances, and


---PAGE BREAK---

technological evolution which scenarios care about. A planner might
ask, “What if the Soviet Union fell under the control of a new Stalin-
like figure?” If that happened, the new Stalin’s self-image and
relationship with his mother would be grist for future psychological
historians. But there would be no need to speculate on it before the
fact—or on Gorbachev’s psychology, or Bush’s relationship with his
dogs. Usually leaders are an expression of the forces at work in their
own societies. By understanding those forces one can anticipate the
possible pattern of future leadership. For example, those of us, in
1977, thinking about scenarios of the future of Iran with an
understanding of Iran’s various cultural roots, could foresee a
possible scenario where rising fundamentalist resistance to
westernization might bring to power a man such as Ayatollah
Khomeini.
Similarly, you wouldn’t build the scenario for a corporation
around the personality of its CEO, even in this age of “leadership.”
In most companies, the role and power of the leader are exaggerated
enormously. As in society at large, business leaders reflect wider
forces within the company itself, forces which choose and influence
them. John Reed, the bank’s CEO, reflects Citicorp more than
Citicorp reflects John Reed. Thus, the scenario writer’s task is to
define the forces inside and outside the company, and analyze
which plots they fit.
Some plots will fit your elements and some won’t. Looking at your
predetermined elements, you might make a judgment: “These will
never fit together in a framework shaped by challenge and
response.” Having gathered the variations that are possible, you
would tease out five or six variations that fit the case. Eventually
you narrow and combine those into two or three fully detailed
descriptions of what might happen.
Why two or three plots or logics? Because people’s minds can
cope with only two or three possibilities. Two may not capture
reality, so you often use three. On rare occasions you might consider
four. Any more choices will produce a hopeless muddle. Scenario-
planners did not always know this. At SRI, in the early 1970s, we
generated thousands of possible futures. We had to use a computer


---PAGE BREAK---

to sort through them. It was silly. In 1974, our seminal scenario
project for the Environmental Protection Administration offered a
mere ten scenarios. Jay Ogilvy, Paul Hawken, and I narrowed those
further into a book called Seven Tomorrows. Upon reflection, those
seven were still too many; in essence, we had three possible futures
in mind, with a lot of sub-variations. The EPA would have learned
more if we had just given them three.
There is a common trap with three scenarios: it is easy to offer a
bland assortment in which one represents the high road, one the low
road, and one the average of the two. That is why, in figuring out
plots, I usually return to contemplate the decision that must be
made. “If the United States suddenly loosens up all immigration
restrictions, it would really change my decisions about labor
recruiting. I had better make sure one of the scenarios includes that
possibility. Can I design a plausible set of plots which lead to that?”
I try to make the third path a little bit off-the-wall, to avoid a
business-as-usual path. For example, could a labor shortage driven
by an economic boom force the United States to open wide its
gates?
There are three main plots that show up constantly in modern
times. They should be considered for every set of scenarios.
Winners and Losers
Most plots start with a perception: a motive that propels the
characters. This plot starts with the perception that the world is
essentially limited, that resources are scarce, and that if one side
gets richer, the other side must get poorer. Economist Lester Thurow
called this the “zero sum game.” As a plot, it shows up often in
politics (and in business in very mature industries). Only one
candidate can win the election; therefore, others must lose. Only
one country can dominate the economy; therefore, others must be
subservient. Only one executive can become CEO; therefore, the


---PAGE BREAK---

rivals must leave the company. Only one corporation can dominate
the market; there can be only one IBM in computers, or only one
Hertz in rental cars.
In a winners and losers situation, conflict is inevitable. Often, the
sides compromise in a balance of power. This typically leads to a
gradual buildup of tension, suspicion, and uneasy alliances. It’s the
winner’s game, typically; as long as other computer companies play
against IBM, or other rental car companies play against Hertz, the
game will tend to keep both companies on top. Apple fought the
system by turning the computer industry to another game (which I’ll
describe under the “Lone Ranger” plot).
South African scenarios always include a “winners and losers”
plot where different groups battle for control of the country: white
supremacists, the various black organizations, and (increasingly)
white liberals. Only one group can win and dominate the country’s
politics—at least as long as the country’s people conceive of their
politics that way. If the game continues, incidentally, the identity of
the winner will depend upon technology. The fate which white
South Africans fear most—blacks taking over the country and
confiscating white property—does not appear in any realistic
scenario for South Africa. The reason: the supposedly “violent”
black groups such as the ANC have very few weapons, and little
money or support with which to get them. The white militia, by
contrast, is well armed and prepared for violence. They, on the
other hand, lack the economic support which they need to build a
prosperous country.
Winners and losers plots lead to covert alliances. In a bizarre
sense, this is a pragmatic stance: “who” you’re involved with is
more important than “what” you hope to achieve politically. Stalin’s
1941 nonaggression pact with Hitler is one example. In the Middle
East, this logic becomes a political ethic in which “the enemy of my
enemy is my friend,” transcending even the fiercest animosity.
Consider the weird cooperation between Israel and Iran, involving
sharing of military intelligence and matériel during the Iran/Iraq
war.


---PAGE BREAK---

To explain such peculiarities, people with a “winners and losers”
view of the world rely on conspiracy theories. At the height of the
1973 oil price crisis, a Japanese businessman once asked me why
the United States and OPEC had conspired to attack Japan by
raising oil prices. Were not Saudi Arabia and Iran close allies of the
United States? Did they not need American support to quadruple
their oil prices? Meanwhile, angry Americans at gas lines were
blaming American oil companies for colluding with the Arabs. And
Arabs were blaming the U.S. relationship with Israel, and oil
company insensitivities, for provoking them.
In the past, this logic has led to war. Historian Barbara Tuchman
describes a winners and losers standoff in The Guns of August.
Individuals acted in what they saw as self-interest (they were
following another plot, the “Lone Ranger” logic in which the
individual entity stands against the rest of the world). To “protect”
themselves, they formed alliances. No one wanted the war which
followed; it came in an uncontrolled fashion, incoherently, with no
easy resolution. Thirty years later, the “Losers” of World War I were
still playing the same game. Any scenario with winners and losers
had better consider the possibility of perpetuation of persistent
conflict.
If you were a U.S. auto worker or executive thinking about your
future in 1980 you should have considered a scenario based on a
logic of winners and losers. The growth in the U.S. auto market had
stopped for both demographic and economic reasons. The baby
boom was tailing off and income growth slowed. The economic
winners bought fancy European cars (later fancy Japanese cars),
while the fading middle class could no longer afford to keep up. The
losers would be the American car makers. GM saw its share of the
market fall from over 50 percent to less than 35 percent. Thousands
of jobs and careers went with that fall. By the end of the eighties the
leading selling car in America was a Honda. Would you have been
better off going to work in the successful nonunionized Honda plant
in Marysville, Ohio, or in the “protected” unionized factories of GM
in Detroit? Where would your prospects have been better? If you
were plotting steel company strategy, would you rather have


---PAGE BREAK---

targeted the fading markets of Detroit or the new markets of the
Japanese companies rapidly expanding their manufacturing capacity
in the U.S.?
Challenge and Response
In the summer of 1987, I looked at the future of global finances
for the London Stock Exchange—with particular emphasis on
looming problems such as the U.S. deficit and the Latin American
debt crisis. At the time, conventional economic thinking admitted
only two scenarios. Either the economic system would crash into a
prolonged depression, or we would “magically” defeat the problems
created 
by 
these 
huge 
international 
financial 
imbalances
permanently and break forth into stable prosperity. These scenarios
in their naive extremes did not seem to make sense. I visited
Ariyoshi Okimura, the chief financial economist and director of the
Industrial Bank of Japan, a quiet, soft-spoken man in his fifties, and
a brilliant economist. “I don’t think the imbalances are going to go
away,” he said casually. “And I don’t think they are going to destroy
the system. I think we will have ‘managed imbalances.’ The question
will not be how to eliminate them, but how to live with them.”
Okimura was correct. The economy has been volatile, with many
crashes and rises, many individual winners and losers; but it has
also been resilient. As new problems come up, investors and
countries learn to adapt. We may see events that bring us to the
brink, but the system itself won’t fail. Instead, it will evolve further
with each new challenge and response.
The term “challenge and response” comes from script writing as
well as from historian Arnold Toynbee. There, it refers to adventure
stories, in which an individual faces one unexpected test after
another. Each time, as a result, the tested person emerges different
from the way he was before. Overcoming the test, passing the test,


---PAGE BREAK---

is important—not for its credential, but for its effect on the hero’s
character.
I described in Chapter 5 how one Japanese definition for
“optimism” means “having enough challenges to give life meaning.”
That mentality is arguably Japan’s greatest asset in the modern
world. In 1973, the United States and Japan were hit with the same
challenge: a quadrupling of oil prices. The United States responded
with a winners and losers scenario in which it was, it felt, the
winner. “This is temporary, we will surely win,” said American
policymakers. “We don’t need to worry about it.” Within a year, the
United States was importing half its oil. Japan responded instead by
completely rebuilding its capital structure to become the most
energy-efficient economy in the world. Today, the average Japanese
automobile gets thirty-five miles per gallon. Their most efficient cars
go much higher. If the entire U.S. car fleet averaged thirty-five miles
per gallon America would need to import no oil.
Ironically, America’s history had been a continual succession of
challenge and response stories. Mark Twain’s Huckleberry Finn is one
of the great novels of challenge and response; by the end of the
book, having met every challenge, Huck is a very different person
from when the book began. Each push westward on the frontier was
a new challenge; so was every moment in an immigrant’s life. The
American myth is built on stories of step-by-step success, in which
the hero rises to each challenge and improves along the way. The
United States could have reacted against World War II with
isolationism; it intervened instead, and became, as a result, a
successful capitalist global empire. Today, scenarios for America’s
future must include one key challenge and response plot: can it pass
the test of its deficit?
Environmentalism offers another test. For many years, the most
widely 
perceived 
relationship 
between 
economics 
and 
the
environment was a zero sum winners and losers logic. You could
either have growth or environmental safety, but not both. If you
wanted a cleaner environment, you had to waste money on
paperwork, catalytic converters, and coal plant scrubbers. If you


---PAGE BREAK---

were pro-growth, it meant you opposed environmentalism. People
were locked into polarized positions by the logic of the debate.
Today, the logic of “sustainable development” suggests that both
economic growth and environmental quality are possible—if people
tackle the challenge of satisfying both criteria. That means
developing new technologies which cut waste and save energy.
When we designed scenarios for PG&E, for example, we deliberately
set them up as challenge and response plots. We said that they had
consistently seen their world as winners and losers, in which they
were limited by politics and the supply of energy. That meant
fighting to build power plants and transmission lines. In a challenge
and response mind-set, they look at each difficulty as an opportunity
to learn. As a result, their perceptions are now influenced by
community feelings and their sense that the public will work with
them to solve problems. If they don’t meet the public halfway, the
problems won’t get solved. Indeed, it was the challenge of the
October 1989 San Francisco earthquake and the very effective
response of PG&E and the community it serves that helped create
the sense of shared fate that now shapes corporate strategy.
Evolution
The window by my computer, up in the Berkeley hills, surveys the
sweep of the heart of the San Francisco Bay. Three spines of land,
from the south, the north, and the east, descend to the waters of the
bay. One can imagine Miwok Indians walking down to the water’s
edge. Today, I see the Golden Gate Bridge in the distance, the Bay
Bridge a little closer, and a web of streets and arterial highways
between them. The bay is dotted with sailboats and windsurfers;
rows of houses encroach upon the summertime-tawny hills of Marin
County. In the north, I see a cluster of oil refineries. A steady stream
of tankers churn in and out of the Golden Gate to reach them.


---PAGE BREAK---

When I moved into this house, I obtained photographs of the
region, taken from the same place as my window, dating back to
1926. There was no Golden Gate Bridge; there were no freeways
and few roads. There weren’t any other houses on this now-
populated hillside. And, surprisingly, there weren’t any trees. The
trees had all been cut down to build San Francisco, with the
remainder destroyed by a great forest fire in the early twenties.
Nearly everything I see has grown gradually over the past sixty
years; a time-lapse film of the intervening time (with, say, one frame
per week) would show people flowing into view, roads and
buildings sprouting like plants, industry’s roots burrowing into the
soil like botanical roots.
These evolutionary changes are always biological in nature. They
always involve slow change in one direction—usually either growth
or decline. Evolutionary changes are hard to spot if you’re not
attuned to them, because they take place so slowly. Once spotted,
however, they are easy to manage, precisely because they don’t
suddenly leap upon you.
The most common evolutionary plot in the world today is
technology. New innovations grow in a biological fashion—
sprouting slowly from earlier technologies, gradually ripening, and
then bursting upon the world. In the early 1980s, new types of
microchips, sensors, and control devices made robotic machines
with astounding new capabilities possible. Promoters expected to
sell 2 billion robots in a few years. Instead, they sold 200 million
and lost tons of money. Before the new machine could catch on,
learning had to take place. Customers had to discover how to use
robots; and in the process, they learned that robots could not
perform as well as they hoped. That in turn sent robot designers
back to the labs. When the next round of robots is introduced, once
again people will have to learn to value and use them. Technology
entrepreneurs often fail to predict their own growth because they
don’t take that learning time into account; they don’t see
technological growth as a process of evolution—the development of
new niches.


---PAGE BREAK---

Technology is also evolutionary because new tools fit within an
existing system. The aviation industry created wealth, but only after
many smaller forces coalesced—including jet engine research, air
traffic control development, and government support of airports.
Automobiles could not travel without asphalt paving, oil pipelines,
tire manufacturing, rubber plants, engine design, assembly lines,
and the vast network of highways and streets. If anyone wishes to
make major changes in automobiles (such as designing an electric
car, or a “people-mover” style car that runs on rails), he cannot
merely design a machine. He must think about changing the web of
systems that support the car.
Similarly, any scenario for technologies must include an
understanding of the political and social systems around it. The Wall
Street 
Journal 
has 
extolled 
the 
future 
of 
fiber 
optic
telecommunications, linking everyone in the United States in a
wonderfully versatile digital telephone network. Individuals would
all get access to far more information, control over incoming calls,
and an electronic mail system for sending videos, music, and
computer programs as well as text. Technically, most of the
mechanisms exist. But we can’t get there from here in the United
States, given the current American regulatory framework for
telecommunications. Large businesses can expect hookups to fiber
optic channels, but most small businesses and individuals in the
United States will not get them soon. The initial cost is too great;
well-meaning consumer groups, trying to keep phone bills from
rising, have stymied the movement. Meanwhile, Europe and Japan,
with different regulatory frameworks, are moving aggressively. By
the next century, the rest of the industrialized world will have a
superpowered telephone system; compared with them, the American
system will feel as antiquated as the telegraph is today.
Economic control tends to move to the places where technology
evolves the fastest. While the Japanese have deliberately moved
since 1981 toward a hyper-industrial society of sophisticated
manufacturing, the Americans saw the future as a post-industrial
service society, in which heavy industry was done elsewhere. The
Japanese model is turning out to be correct even in the United


---PAGE BREAK---

States, except that the hyper-sophisticated plants are no longer
owned by Chrysler, but by Toyota. Solar power in this country is
dominated by Germans, not by Americans. The ownership structure
rather than the nature of the industry is turning out to be different.
As a result, Americans will be much less in control of the American
economy.
The competitive dynamics of business tend to obey rules very
much like the competition of nature. Mergers, acquisitions,
diversification all have their counterparts in nature. Capitalism, by
its nature, follows an evolutionary plot. For quite a long time the
old order—especially if it is embedded in government bureaucracies
and giant companies—resists sudden change and challenge. While
the directors of the London Stock Exchange adapted a challenge and
response plot, the other major financial players continued to accept
slow evolution. It makes the old order more vulnerable to sudden
sharp discontinuities as the pressure for change builds up.
Common kinds of business decisions often lead to structurally
similar scenarios. Decisions to build a new business around a new
technology often lead to evolutionary scenarios addressing the
ability of new technology to find a successful niche in a competitive
ecosystem. The continuing success of SUN Microsystems, for
example, relies on its ability to anticipate the possible pattern of
evolution of today’s scientific and technical networks and adapt
accordingly. Industries anticipating the possibility of restructuring—
say AT&T, before the breakup of the Bell System in 1983–84—might
think about scenarios of challenge and response; how to respond to
the challenge of a newly competitive environment? If your company
is thinking about investing overseas, in an increasingly protectionist
environment, perhaps the logic of winners and losers will help
identify the regions of greatest likelihood of success. In other words,
similar decisions often lead to similar classes of scenarios. But each
would be unique to its particular circumstances. AT&T and
BellSouth faced similar challenges, but in very different situations.
Their scenarios of challenge and response would be very different.


---PAGE BREAK---

Other Common Plots
The three plots just described are the most common in scenarios,
but they do not cover all situations. Other, spicier plots need to be
stirred in. These plots are ones which I have personally found
illuminating:
•    Revolution: Every now and then there’s a sudden dramatic
change, usually unpredictable in nature. Peter Drucker called such
changes “discontinuities” and gave as examples an earthquake, a
volcanic eruption, a political revolution, the toppling of a
presidency (as in Watergate), and the sudden emergence of an OPEC
as a political power. Revolutions are rare, but they must always be
considered if they are plausible. The most frequent question asked
of scenario-planners by business people is: “Where are the big
discontinuities likely to be?”
It’s fun and a little scary to think of possible discontinuities. They
can include human-made natural disasters: pollution-precipitated
sudden climate change. Or plain natural disasters: a large meteorite
striking the earth, or a series of earthquakes. They can include
surprising changes of public attitude. People might suddenly decide
that space is a bore; there isn’t much worth doing out there. As a
result, space technology would lose a great financial and
inspirational impetus. New religious and cultural wars could erupt
as fundamentalists clash with the world’s growing secular tolerance.
Or new types of plagues might strike, more virulent than AIDS,
spread not through direct blood contact but simply through normal
contagion, exacerbated by the expanding global transport system
and by more crowded cities. Less likely, but still possible, is a
sudden world government, responding to the increasing perception
that independent governments are not fit to manage their nations.
There is no guarantee that a world government would be benevolent
or democratic.


---PAGE BREAK---

Revolutions are important for their aftermath. People perceive
possibilities differently. Consider what the 1929 crash did to a
generation’s optimism. After Chernobyl, people suddenly realized
that nuclear accidents were not a local problem, they were a global
problem. After Proposition 13 in California, American politicians
realized that their constituents no longer trusted government
enough to support higher taxes. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, no
one could see Germany or the U.S.S.R. the same way.
In San Francisco, on the morning of October 17, 1989, the
possibility of an earthquake felt far away. Thus, few people were
prepared. When the earthquake struck, hardware stores sold out of
gas wrenches; bottled water and batteries went fast. Traveling
outside the Bay Area that day, I found it almost impossible to get
news of my family. Today, we have bottled water and gas wrenches
in our house. We also have a plan for what to do if we’re trapped
away from the city when a quake occurs; a scenario, in effect, for
how our neighbors and friends could get news to each other.
•  Cycles: In the 1920s, the small city of Emeryville (just outside San
Francisco) was a sparsely populated industrial area next to the salt
marshes. After World War II, Emeryville grew into a major
industrial center, a healthy blue-collar home to steel mills, chemical
plants, and research laboratories. With the decline of heavy industry
in the United States over the past two decades, Emeryville became
sparsely populated again; stagnant, with empty factories, empty
streets, a few active warehouses, and a small residential population.
But in the late 1980s, Emeryville revived. The old International
Harvester factory was converted to airy, sunny, fully electronically
wired, loft-like office spaces. Software design and biotechnology
businesses occupy buildings where bridges were fabricated and
tractors manufactured. Cetus, the biotechnology company, occupies
the old Shell research lab. Rents and property values are rising.
Emeryville is playing out a cyclical plot of decay and rejuvenation.
Many cities go through these cycles; the next up-and-coming area of
New York, for example, may well be the South Bronx. It is where


---PAGE BREAK---

the cheap close-in real estate will lie as gridlock diminishes the
capacity for commuting.
Economic matters often occur in cycles; for that reason, it is good
for a scenario-builder to be familiar with some economic theory. If
the Federal Reserve increases the money supply, you can count on
interest rates going down. That in turn means that people (and
industries) will borrow and spend more. That, in turn, often
encourages inflation, which then influences a restriction on the
money supply.
But the cyclical logic of market economics appears in other areas
as well. Ronald Reagan’s drug policies, for example, unintentionally
created crack. When the Drug Enforcement Administration began to
put pressure on cocaine dealers, the price went up. When the price
goes up on a commodity, it becomes a more valuable line of
business. In classic market economic terms, when the price went up,
the volume went up. Many more dealers entered the business in the
United States. They, in turn, flooded the market, which (up until
that time) had been a fairly upscale market; cocaine was expensive.
So they added a new low-cost product: crack.
Today, every time another drug war is announced, and law
enforcement gets tougher, the same plot line takes effect. Cocaine
gets more expensive, and thus more enticing as a business, and the
volume goes up. But the volume does not stay high, because (as
classic market economics suggest) there is only a limited demand for
the drug. When the market gets glutted, the price falls. Business
shrinks, and the supply goes down—until the next crackdown on
drugs raises prices again. Clearly the main role of the Drug
Enforcement Agency is to assure the profitability of the drug barons’
business. Imagine how they would feel if the DEA stopped enforcing
the law and anyone could sell cocaine?
The timing of cycles is important, and unpredictable unless you
look for clues. To know where a neighborhood is located in a real
estate cycle of rise or fall, you might have to actually go and visit it.
Savvy real estate investors often do exactly that, using their insight
to buy real estate as a long-term investment. An individual’s only
weapon with cycles is awareness; they swing independently of


---PAGE BREAK---

anyone’s attempts to control them. Because of their lag time, cycles
can be emotionally misleading. When things look like easy street,
quite often there is danger at the door—and vice versa. As a result, a
cyclical plot often leads to an impression of scarcity, and therefore a
winners and losers plot.
•    Infinite possibility: At the end of every decade, The Economist
produces a special issue looking ahead for the next ten years. In
1950, its tone was cautious, reserved, and a bit shell-shocked: “We
hope the world never again experiences what it did in the last ten
years.” The magazine hoped, not for affluence or growth, but merely
for a peaceful, tolerable world. By 1960, its attitude had completely
changed. Growth was inevitable: abundance and unparalleled
growth. The only question was how high it could go, how much
could be expected? The Economist, like the rest of the Anglo-
American world, had entered the plot of infinite possibility.
Infinite possibility starts with public perception: the world will
expand and improve, infinitely. It is a seductive perception; under
its influence, many things happen that would not otherwise take
place. Money gets poured into research; people spend instead of
saving for the future (as they would under challenge and response);
excess thrives in many forms. Under Johnson, infinite possibilities
produced the War on Poverty. Under Reagan, it produced the
Housing and Urban Development Department scandals. Tom Wolfe’s
novel The Bonfire of the Vanities is about the shattering of the feeling
of infinite possibility. It’s no accident that his hero, bond broker
Sherman McCoy, thinks of himself as a potential “Master of the
Universe.”
Infinite possibility may be a seduction story, but it is not always
seduction with bad result. The computer industry in 1975 was
fueled by infinite possibility. Many people and companies
prospered; eventually, many failed, but on the whole personal
computers were an unequivocal economic boom. Xerox did not see
it: their executives said, in effect, “We don’t think there are many
possibilities here. No one will want these on their desktops.” They,


---PAGE BREAK---

instead, were following the plot of evolution: seeing computers as
natural extensions of a mainframe world.
Infinite possibility is powerful. In 1950, most Americans did not
envision that, by 1960, they would live in a society of two-car
families and three-car garages, in which any American, it was said,
could have his own mini-estate with a plot of grass around it. The
pursuit of infinite possibility made that change possible.
•    The Lone Ranger: In 1982, when Margaret Thatcher began
tackling the stagnant British economy, she had in mind a scenario
built around the individual versus a system. She saw herself battling
the dominance of self-serving labor and the excesses of the post-war
“Yes, Minister”-style social welfare state. Her strategy was to
dismantle the existing system, provide the right incentives, and let
entrepreneurial spirits blossom. Her “Lone Ranger” plot has been
proven mainly right.
The Lone Ranger plot is mainly a social logic, driven by a street
sensibility that emerges in an incoherent fashion. It says that the
ordering principles of politics, trade, and technology cannot reach
the basic individuality in our souls. David facing Goliath is a “Lone
Ranger” hero; so was James Dean in Rebel Without a Cause, as well
as the Lone Ranger himself, riding alone into town to confront a
corrupt system and win. Apple Computer was an archetypal
corporate Lone Ranger, confronting the faceless minions of the IBM
“ranch.”
Despite the romantic image of Lone Ranger-style heroes, the
effects of the attitude are often troublesome. When two or more
Lone Rangers butt heads, it creates a particularly virulent winners
and losers conflict. Both sides see themselves as the independent
heroes, each convinced of his own virtue and the inevitability of
victory.
•  “My Generation”: In 1963, planner/futurist Don Michael foresaw
that the world would forever be different when he looked carefully
at the demographics of the early 1960s. His resulting book was
called The Next Generation: The Prospects Ahead for the Youth of


---PAGE BREAK---

Today and Tomorrow. He noted that the youth of the post-war era
were not only large in number, but were growing up with
experiences different from those that any generation had
encountered before: affluence, peace, and freedom. With their needs
for food, shelter, work, and companionship satisfied, they could
think about self-expression, status, and the meaning of life. Seeing
this, Michael could anticipate the youth rebellion and widespread
social experimentation that, soon thereafter, burst upon the scene.
He also saw that women, as well as youth, would have enough
freedom and increased affluence to question their traditional roles.
Scenarios should always include the influence that the culture has
on people’s values—particularly the culture of large generations of
people. There used to be four ways to live in America—poverty,
working class, middle class, or upper class. But now, the common
experiences of the baby boomers have been transformed, through
their own experimentation, into an amazing diversity of lifestyles.
Steve Barnett, in a GBN meeting, described people who are “bankers
by 
day, 
punkers 
by 
night”—comfortably 
moving 
between
discontinuous lifestyles. Advertisers and employers can no longer
look at their markets and workforce as simple and consistent.
Our global teenager scenario (Chapter 7), of course, is another
example of the “My Generation” plot at work. It relies, for its power,
on enough demographic force to make a generation of people feel as
if their culture will influence the world.
How Plots Interact
Scenario designers rarely consider plots individually. They
consider the ways in which different plots might handle the same
forces. Global environmental policy, for example, could follow
either an evolutionary plot or a challenge and response plot.
Evolution could lead to ecodisaster simply by producing more of the
same. Waste dumps would proliferate; refinery explosions and


---PAGE BREAK---

chemical 
accidents 
would 
continue. 
The 
transportation 
of
biologically hazardous wastes would increase, creating the
opportunity for dangerous accidents, such as those of oil tankers
before them. Most often nothing would happen; or outbreaks of
polio and typhoid would occur, not linked to the accident until
much later. Fear of such epidemics would most likely trigger an
eventual overreaction against technology; that, combined with the
reduced productivity of poisoned land, would drive the economy
downward—slowly.
Alternatively, if policy followed the challenge and response plot,
we might experience an ecoboom. This late in the game, the
urgency of building a “sustainable growth” society would inspire
unusual innovation and change. Somewhere out there, the Aristotle
Onassis of the 2000–2010 era is growing up. Spurred by the
challenges of these years, he or she will figure out a way to
entrepreneur intelligently managed transportation, for example. At
first he would fill only a niche that exists because of the
environmental threat, a niche that gradually expands to the full
system.
Often, people think they’re in one plot, while the system follows
another plot—with miserable results. Many of Ronald Reagan’s
policies ostensibly followed a scenario logic of individual against the
system. No energy policy was a good policy as far as Reagan was
concerned. Unfortunately, the real logic behind the energy
environment of the eighties was challenge and response. The
Reagan government, for example, reduced mileage standards and
failed to increase gasoline taxes. Thus, America, with low oil prices
and low income from a gas tax, did not invest as much as other
nations in energy-efficiency. Instead, the U.S. addicted itself to low-
price gasoline. Now, there is good reason to expect an increase in oil
prices. While other nations merely adjust their taxes down, the U.S.
will end up paying the money to the “tax collectors” in the Middle
East, instead of having used it to invest in its own energy-saving
infrastructure while it could. The U.S. failed the challenge of
efficiency and did not even recognize it as a nation. Americans had
the wrong image of the future and did the wrong thing, coming to


---PAGE BREAK---

regret it only when Saddam Hussein marched into his neighbor
Kuwait in the summer of 1990.
The Unbroken Line
One cautionary note in developing plot lines. When things get
worse, people often expect them to get much worse, until they
produce devastation—war, economic collapse, apocalypse. Thus,
watch out for the unbroken line—conditions that change, but do not
engender any response. If there is dramatic continued growth, look
for the undertow of resistance which will slow down the growth.
The threat of war breeds resistance to war. Environmental threat
breeds ecological activism. Japan’s prosperity has provoked forces
in competing countries (Korea, Taiwan, France) and in Japan itself
(its severe labor shortage). It is the prophecy itself that leads to
change and the prophecy’s negation.
Royal Dutch/Shell planners saw the undertow in oil prices in the
mid-1970s. After prices jumped, most forecasters assumed that they
would continue rising. But the price jump provoked a wave of
energy-efficiency innovation and new oil development, which then
helped bring the price back down.
A similar case is going on today in oil exploration. Most of the
large oil companies are spending billions in exploration, expecting a
return from the oil. Their projections assume that the price of oil
will stay the same. However, if every company that is exploring for
oil succeeds, that will produce a glut, and the price of oil will drop
—perhaps to ten dollars per barrel. That price is too low to develop
most of the new oil, which is expensive because it is difficult to
retrieve. The companies’ projections all tacitly pretend that others
will not see the world as they do and act accordingly. The result will
be either lower oil prices, if they succeed, or fewer oil companies, if
they don’t.


---PAGE BREAK---

Training Yourself to Recognize Plots
As a student inspired in the early 1960s, during the aftermath of
Sputnik, I resolved to pursue a career in aeronautical engineering. I
knew that the space race would guarantee me employment and
excitement for years. However, I was not prepared for the response
to the success of the moon walk in 1969. After having met the
challenge of the competition with the Soviet Union, America lost
interest and support for the space program diminished. When the
aerospace industry became depressed after the completion of the
Apollo program, the bright future I had trained for disappeared. I
realized that I had never thought about such a situation. What could
I have foreseen if I had been paying attention? What might I have
done differently as a result?
If I had really thought about it I would have had to say, “This is a
short-lived effort. If we get to the moon first, we are out. If the
Russians beat us, we are out. It is predetermined that the space
program will wind down.” Moreover, I might have recognized a
winners and losers plot which suggested that rivalry was the deep
motivation. I had been interested in my own growth, and assumed
that the space race followed a challenge and response logic. I could
have learned differently by paying more attention to what
Washington bureaucrats were saying at the time.
Hindsight is useful for sharpening your foresight. That’s why I
recommend that you practice such a “retrodictive” scenario
yourself. Imagine that you had been trying to write the scenario for
your company, or yourself, or your country, ten years ago. What
would have been the right scenario, what would have been the plot,
what were the driving forces, what were the critical elements, what
could you have seen then that you didn’t? I have actually done this
as a formal exercise with, for example, executives from a major U.S.
steel company. We went back in time and said, “What might you
have seen about the near demise of the U.S. steel industry, if you
had been doing scenarios?”


---PAGE BREAK---

The answer was that they could have foreseen the collapse of
American steel, but they probably could not have prevented it. They
would have seen slow growth in their markets, if they had stopped
to consider it; and the growth of foreign competition as a driving
force. They might have reacted much sooner and given themselves
much more maneuvering room. Some players didn’t make it at all,
while most were forced to change dramatically and painfully.
U.S. steelmakers did not consider a plot in which high inflation
and interest rates continued. They did not foresee their inability to
invest in steel manufacturing, or their customers’ inability to invest
in new facilities for using steel. Finally, like the U.S. auto industry,
they did not notice the Japanese attitude toward challenge and
response: they believed Ford, and ignored Toyota; they saw
promises of rising American markets, and ignored new Japanese
steel competitors. Everything was there to be seen. It was missed,
not for lack of information but for denial and lack of methodology.
They didn’t want to see it, and didn’t have the mechanism to force
them to see it. A well-constructed scenario plot is exactly that sort of
mechanism.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

THE WORLD IN 2005:
THREE SCENARIOS
            The fundamental uncertainties of our time will shape the
context for many of our business and personal decisions. Will there
be war or peace? Prosperity or depression? An atmosphere of
freedom or one of restraint? As a group, Global Business Network
produced our first set of global scenarios in 1990. We followed the
same practice discussed in this book—isolating predetermined
elements and critical uncertainties, and then considering the
possible scenario plot lines. And we emerged with three scenarios of
the future which we still feel are plausible. Any of them may come
true; the future will probably be a combination of all of them.
Large-scale scenarios such as these serve as a sort of template; you
can use them as a basis for more specific scenarios. We use them to
keep ourselves from reinventing the wheel each time we consider a
new decision, and it helps us continue to educate ourselves as well.
As we learn more about the fate of any individual organizations or
people, we learn more about the quality of our wider-scale long
view, and more about the global economy.
You might use these scenarios (or parts of them) as components in
your own planning. Alternatively, they may just spark your own
thinking. I offer them in the spirit with which scenarios are always
offered: as a vehicle for envisioning where the world could go so
that we can learn in time to do something different.
Driving Forces of the Next Two Decades


---PAGE BREAK---

As always, our scenario process started by looking at the driving
forces in the world today. They led us to a surprisingly large number
of predetermined elements, and an equal number of critical
uncertainties. Here, I’ve grouped them thematically:
•    Shuffling Political Alignments: The post-war era is over; the
Cold War is ended. Economic forces are increasingly more important
than military. Germany appears to look more toward Eastern Europe
and the Soviet Union as its future, than toward its American former
political ally. A united Germany will be an economic powerhouse,
the most powerful nation within Europe; politics on that continent
will unite many diverse economies, possibly including the Soviet
Union, in an on-going balancing act.
Meanwhile, Japan and the United States essentially share one
economy already, based on mutual investments, markets, and
strategic alliances between multinational corporations. Despite the
political resentment on both sides, the network of interconnections
is so dense that tearing it apart could happen only under the most
extreme circumstances. Like it or not, the United States and Japan
are bonded together. One great uncertainty is the shape of this
alliance—a fiery, conflicted marriage, or a formidable, well-
balanced partnership? A few prescient politicians have recognized
the opportunities in the latter. In a speech in San Francisco in
December of 1988, for example, U.S. Senator Bill Bradley proposed
a “Pacific coalition for growth and democracy,” including the
United States, Japan, Canada, Australia, Mexico, South Korea,
Indonesia, and Thailand. “Trade,” said Bradley, “has made the
Pacific rim the only part of the post-war world to evolve successive
generations of high growth economies.”
Note 
that 
Bradley’s 
proposed 
coalition 
included 
both
industrialized and developing countries. That division is rapidly
falling. New free trade talks between the United States and Mexico
are one sign; the inclusion of borderline countries such as Turkey in
the European Community is another. If the trend continues, then
India, China, and Latin America could wield greater influence by
how they choose to participate in the new alliances.


---PAGE BREAK---

In a world of stronger regional governments (such as the
European Community) one uncertainty lies in the role of
international political and economic institutions—the United
Nations, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
They may not be as necessary. Though they continue in vestigial
form, their roles may be replaced by negotiations between rival
power blocs. The failure to sustain the long-term development of
more global rather than regional organizations will slow the process
of global integration considerably. Conversely, the environment—a
global-scale crisis that doesn’t recognize national or regional
boundaries—may make worldwide organizations (e.g., IMF or
GATT) stronger. The same may be true if marketplace laws take
precedence over national interests. The movement away from global
economic and political institutions may portend an increasingly
difficult period for companies trying to operate at a global level.
Regional barriers and politics may come to dominate the evolution
of the business environment.
•    Technology Explosion: Rapid technological evolution will
continue. This will put education in an increasingly important role,
as the human community’s means for keeping up to date. Education
levels are already accelerating rapidly worldwide, as people in
developing countries realize their financial survival depends on it.
That’s not good news for the United States, whose educational
system is in decay, but it’s great news for Taiwan, Korea, and
Singapore.
We do not know which new technologies will be resisted by
narrow 
self-interest 
(as 
Detroit 
resisted 
energy-efficient
automobiles), and which will be so dangerous that they will require
severe controls (as with nuclear and chemical weapons). To judge
from the history of the computer, the transistor, the laser, and the
fax—the 1990s are almost certainly bound to spawn several world-
changing innovations that nobody but a few scientific specialists
had ever heard of in the 1980s.
Despite vexing global problems, technological change might alone
be strong enough to guarantee global prosperity. The single most


---PAGE BREAK---

frequent failure in the history of forecasting has been grossly
underestimating the impact of technologies. We may, in fact, be in
the midst of a major transition to technologies that may make
possible much higher economic growth—fueled by the faster pace of
research and by “nanotechnologies” such as molecular engineering.
By the late nineties, genetic medicine may take off with the
increasing capability to operate at the bio-molecular level. Industrial
materials may be nearly impossibly precise in their fabrication from
the atom up, which (since the precision of materials is an
acknowledged factor in quality and productivity) may lead to vastly
better, 
more 
productive 
infrastructures. 
And 
improved
infrastructures is one of the most important factors in sustaining
increases in business productivity and profitability.
•    Global Pragmatism: A new political ideology—“whatever
works”—transcends old attitudes about left versus right, or
capitalism versus socialism. You see the effects not just in
perestroika, but in Ronald Reagan’s surprising willingness to
negotiate arms treaties and the ideological “caution” exhibited by
George Bush. The Ayatollah of Iran has bought armaments from
Israel; the totalitarian Chinese Politburo has wooed entrepreneurs
from London and Los Angeles. “Who cares what color the cat is,”
asked Deng Xiaoping, “as long as it catches mice?” The near
universal condemnation of Iraq following its invasion of Kuwait was
born of the recognition that our collective reliance on the global
economy with its oil jugular running through the Persian Gulf made
us all brothers in oil with common interests to defend.
Developing and industrialized countries have learned from the
debt crisis of the early 1980s: those who resisted change with
rhetoric of protecting sovereignty, jobs, and consumption lost the
very control, jobs, and income they sought to protect. This change
of mood is predetermined—that is, we cannot imagine any plausible
scenario which would contradict it, unless, local cultural conflicts
such as those in the Soviet Union, the Middle East, and South Asia
come to play a much wider and larger role on the world stage.


---PAGE BREAK---

The downside of global pragmatism is a loss of belief structures
and a widening gap in society between rich and poor. This is
especially hard in countries based on an egalitarian promise, such as
the U.S.S.R. and China. Japan, for example, has a brand-new super-
rich class.
•  Demographics: We have already covered the rise of the global
teenager in Chapter 7—2 billion teenagers by the year 2000, most of
them in Asia, South America, and Africa. Meanwhile, industrialized
countries face declining population growth or even losing
population. In these industrialized countries, per capita income is
forty times as high as in the poorest developing countries; and there
is evidence that the gap is widening. Thus, there will inevitably be a
tidal wave of people yearning to migrate from developing nations to
the industrialized world in the 1990s.
In the United States, the sheer size of the baby boom, along with
its tendency for embracing social change, opens up uncertainties as
its members reach their fifties and sixties. Significant numbers of the
generation that learned how to drop out in the sixties, once past
their decades of homemaking and family rearing, may revert to
nonconformist ways during the next decade. At the same time, there
will be far fewer twenty- to thirty-four-year-olds. Entry-level job
seekers, college students, and young marrieds will be evident by
their relative absence. Much of the decline may be offset by
immigrants—for example, by young people coming from Mexico.
How will countries manage the crucial immigration issue in the
1990s? We do not know. Will new immigrants be effectively
absorbed into a pool of human talent to contribute to economic
development? Or will the presence of immigrants from poorer
nations, with different ethnic backgrounds from those of their new
destinations, provoke ethnic conflicts around the world? As noted
earlier, for businesses which deal with large numbers of people
either as customers or employees the new multicultural realities will
impose dramatic new requirements upon a management which is
largely white male. Understanding the needs of these new customers


---PAGE BREAK---

and workers will require a level of cultural sensitivity that has at
best been rare.
•    Energy: The amount of energy people consume is a powerful
driving force in political matters, technology, and global ecology. In
the 1990s, two forces will hold back energy consumption: perceived
price benefits from efficiency, and perceived damage to the
environment. Population is a critical driving force here: if every
Chinese citizen had just one motor scooter, the world’s oil demand
would leap by 2 million barrels per day. Fortunately, fuel is used far
more efficiently today than twenty years ago—accounting for more
than half of the lowered demand for oil since the 1973 OPEC-
spurred oil price crisis. If the impact of the Kuwait invasion is to
lead to moderately high prices it will accelerate the pace of
efficiency improvements as they become more economically
justifiable.
The rapid growth of population in the developing world
undoubtedly will push up energy demand. But it is not clear how
energy-intensive the economic growth in those countries will be. If
prices remain too low for very long, the marketplace will squander
energy; efficiency requires investment up front. Fortunately, energy
is sufficiently taxed in most countries that consumers have not
experienced a major fall in prices. Meanwhile, technological options
include a one-hundred-mile-per-gallon car and new networks of
high-speed, magnetically levitated trains. A lowering of demand
buys time to develop new and unproven energy options such as
large-scale solar power and (possibly) next-generation nuclear
power.
Technological improvement in energy development will continue,
particularly if oil prices rise and nanotechnology research begins in
earnest. We can expect more efficient solar cells, smaller nuclear
power plants (in pro-nuclear power countries such as France,
Germany, and Japan), and small-scale electric generators, using fuel
cells or gas-fired turbines. If these devices appear in large enough
numbers, it could mean the end of the electric grid that underlies
industrial civilization. Homes would still be connected, but the


---PAGE BREAK---

nature of interconnection would change and economics of location
would be different.
While the world or particular localities will still continue to
experience disruptions based on local politics (e.g., the Middle East
or local opposition to development), over the long run the vast
improvements in efficiency and the proliferation of energy supply
options mean that business will experience no fundamental long-
term constraint from lack of available energy.
•    Environment: Judging by credible warnings from atmospheric
scientists and ecologists, such perceived looming crises as global
climate change are, unfortunately, predetermined elements. Even if
the scientific realities still contain enormous uncertainties,
perceptions have already shifted fundamentally. But their outcomes
are uncertain. The world’s environmentalists and technologists
could develop an effective response, leading to a cleaner, more
efficient, and wealthier world. Or there will be an ineffective
response—too little, too late—resulting in a dirty, decaying
environment with pockets of wealth fleeing the unlivable air and
water. Some people still argue that the magnitude of environmental
problems has been exaggerated. If they are right the answers are
more research and moderate actions. In each of the scenarios in this
chapter, environmental issues play out differently.
Over the last couple of years, we have come to feel fairly certain
of continued public concern about the environment as a driving
force. But we do not know whether people will target local issues—
such as air and water quality—or global concerns such as the
greenhouse effect. Will the problems be so severe, so soon, that their
drastic economic and political fallout forces many countries into a
crisis mode? Or will scientists discover that global environmental
concerns were mainly a false alarm, leaving behind some definite
problems such as toxic wastes, but allowing people the time and the
means to solve them? Or will other concerns such as a renewal of
economic recession, unemployment, or inflation take over the public
spotlight as they did during the seventies and early eighties.


---PAGE BREAK---

•  The Global Information Economy: Information technology will
create new forms of organization. The financial, entertainment, and
communication industries are spearheading this transition, although
its effects reach into every business and home. Industry and natural
resources will still be important—this is not a post-industrial
economy in which “services” replace “things.” But key economic
relationships will be transformed. The speed of global electronic
transactions will generate speculative wealth much faster than
industries and services; the exchange of information, not the
possession of treasure, is the new definition of wealth. World paper
financial transactions are already ten times larger than physical
trade transactions.
Semi-industrialized nations, building their industries from scratch,
may use the productivity of “smart” technologies and management
methods to leapfrog past today’s industrial powers. The advanced
economies will seek more of their growth in nonindustrial activities
such as services and information—which tend to use less energy.
The move toward a global economy is inevitable. It suggests
regional currencies—a single European currency, for example—and
eventually a “WorldEx” (World Exchange Unit). But we do not know
how quickly the global economy will develop, or whether it will be
dominated by old political structures or market dynamics. This fate
hangs on a number of political issues, such as the evolution of
telecommunication standards and the regulation of international
securities trading. The outcome of the Gorbachev revolution is by no
means predetermined, nor is the global political role of the new
Japan and new Germany. And China after June 1989 is a fulcrum of
uncertainty. Will the U.S. deficit be any more manageable in the
nineties than it was in the eighties? How will the Europe of post-
1992 fare? What will be the impact of early-nineties downturn? Will
the growth potential of Latin America be liberated from the burden
of debt, and will the Asian “Tigers” follow the course of Japan and
become the new industrial powers?
The only certainty is that the 1990s will be a time of economic
and political “rapids”; far more turbulent than the early- to mid-
1980s. In retrospect people may say that the 1990s really “began” in


---PAGE BREAK---

1989, when the Berlin Wall came down. In a decade of uncertainty
and turbulent transition, no one is guaranteed success. Every nation,
rich and poor, faces new challenges of competition and of
adaptation to the emerging new rules of the game.
At GBN, we chose the mid-1990s as the point of divergence for
our long-term scenarios: the coming few years will remain highly
constrained by the momentum of history, such as the U.S. deficits
and the need to integrate Eastern Europe into the West. But as the
legacy of the recent past diminishes, by the mid-nineties the
possibilities begin to open up as we enter a period where many
choices will be made that will set the rules of the game for a long
time to come. We chose a vantage point of approximately ten years
later from which to see the results. Let’s paint portraits, then, of
three possible scenarios for the world in the year 2005.
New Empires
By the early 1990s more and more people in the industrialized
countries are increasingly angry with their trading partners. Buying
and selling companies, the rise and fall of regions at the hands of
distant foreigners, the buying of precious assets such as art and
landmarks all create a hostile mood, where recent friends come to
be seen as new enemies. Demonstrations against foreign owners
become a commonplace sight. Campaigns for “Buy American,
French, or Korean” raise the level of friction and anger. In such an
environment of conflict, what if politics wins control of the new
information economy? What if the winners and losers logic proves
persuasive—if politicians believe that they are in a zero-sum
competition for wealth and prosperity with all other nations? It’s a
plausible scenario; it merely suggests that governments will
continue to do what comes naturally.
This scenario begins in the mid-1990s with most nations deciding
to protect their threatened cultural identities and to take control of


---PAGE BREAK---

the pace of change by regionalizing their interests. The tension
between isolationism and the global economy creates what George
Kennan called “fateful alliances”: multinational power blocs. We call
them “New Empires” because they take on the qualities of empires.
Federated and all-powerful, bureaucratic but decentralized, these
superpower-style blocs of countries and corporations grow to
dominate the world. They are often benevolent, but they are always
despots.
One such empire is the Pacific bloc, including Japan, the United
States, Canada, Mexico, and most of East Asia. A rival European
bloc revolves around Germany and the Soviet Union. Nearby hover
fragmented and short-lived confederations involving countries from
the Middle East, North Africa, and Latin America. China and India
go their own way, preoccupied with territorial disputes against each
other. Though the direction of Africa is still unclear, the term “Third
World” no longer has any meaning and is not used as the spectrum
of nations no longer divides so neatly into three groups. Those
within each circle of allies protect each other. Those outside the
circle are economic rivals. The two main circles control most natural
resources and industry, with roughly equivalent riches that hold
them in balance.
This is a world vastly different from the world of the bipolar Cold
War. And for many, it’s a relief from the turbulent rapids of the
nineties. There is still change, but all progress is held in check by
resistance from the existing giant bureaucracies, both public and
private. Tariffs and protectionism hold back what would otherwise
be spiraling technological growth. In global telecommunications,
multiple bloc-defended standards continue to collide inefficiently.
The age of incompatibility persists. There are no global
infrastructure projects, but there are some intra-bloc undertakings.
Boeing, Mitsubishi, and the Daewoo Bank, at the instigation of U.S.
and Japanese governments, join forces to build the “Orient
Express”—a space plane traveling at twelve times the speed of
sound, linking the cities of the Pacific bloc.
There is prosperity in this world: stable, controlled, but not
universal. Africa is still trapped in poverty, in part because it is


---PAGE BREAK---

unaligned. And it is unaligned because it is so poor and no bloc
wants the drag of massive poverty on its economic performance.
Within each bloc there is fairly open trade, but between the blocs an
elaborate network of regulations governs all forms of economic
interactions, from physical trade to financial flows and even the
movement of information. “Sony-Apple” and “IBM-Siemens” (now a
completely European-owned company) sell to computer markets
that are almost monopolistically controlled.
Perhaps the clearest example of the failure to integrate lies in the
financial markets. After the crash of 1987, there had been much talk
of a single global stock market. But the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission could not agree with its counterparts in London, Tokyo,
and Brussels on any long-lasting framework for international
securities trading. Instead, protectionism had increasingly decoupled
the markets. The United States, coping with the long-term
consequences of its massive foreign debt, had placed limited
controls on capital outflows in 1995. The EC retaliated, and London,
looking toward the massive opportunities of a revived Europe, had
joined the Continent. British and Continental European sources of
capital had dried up as a result, putting even more pressure on the
U.S. capital markets.
By early in the decade post-2000, bureaucrats at Eurobank and
the Japanese Ministry of Finance have learned to wrangle each
week over the value of their currency units: the European Currency
Unit (the “eckoo,” as people call it) and the Pacific-Asian “packoo.”
Americans keep both dollars and packoos in their wallets.
Negotiators meet through a complex web of electronic media,
including elaborate computer simulations of the global economy,
managed by no one but watched carefully by every bloc.
Governments set the rules; corporations enforce them. Managers in
both sectors are increasingly difficult to tell apart. Access to markets
is their key issue: who for example will forge the best relationships
with China?
Environmental troubles continue, in some blocs more than others
and also on the global scale. The new China of over 1 billion people
wants to manufacture for the world as Taiwan used to. But the


---PAGE BREAK---

pollution costs of such industrialization are not trivial, and every
bloc resists paying for it. Generally, the right to pollute is a critical
international issue. Each bloc finds it can’t legislate against ozone
depletion, greenhouse warming, acid rain, deforestation, toxic
wastes, and despoiled oceans—so each takes refuge in blaming the
other blocs.
Within blocs, the cultural variety of individual nations is officially
respected—even officially encouraged—but larger loyalties are also
demanded. There is almost unlimited population migration within
blocs, for example, and contributions to shared military research.
Nonetheless, for the young who came of age at the turn of the
century, identity is a major psychological issue. Are the Europeans
French or British or Hungarian or something new not yet seen? The
social tensions between those who fight to preserve national identity
and those who find their meaning within a larger context is a
deepening divide. As a reaction to international media, there is a
revival of native arts, culture, and language, particularly in Europe.
Fashion becomes a way of expressing differences of origin.
A major surprise is the key role of Canada as the glue that binds
the Pacific bloc together. Since the Canadians are relatively wealthy
and unthreatening, they serve as mediator within the bloc. Having
managed a genuine federal and multilingual system (especially after
resolving the differences between French-speaking Quebecois and
pre-Columbian Native Canadians during the early 1990s), they are
adept at the skills required to manage a fiercely multicultural
political entity.
It’s a conflict-prone world. The mood is similar to the Iron Curtain
tensions of the sixties—little cooperation and collaboration, lots of
belligerence. The arms trade is booming. Each major bloc possesses
sufficient nuclear weapons; the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists has
moved the hands on its “doomsday clock” warning closer to
midnight than they have been since the early eighties. Most
hostilities play out in border-state and client-state conflicts. When
physical force is needed, elite military units are secretly deployed.
More often, war is economic and computer-based. New types of
“generals” in Japanese and German banks wield armies of traders,


---PAGE BREAK---

armed with computer-based simulations, boosting and cutting credit
where needed. False information suddenly appears on data banks of
trading strategy, placed there by enemy agents. A computer virus
paralyzes London’s sewage system and thus the financial operations
of the City; its source is never identified, except that it came from
outside Europe.
There is still, of course, uncertainty about the future in 2005. The
greatest uncertainty is military. If freedom, diversity, and
competition are preserved as social values, then the growth of
bureaucracy and the web of constraints will prevent full-scale war.
However, if the new mercantilism of the times evolves into full-scale
economic competition, then that could easily move to the military
front. Most people won’t see that potential until it’s too late.
It’s useful to remember that similar blocs have risen before in the
world, battling for military and economic supremacy in times of
wealth, growing population, and new technologies. George Kennan
was writing about just such a situation in his book about “fateful
alliances”—the stalemate of rivalries that existed in 1912. Two
years later, the world had entered one of the most tragic wars of
history. It produced a war which no nation wanted, and which no
one could figure out how to stop; a war which devastated a
generation, and provoked the half-century of depression and
continued war which followed.
If “New Empires” does appear, the most worrying variation would
be a North American bloc with Japan outside of it. That’s exactly
what happened before, and it suggests that the most dangerous
policy decisions Americans could make would be to isolate the
Japanese. The U.S. can either keep them in the family or make them
its enemies; but it will be one or the other.
Market World


---PAGE BREAK---

Imagine now that economics wins the ideological battle of the
1990s. Most of the world has adopted the Japanese challenge and
response willingness to meet all difficulties head-on and learn from
the experience. There is a resulting sense of “infinite possibilities”
almost everywhere, along with a sense of interconnected
responsibility. That is good business in the long run. This world is
entrepreneurial, multicultural, full of hope and harshness. It’s as
purely capitalistic as an open market, but it’s a smart form of
capitalism. The major international institutions are not government
alliances, but associations: international rule making, standard-
setting, conflict resolution and system management groups that
collectively form an informal “global commons.” As every village
had a group that set the rules for the use of the village commons, so
an integrated world economy needs some means for setting the rules
of those things we share in common such as the air, water, and
radio/TV spectrum. The new global commons is critical if the world
is to function like one vast market; without it the abuse of the
commons leads to conflict and friction. There will still be some who
come out on top while others are left behind and hunks of the
planet despoiled. Markets are like that.
Economic 
intelligence 
is 
the 
organizing 
principle. 
Large
corporations learned through the 1990s that they could not survive
as bureaucratic, slow-moving entities. They slimmed down as
smaller, more innovative, more creative companies thrived around
the world. The flood of complexity is kept coherent by a new way of
organizing society, built around communications links. It favors
those who can understand the unpredictable dynamics of trade; it
encourages cooperation, productivity, efficiency, and organizational
learning. People work to achieve, not to control; decentralization
and diversity are paramount, but do not block the flow of ideas
between regions. Vested interests still exist, but they get found out
and removed—not by government regulators, but by eager
competitors and investors. The harsh realities of enduring
competition keep pressure on long-term profits and continuous
improvement, increasing the risks of profiteering or nepotism.


---PAGE BREAK---

Economists still strive for a theory to explain the remarkable self-
organizing and self-correcting properties of the present world
complex of markets—and the speed with which that complex came
together. It began in the early 1990s, as a “pragmatic” realization
swept through every nation (which even fundamentalist Islamic
nations have come to understand). A society cannot survive in a
technologically open world without cooperation, international
coordination, and political freedom. After the “Peace Breaks Out”
period of the late eighties, government priorities shifted toward
rebuilding national infrastructures. Instead of seeking control over
the marketplace, they focused on helping build and enable free
markets, which led to international cooperation.
They also focused on education, which more countries,
particularly in what had been the “Third World,” came to see as the
path to prosperity. Today in 2005, everyone learns in school that
the success of Japan in the post-war era, the U.S. response to
Sputnik, the takeoff of the Asian “Tigers” and the most effective
global companies such as ABB, Nissan, and BP were all founded on
effective learning. Nations and companies invest a still-growing
share of their income in education and its infrastructure. As Arie de
Geus pointed out, learning faster than your competitors comes to be
seen as the only sustainable competitive advantage in an
environment of rapid innovation and change. Pursuing national
strategies for competitiveness, governments are promoting the goal
of becoming a “learning society” and research on learning has,
therefore, become a major growth area. The power of the computer
to simulate “microworlds” (capturing the world of the business and
its environment in a simple computer model) and display them in
vivid “virtual realities” (as the computer creates the possibility of
actually experiencing these “microworlds”) has become a common
tool for coping with the dynamics of modern complex social
systems. Incidentally, the United States is striving to catch up with
the rest of the world, after ten bitter years of political acrimony
about the decline of the U.S. educational system. Some American
parents still send their children to Canada, Singapore, or Korea to be


---PAGE BREAK---

educated. The public schools are fighting to win back the students
they lost to the private schools in the eighties and nineties.
In this “Market World,” companies continually restructure, rise,
fall, and intermesh. Small multinational consulting firms grow
through their bold innovation and the adept use of interactive
computer simulations. Millions of people work as professionals,
continually shifting to new employers. Many work at home. Asian
software companies bid for jobs for European conglomerates and
vice versa. Entrepreneurial bids from outside undercut inside
departments, so companies divest more and more of their jobs.
Meetings between people at these partner companies take place at a
moment’s notice, operating through video links and computer lines.
People collaborate on projects from different continents, speaking
several languages to do so.
The image of a “rising tide that lifts all boats” appears true, but
there are also many storms on the surface. High and volatile
economic growth is spurred by heavy investment in technology.
Boom-bust cycles are common and expected. Entire industries
emerge and are made obsolete in a matter of a few years. Their
workers retrain as a matter of course. Better-educated workers
produce new markets; “flash trends” for new electronic media, new
clothing, new types of food, and new entertainment sweep across
the world. For example, the product of the eighties, the fax, is gone
by the late nineties as it is replaced by integrated electronic
communication and printing machines. This is a world learning to
live with innovation as a constant.
You might describe the international mood as giddy and
optimistic, but with pockets of frustration. Some countries have high
expectations that the market doesn’t fulfill. Some feel that the speed
of change requires too high a price: from the environment, from
traditional beliefs and values, from the lives of the losers in
economic competition. There is little government-sponsored welfare
by the standards of the 1960s and 1970s. In some cities, companies
cooperate to sponsor small “nursing homes” and “hostels” for
indigent people—considered part of the cost of operating within a


---PAGE BREAK---

community. But many cities have no such services, and homeless
people throng the streets.
Many people miss the zest and focus of ideological zeal, if not its
economic effects. Independent movements for cultural pride exist in
many places, some with fundamentalist roots and others with
leftover tribal or Communist sensibilities, answering a hunger for
meaning and identity which the pursuit of the almighty dollar, yen,
and ruble doesn’t satisfy. In this highly materialistic world, there are
monasteries of rest and contemplation—but usually among those
people who have their “mid-life crisis” at age seventy-five, for
whom the loss of ideological purpose represents a genuine loss of
the meaning that informed most of their lives. Most of the world is
still in its teens and twenties, and for these people, the drive to get
ahead is not a luxury. It is a necessity. Family and community suffer
as the social fabric is shredded by affluence.
The environment suffers, too—but not as much as people feared it
would. Huge energy efficiency improvements take place each year,
and most companies operate under the principle of “sustainable
growth.” Population has begun to fall, and environmental cleanup
has moved up the “pipelines” in most industries. Nearly everything
is recycled; it’s less expensive that way. Some large companies, and
consortia of medium-sized companies, support large-scale “genetic
diversity” forests as part of their biotechnological research.
Massively parallel, interconnected, locally powerful computers
have blossomed everywhere. Nanotechnology—engineering at the
molecular scale—and life extension are in full swing; dozens of
companies have introduced products for each. Despite opposition
from fundamentalists, the technologies of birth control and fertility
also advance. Most of the world’s people can travel somewhere to
get a “morning after” pill or find a technique that will allow them to
conceive a child. In most countries, the number of births per year
has started to fall—not because of government fiat, but because
prosperity and technology have affected it.
Europe 
is 
thriving. 
The 
cosmopolitan 
traditions 
and
multilinguality of Europeans have suited them well for the new
global culture. The delicate political dance of putting together the


---PAGE BREAK---

EC helped breed a cadre of business people and flexible bureaucrats
who now lead the managers of the volatile multicultural world
economy. The Japanese had the money but lacked the diplomacy,
while the Americans knew too little about collaboration.
The dollar, yen, ECU, ruble, and dinar are all used around the
world, with constant speculation on their exchange rates. A many-
leveled structure of local and small-scale financial markets is
densely coupled to a new global currency market called the
“WorldEx,” managed by a group called the International Financial
Regulation Commission. It traced its history back eight years, to the
1997 crash—the third major stock market crisis of the decade, in
which the New York Stock Exchange lost more than a thousand
points in a single day. The crash this time had been brought on by
bad Chinese debts to Japanese banks, and a massive corruption
scandal in South America. A group of surviving bankers and
regulators created the IFRC to stabilize the runaway evolution of
international financial markets, using a global electronic market to
link the giant financial trading and investment management houses.
It’s a game for high rollers only—a seat on the World Exchange
costs 100 million dollars. Players trade primary and derivative
instruments based on equities, bonds, currency, and commodities,
plus exotic new securities being invented constantly. Small investors
play in the domestic markets for more modest securities.
By 1999, the WorldEx had developed its own trading counter. In
value terms, the “gandhi” is now (in 2005) worth more than all the
other currencies of the world combined. It is forming the basis for
the first true global currency, with the IFRC beginning to adopt
some of the functions of a global central bank.
Market World is not a utopia. It is a scenario where almost
anything is possible, where innovation and change are king. But as
the new, ever richer world races into the future, there are many
who are left behind. The desperate slums of Rio run directly
alongside villas of the rich. In this scenario the gap between rich
and poor widens, even though more people at the bottom of the
social scale have the possibility of climbing out of poverty. As Peter
Warshall, the biologist, observed at a GBN meeting, this is a world


---PAGE BREAK---

where wilderness may come to be seen as a Japanese bonsai tree—
beautiful and contained in a tiny pot.
Change Without Progress
The Change Without Progress scenario is the dark side of Market
World: a future of chaos and crisis, in which people see themselves
as the Lone Ranger, fighting the system, and the system falls apart.
It’s a future similar to the world of the movie Blade Runner. Here is a
world with fast-paced economic activity, but in which ruthless self-
interest and corruption run rampant. Social conflict, a widening gap
between those who have made it and those who are permanently
locked out, and environmental decay are all commonplace.
Economic volatility and a disdain for the welfare of average people
color public policy and corporate practice. There is little threat of
big wars; imagine global gang wars instead—small short-lived
incoherent fights born more out of pride and bad temper then
conflicts of real interests.
The principle that “the enemy of my enemy is my friend”
dominates international politics. Instead of rigid alliances, there are
quick-paced, uneasy, tense marriages of convenience. Pakistan
might not be a belligerent principal in the Tibetan War, but
anything that hurts India helps Pakistan, so the Pakistanis regularly
supply China with critical war materials. The war had broken out a
year before, after Beijing nearly exterminated the Tibetan
independence movement and imprisoned the Dalai Lama. India had
entered the war as the purported defender of the Buddhist faith and
the human rights of the Tibetan people. On their way into Tibet,
unfortunately, they had to “temporarily” annex Nepal. Their
bombing raids reduced key Buddhist shrines in Nepal to rubble.
Young Indians lustily cheered the war on; once they controlled the
minerals in the Himalayas, they believed, they could face off against
China. The rest of the world also cheered the war, in a more cynical


---PAGE BREAK---

sense; if it could rid the world of some of its surplus of unemployed
young people, so much the better.
No one expects the world to be coherent any more. The economy
is a roller-coaster, cycling rapidly through boom and bust—high
inflation, high unemployment, overvalued currencies, high interest
rates, negative interest rates. Every nation muddles through its
reflections of the economic ups and downs. Very few nations are
much wealthier than the rest; all treasuries have been rifled by their
own “first families.” No nation has the power to stabilize the system.
Any attempt to set up multinational efforts is undermined by
nationalistic rivalry and behind-the-scenes gangsterism. The
“winners” devote their efforts to protecting what they have won.
There is no economic accelerator because a larger share of profit
goes to covering risks than to capital investment. Corporate raiders
are the powerful players of this era. Their competition now takes
place on the uneven electronic grid of the global marketplace, in a
thousand different shifting stock exchanges at once. In this
atmosphere, optimistic small-scale investors who “believe in a
company” are punished. Currency volatility makes managers
uncertain about future market conditions. Cautious investment
means slower growth. The world economy sporadically responds to
forward steps in technology, but many of the potentially interesting
technologies wither for lack of an infrastructure to support them. It,
too, is hampered by unpredictable investment. Innovation is a
gambler’s game. The only sure bet is weaponry. Many people make
their living doing electronic spy work. They call themselves “cases,”
after the hero of William Gibson’s Neuromancer, now considered the
most prescient book of its time. The global network is a cyberpunk
world, hacker heaven, driven by hidden forces in a vast electronic
underworld.
Policies in the world of “change without progress” are usually
inadvertent. Quell a riot, build a thousand prisons, cut a tax. Good
intentions occasionally propel a new political party to office in some
Central American or East Asian country. Their efforts somehow lead
to perverse, self-destructive effects. Vicious circles dominate
economic interactions. Every attempt at a solution makes the


---PAGE BREAK---

problem worse. The resulting incoherence creates a scramble for
change. Speed of adaptability is at a premium and loyalty is a
detriment. The rate of change is itself a driver in runaway markets,
as the world feels more and more frenzied. The framework of
international competition is unconstrained, the rules of the game
shifting constantly and unpredictably. Corporate and national
strategies pay a high price for the flexibility that they need just to
survive. The world wastes its people, its resources, its money, its
time, and worse, its soul.
The EC never did cohere. Did they really think back then that the
Italians would work with the Spanish, or the Germans with the
Dutch, or the British and French with anyone? By now, it’s
considered a lost cause. The governors of the world’s central banks
cannot agree among themselves on the appropriate balance of
monetary policies—tightening or loosening. Japan, meanwhile, has
retreated into near isolation, making products which appeal to the
small, but growing, wealthy class. The United States, like the Great
Britain of a half-century before, lives in a perpetual “nostalgia”
phase. Films of the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, when the United States
controlled the world, are continually rereleased.
There are more wealthy people than there were twenty years ago
—and far, far more of the impoverished. The favelas and barrios are
spreading. We now realize that the city of the future in the 1980s
was Manila. Tondo, the vast trash heap that was home to thousands
of Manila’s most unhappy denizens, was the de facto prototype for
similar shanty towns in every metropolis, housing billions of people.
A few miles up the road from Tondo was Forbes Park, where all one
saw were white walls and armed guards, home of Manila’s rich,
powerful, and privileged. That, too, is a common image of the new
century. There are still a few remnants of the middle class, including
one or two sociologists who give both their profession and their
economic class another generation or two at the most.
Despite the sudden rejection of communism by Eastern Europe,
there was no “socialist surprise” after all in the major Marxist
empires. Reformists were defeated in China and the Soviet Union,
but whirlwinds were let loose in both countries. Frequent ethnic


---PAGE BREAK---

revolutions are containable only by force. Central power is
maintained, at the price of nearly starving the citizenry, with no end
in sight.
Decadence and the escape from it shape the social mood. The
extremes dominate; the conflicts between the social fundamentalists
and the libertines create the character of the times. A sense of
movement without progress defines the social undercurrent—
cynicism about institutions and pessimism about the future. The
times are ripe for demagoguery and cults. About one third of the
world has hookups for portable, radio-connected telephones which
travel with people and receive calls wherever they go. The phones
were popular until several apocalyptic sects discovered that they
could rig up computers to repeatedly call a number from an offshore
boat and deliver the same message again and again.
Technological accidents are common as now-ancient, poorly
maintained systems fail. Among the worst are the bio-accidents. All
of the Baltic States were evacuated in 2002 to save them from a
sudden man-made plague. Some of the refugees are still living in
quarantine on old Soviet warships. In the meantime, with no
coherent policy to reduce air pollution or save forests, weather
catastrophes are increasingly common. Most of the beaches in
Florida, Georgia, and Louisiana are now fully under water. Other
countries are considering invasions to find arable room for their
expanding populations.
No nation can afford big wars, so (except for occasional acts of
saber-brandishing by Middle Eastern countries) nuclear weapons are
carefully kept under wraps. But there are many small wars, often
started to divert a starving population. They are a popular item on
international news stations. Commentators offer play-by-play
analyses of mountain skirmishes and bombing raids. The Falklands
War and the Iran-Iraq War, it now appears, were the first wars of
the modern era. Dozens of others have followed—along the borders
of the Soviet Union and China, Pakistan and India, Vietnam and
China, and Tibet and China. A corrupt right-wing regime rules
Mexico and is fighting a prolonged dirty war with leftist guerrillas.
The U.S. southern border is a war zone. As millions of Mexican


---PAGE BREAK---

refugees sought asylum, the United States couldn’t help being
dragged in. Constantly vacillating policy has kept the United States
from improving the situation or getting out of it.
Some people still remember the time, at the beginning of the
1990s, when there was widespread optimism about the world’s
future. Paradoxically, that optimism was one of the reasons for the
current decline. It looked like easy street was on the way; so people
around the world spent instead of investing for the future.
There is one good effect: it’s a great time to be a stand-up
comedian. Anyone who can be sardonic, cynical, and funny finds a
willing audience everywhere in the world.
Why I Am Optimistic About the Future
Each of these scenarios could happen. None of these worlds
represents the sort of utopia which many people had hoped for after
World War II: a utopia in which people’s needs are met, and in
which the largest institutions act appropriately. I simply don’t see
any driving forces in the world which would produce such a future.
However, I also find myself ever more optimistic these days for the
world and for the United States. This is in contrast to my mood
during the 1970s, which was a very pessimistic time. None of these
scenarios is the end of the world. A good life can be found in each of
them.
My vision of the future no longer relies on a world without
troubles and cares. Rather it is a world where the challenges are
realizable. Such a vision is based on a scenario in which the human
imagination, drive, and competence combine to meet the enormous
hurdles of, for example, environmental restoration. In my dealings
with business people I see plenty of imagination, drive, and
competence—and the will to use it.
A great dark shadow has been lifted from all our dreams. With the
new U.S.-U.S.S.R. relationship and the changed situation in the


---PAGE BREAK---

Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, the likelihood of major nuclear
war is now enormously diminished. We can imagine a world with
many fewer nuclear weapons, none of which would be on the
fragile, hair-trigger alert of the last forty years, where local conflicts
will not threaten to become ultimate catastrophes. Suddenly it
becomes possible to imagine a future where people feel more
inclined to build and plan—for themselves, and for their children. I
believe that this is the hidden driving force of our time—a capacity
to dream of a better tomorrow, confident that tomorrow will arrive.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

REHEARSING THE FUTURE
            Imagine that you are a well-practiced actor in a repertory
theater. One week you come into work and your director hands you
a copy of The Tempest. You learn your part and practice it
thoroughly, preparing for the performance the following month. The
next week, you walk in and the director hands you Rhinoceros, by
Ionesco. A very different play from Shakespeare, but no matter: You
learn those lines and practice that part. The following week, the
director gives you a copy of Eugene O’Neill’s Long Day’s Journey into
Night.
When the night of the performance finally comes, you walk up on
the stage. The stage lights come on, and you are given your first
line. But you don’t know which play you are performing. To find
out, you have to look at the scenery around you. Hopefully, you had
enough sense ahead of time to talk to the stage manager and find
out what each set looks like in detail—so that, by fixing on only one
or two details, you will be able to tell. If there’s a palm tree, it’s the
shipwreck/island setting of The Tempest. A bottle of beer on a café
table suggests Rhinoceros. And a lamp, the kind you might see in a
1920s New England living room, lets you know that you’re in the
O’Neill play.
That’s what using scenarios is like. In the real world, you don’t
know ahead of time which scenario will take place. But you prepare
for all three, and then train yourself to look for one or two small
details so that you can recognize the full play before you’re called
upon to act.
This type of theater is common with many complex technologies.
They call it “simulation.” I witnessed one such specialized flight
simulator in the late 1960s, as a student of aeronautical engineering.
Astronauts were strapped into a flight seat for their space capsule


---PAGE BREAK---

that could spin in three axes of rotation to simulate chaotic and
possibly fatal wobble. The astronaut had to learn to gain control
over the spin by manually firing guidance thrusters. The astronauts
were experienced test pilots and some felt that such an accident was
too unlikely to waste scarce training time and energy.
But during one of the early Gemini flights, Neil Armstrong found
himself in exactly that unlikely situation. Because he had spent time
practicing that unlikely maneuver, he brought the wild oscillations
under control. The lesson, as I watched that Gemini flight on
television, was not lost on me: even the most unlikely events should
be prepared for if the consequences are great enough.
Using scenarios is rehearsing the future. You run through the
simulated events as if you were already living them. You train
yourself to recognize which drama is unfolding. That helps you
avoid unpleasant surprises, and know how to act.
Thus, the “performance” of a scenario will take you once again to
your original question. But now you approach that question
differently. “All right, now that I’ve considered the future of the real
estate market and interest rates,” you might ask yourself, “should I
buy a house now or continue renting? Should I move to Houston or
stay in New York?”
My wife and I bought our house when interest rates were at their
ten-year low. We had to decide: should we get a fixed- or variable-
rate mortgage? The decision depended entirely on the future of
interest rates. I asked myself, “Is there any scenario in which
interest rates will go much lower during the next five to ten years?”
The answer was no; indeed, there were forces already ready to pull
interest rates back up. Hence a variable-interest rate would be a
disadvantage. Many people bought variable-interest rate mortgages
at that time and regretted it. The value of a scenario for them would
have been twofold: to encourage them to think about the future, and
to encourage them to learn enough about the forces behind interest
rates so they could make a reasonable decision.
The more complex and large a business, the more complex and
large the scope of the scenarios. Thus, scenarios have to be simple,
dramatic, and bold—to cut through the complexity and aim directly


---PAGE BREAK---

at the heart of an individual decision. Often, the core of the decision
is not that different from buying a house: Should we invest in that
refinery or not? Should we start that enterprise or not? The answer
may not depend on interest rates; it will depend on other factors.
But you consider them in exactly the same way. The role of
scenarios is to arrange the factors so they illuminate the decision,
instead of obscuring it.
To do this, you start by questioning your belief in the inevitability
of more of the same.
The Suspension of Disbelief
At Royal Dutch/Shell, only half of our work was actually building
scenarios. The other half was traveling the globe, presenting the
scenarios to people in chemicals, refining, marketing, exploration,
and production, or in other parts of the business. The heart of the
task had to do with engaging people’s willingness to suspend
disbelief in the futures we offered.
We knew that at least one, and probably more of the scenarios we
had developed would challenge their beliefs. That was the reason
for creating scenarios in the first place. But how could we convince
them to consider the alternative to what they felt in their heart?
One of my first Shell scenarios, for instance, concerned the future of
the Oil Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the cartel which had
dominated oil prices since 1973. Now it was 1982. OPEC’s power
was embedded in the hearts of the directors of the company; they
had been preoccupied with it for nine years.
In 1982, I was working with Ted Newland, one of the first and
most prescient scenario-planners at Shell, and a close colleague of
Pierre Wack’s. We had asked ourselves, “Is there a plausible scenario
under which OPEC’s control over oil prices collapses?” and
discovered that there was such a scenario. With improved energy-
efficiency in many countries and surprisingly large new supplies


---PAGE BREAK---

from non-OPEC countries, petroleum was no longer so scarce. Ted
made the presentation. He used many slides, mostly graphs and
charts, to show the rise and fall of trends in the industry. Looking
around the room, I could see the managing directors listening
carefully. Emotionally, they had invested a great deal in battling
OPEC, negotiating with OPEC, understanding OPEC, and explaining
OPEC to other Western companies and governments. They were
skeptical of Ted’s entire talk.
Until his last slide—a page taken from a child’s nursery rhyme
book. It showed a giant egg, with human features, cracked on the
ground. Ted read the text aloud to us in his most imposing,
thoughtful, British voice. “Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,” he said.
“Humpty Dumpty had a great fall. All the King’s horses and all the
King’s men couldn’t put Humpty Dumpty back together again.” In
other words, he continued, if their price mechanism shattered, the
OPEC ministers would have no way to regain their former strength.
I can assure you that every manager who heard that presentation
walked out with the image of that silly egg in his mind. It was a
powerful bit of theater. It touched them deeply. Thereafter, in
meetings, they would always talk about the possibility of the fall of
“Humpty Dumpty.”
There is an almost irresistible temptation to choose one scenario
over the other: to say, in effect, “This is the future which we believe
will take place. The other futures are interesting. But they’re
irrelevant. We’re going to follow this scenario.” That’s what Time-
Warner did in announcing that the future lies with integration of
media, with selling books, music, and films together in packages.
Unfortunately, reality does not follow even the best-thought-out
scenario. The point of scenario-planning is to help us suspend our
disbelief in all the futures: to allow us to think that any one of them
might take place. Then we can prepare for what we don’t think is
going to happen.
That’s why scenario-planners avoid single predictions. If we
present several possible futures, our audience would consider plots
which they would not otherwise accept. The “Humpty Dumpty”
Shell scenario included an unthinkable price drop to sixteen dollars


---PAGE BREAK---

per barrel of oil. The managing directors could consider this because
we also had scenarios for prices of thirty and fifty dollars per barrel.
The executives could say, “Well, it may not be so terrible, because
look at these other possibilities.” If we had told them that there
would only be one outcome and it was bad they would have denied
it. Few people have the perversity to study a future that they
perceive as completely gloomy.
Similarly, many people don’t want to see only the up side. That,
too, is difficult to anticipate. I was surprised at first to find out how
difficult it is to convince people of optimistic scenarios. But up sides
also pose enormous challenges: growth, innovation, and change. In
addition, most people are afraid to feel secure: “Oh, it could never
really turn out that well,” they say, “so why should I even consider
the possibility? It will just make it harder for me to do the dirty,
slogging work I have to do.” People call optimistic scenarios
“unrealistic,” and since it’s a crime in business to be unrealistic, the
scenario is often discarded.
Consider Hollywood’s attitude toward the videocassette recorder.
They saw it as a threat throughout the 1970s and 1980s. They didn’t
see that suddenly there would be enormous new revenues. They
didn’t ask, “What if it doesn’t kill the theater business?” They
considered only the scenario in which the VCR destroyed them.
They could not imagine other scenarios. They fought the VCR hard,
and delayed it successfully, and lost millions of dollars in the
process.
If they had considered other scenarios they might have discovered
that technology follows an “evolution” plot; that it isn’t a “winners
and losers” game. If the VCR won, they might win too.
To help Shell managers overcome their disbelief, we would
literally use simple computer simulations embodying the scenarios
as a means for rehearsal. We would sit in a group, with the personal
computer and a large screen, and role-play the future of oil prices.
One executive would play the Iranians, another the Kuwaitis. Others
would play the oil companies, or oil ministers of industrial
countries. “Now then,” I would say, “what would you do in this
situation? It is the summer of 1990 and the Iraqis invade Kuwait.”


---PAGE BREAK---

The “Saudi minister” might say, “I will increase production by 25
percent.” An oil company representative might reply, “I’ll buy that
oil, but not at the price you offer today.” By the end of a session,
managers understood the implications of each possible future,
because they had literally rehearsed them.
It’s too bad that such role-playing isn’t done in, say, city
governments or among policymakers. Because they, too, have
unthinkable issues that won’t go away. In the United States, one
such issue is race relations. The success of Asian immigrants is
straining the relationship between blacks and whites in the United
States; so is the perception that the drug war is actually a race war.
An explosion of ethnic and racial war in the United States is an
entirely plausible scenario which no one will talk about, even as
tabloid newspaper headlines scream about Tawana Brawley,
Bensonhurst, Marion Barry, or the Central Park jogger. One
alternative scenario is also taking place: economic success
stimulated by the remarkable diversity of Caribbean, African,
southeast black, Creole, Korean, Vietnamese, South American,
Central American, Mexican, Japanese, Philippine, and Chinese
cultures. That scenario is also ignored because it’s unthinkable. Only
the “Official Future”—a melting-pot society in which everyone
adapts to the upper-middle-class norm—is assumed. Role-playing
each scenario would show exactly why the “Official Future” is
unlikely.
Looking for Warning Signals
At Shell in the early 1980s, when we saw the looming economic
problems in the Soviet Union, the first thing we did was look for
small specific signals that might indicate the change was coming.
For example, any loosening of political control would give the
Communist party a tough public relations problem. How could the
Communists justify their ideological shift from a centrally controlled


---PAGE BREAK---

economy? We remembered that the Soviet Union had relaxed its
central control once before. In 1920, Lenin’s strict Marxist policies
had provoked massive unrest over food rationing, strikes in major
cities, and at least one mutiny. He announced the New Economic
Policy, a relaxing of restrictions: it allowed small businesses (called
“Nepmen”) to exist, and returned to the old Czarist monetary
system. The NEP lasted seven years, until Joseph Stalin put an end
to it.
We asked ourselves: “Suppose the new leadership now went for
something called ‘the neo-NEP’?” It would be a return to Lenin’s
more mature vision, which had been aborted by that arch-villain
Stalin. We singled out potential leaders of such a new movement,
including Mikhail Gorbachev. We also looked for Russian
economists who might be prime movers in a neo-NEP reform
movement. We found several; one was named Abel Agenbegyan, a
writer for an obscure journal of economics. If Gorbachev came to
power, it would be a signal of change; if Agenbegyan joined the new
government, it would be a sign that the change was serious.
A few years later, Mikhail Gorbachev came to power. In one of his
first speeches, he declared that his new ideas were really in the
spirit of Lenin’s New Economic Policy—not such a radical change
but a “return to Leninism.” In 1985, Gorbachev brought
Agenbegyan to Moscow as his chief economic adviser. Together,
these signs suggested that we could trust the Soviet loosening up.
They meant something because we had taken the trouble to identify
them in advance. We had identified other signs which did not take
place, but we did not need all of them to come true. Three or four
such events were enough, together, to comprise solid evidence.
Any business can use such specific events as warning signs to help
decide which scenario is coming to pass. A book publisher, for
instance, might keep three scenarios in mind for the next fifteen
years. Thereafter, the publisher would be on guard for particular
warning signals:
•    If childhood literacy rates and educational reading scores
suddenly go up, that would suggest the first scenario—a general rise
of interest in reading—might come true. The number of new


---PAGE BREAK---

bookstores that open and survive for three years would be another
indicator. A third would be the appearance of high-level, serious
books on the shelves of, say, airport bookstores.
•  On the other hand, if the publisher sees a fall in literacy rates and
a rise in picture books or books about television, the second
scenario—a declining public of readers—seems more likely. A
decline in independent bookstores, especially in suburban areas,
would also suggest this scenario was coming to pass.
•  For the third scenario—a fragmented market—literacy rates and
school scores would be irrelevant. The publisher would look instead
at different sectors of bookstore activity: more specialty bookstores
emerging, for example. The publisher would notice the prices of
books: when a market fragments, the prices go up because they lose
economy of scale. Simultaneously, the intensity of service increases
because they have to make more money from a smaller volume.
Thus, an increasing number of books would be an indicator. Finally,
if mass market paperbacks slip a notch in reading levels, that would
be another warning signal.
Warning signals may not have anything directly to do with your
business. In our Smith & Hawken scenarios, one indicator of a
market for garden tools was the market for condominiums. At that
time in the late 1970s, the conventional wisdom predicted a rise in
multiple family dwellings, where people would not garden for
themselves. Perhaps, we thought, Smith & Hawken should plan for a
much smaller audience. But when we saw single-family home
construction take off in the early 1980s, we knew we could ignore
that conventional wisdom.
You always work out the warning signals in advance because
they’re less open to misinterpretation that way. You can’t use your
fears or confidence to influence your judgment about which future
is unfolding. Thus, at Shell, for instance, we looked for the most
specific warning signals possible. In our 1982 study of the stability
of oil prices, we suspected they might go into a spree of seesawing


---PAGE BREAK---

ups and downs. A period of volatile swings would be hard for an oil
company to deal with. How could we foresee it in advance? We
uncovered one specific technical indicator. In commodity trading,
futures are a way of hedging against price swings. They’re like rain
checks—a guarantee to buy grain, aluminum, copper, or any other
commodity at a particular price later on—even though the price
may have risen or fallen by then. No petroleum futures exchange
existed in 1982. The market organizers would create one only if
they sensed enough brokers who wanted to bet on oil’s volatility. If
we saw a successful attempt to organize a futures market, that
would indicate a future of volatile oil prices. Toward the end of
1983, we saw the first attempts. By 1984–85, a robust futures
market in petroleum was in full swing. Oil prices were headed to
new volatility.
You ignore warning signs at your peril. As the “Global Teenager”
chapter pointed out, American demographers failed to predict the
“echo baby boom”—the massive increase of births in the last ten
years 
among 
women 
aged 
thirty-five 
to 
forty-five. 
The
demographers could have easily avoided the embarrassment (for
them) and expense (for local governments) by asking themselves,
“What factors might indicate a change in the large trend?” They
might have noticed a small emerging industry for in vitro
fertilization in the early 1980s. Its mere existence would suggest
that older women could have babies in greater numbers. If its
popularity soared as those women began to run up against their
biological clocks, that would suggest that more older women would
want to have babies.
Warning signs are also educationally helpful, in the deepest sense.
One uses them to learn sensitivity to change. A good warning signal
in race relations in 1990 was the appointment of a Chinese-
American chancellor of the University of California, along with a
Japanese-American vice chancellor. That means that non-Caucasian
races are being accepted in the establishment.
We are all living with another ominous warning sign right now. In
the mid-1970s, SRI did a study of the greenhouse effect for the
Department of Energy. We couldn’t be certain then whether or not


---PAGE BREAK---

the buildup in carbon dioxide and other gases would lead to global
warming. One could make a strong case that these pollutants would
produce global cooling instead. But we thought we might be in for a
period of climate change, of such magnitude that it could dwarf
other global problems. After carefully interviewing atmospheric
scientists, we said that one early indicator would be extremes in
local weather conditions around the world: record-breaking high
and low temperatures, droughts, storms, unusually mild or harsh
winters. Ominously, such extremes appeared more and more often
in the late 1980s. We still cannot be certain whether the overall
global climate will become warmer or cooler—but the signs are
clear that a period of drastic climate changes lies ahead.
Creating a Shared Language
Pierre Wack understands how a scenario presentation is a type of
theater. In the early 1980s, after retiring from Shell, he was part of
a team developing a set of scenarios about the future of apartheid
and South Africa for AngloAmerican, the largest South African
company. Clem Sunter, one of Anglo American’s executives, gave a
series of public speeches based on these scenarios, called “high
road” and “low road.” A book of that presentation became a best
seller in South Africa. The book allowed South Africans to see what
would happen if they continued down the path of apartheid. It also
included an alternative scenario that many South Africans had not
considered before—a path in which apartheid could end without the
blacks taking over and driving out the whites.
It is said that De Klerk, the South African president, took these
scenarios very seriously, and that they influenced the release of
Nelson Mandela. Eventually, when people look back on these times
of change, they may consider the names to be the most important
parts of the scenario. The names gave the polarized people of South
Africa a common language for talking about their common future.


---PAGE BREAK---

The name of any scenario carries a lot of freight: a reference to
“the little boy who cried wolf” or to “Johnny Appleseed”
immediately conveys a complex idea. Try phrasing either of those
concepts in a few words without the name; it’s not easy. Similarly, I
always try to choose the name for each scenario so it condenses a
fully delineated story’s essence into a few words. It gives people a
rich reference point, and that in turn helps them think about a wide
range of meanings. This type of scenario name becomes a critically
important form of shorthand when planners and managers meet in
groups. “This project makes sense in the ‘Next Wave’ scenario,”
someone might say, “but we can’t pursue it under ‘Harder Times.’ ”
One of Shell’s current scenarios is called “the Sustainable
World”—a powerful reference to an increasingly popular set of ideas
about environmentally sustainable growth. As soon as people start
using that name in discussions at Shell, the image comes to life with
all its associations. An image of the world in their grandchildren’s
time pops into their minds. They can’t help but ask themselves what
it really means to be sustainable. The questions that they naturally
ask will lead them to the right issues. A good scenario does exactly
that—it can lead you to ask better questions.
One powerful name for a scenario is “the Official Future.” It
stands for the set of implicit assumptions behind most institutional
policies: that things will work out okay tomorrow once the proper
people get into power and can put their policies into effect. The
“trickle-down theory” was exactly such an Official Future: “By
cutting taxes for high-income groups, the wealth will trickle down
in employment to the poor.” Most Official Futures often turn out to
be mere propaganda; but everybody in an organization subscribes to
them almost unconsciously. “We always try harder at our company,
and thus we’ll eventually beat the opposition.” One of our first tasks
as consultants is to flush out the organization’s version of the
Official Future. Then we often present it as one of a group of
scenarios, so that people can see it for exactly how likely or unlikely
it is. They usually discover that, in laboring under the Official
Future, they have been working toward an impossible or
undesirable goal.


---PAGE BREAK---

Another exercise in building a scenario from a title is applicable
both to small business owners and managers in large corporations:
“My Worst Nightmare.” Some friends of mine used to own an
excellent bookstore in Palo Alto, California. But they failed to think
about their Worst Nightmare, and when a chain store and a
technical store moved into their vicinity, they didn’t know how to
cope with the changed competition. Nor did they have the time to
find a viable niche or improve their service, time which they would
have had if they had thought about their nightmare in advance.
What will you do if your Worst Nightmare comes true? Often there
are options you don’t consider because your fear paralyzes you. A
scenario forces you to consider it anyway.
There is a difference between a Smith & Hawken situation—a
group of people creating a set of scenarios for themselves and their
own business—versus my role at Royal Dutch/Shell as a member of
a team of planners whose job included bringing many other people
on board our view of the world. In the early days of Smith &
Hawken we had no customers, board of directors, shareholders, or
employees to convince. We were all of those at that stage. But even
the smallest business can change. Paul Hawken’s job as CEO
included literally laying out scenarios of his business’s future and
communicating them to his employees, shareholders, and even
customers. The Smith & Hawken catalogue featured short
comments, written by Paul, about the evolution of the clothing
business and the future of clothing. The goal in all cases is the same:
you and your co-workers, or you and your customers, can make
better decisions by learning about each other’s understanding of the
world.
Arie de Geus, the coordinator of Group Planning at Shell during
most of the 1980s, perhaps best expressed this use of scenarios in
his Harvard Business Review article on “Planning as Learning”:
When people play with [mental models of the world], they are
actually creating a new language among themselves that expresses
the knowledge they have acquired. And here we come to the most
important aspect of institutional learning, whether it be achieved


---PAGE BREAK---

through teaching or through play as we have defined it: the
institutional learning process is a process of language development.
As the implicit knowledge of each learner becomes explicit, his or
her mental model becomes a building block of the institutional
model. How much and how fast this model changes will depend on
the culture and structure of the organization. Teams that have to
cope with rigid procedures and information systems will learn more
slowly than those with flexible, open communication channels.
Autocratic institutions will learn faster or not at all—the ability of
one or a few leaders being a risky institutional bet.
Did You Do the Right Thing?
When John Gardner describes the art of writing a novel, he is
really describing how to practice—how to develop the talent to write
a novel. Scenario writing works the same way. It takes years of
practice, creating and understanding scenarios repeatedly. Thus, the
most helpful exercise is to go back to old scenarios a year later.
“Well, I missed the thing that was actually going to happen,” you
might say. “What did I not see?” Or, conversely, “What is it that led
me to really see that surprise that nobody else thought about?”
How do you judge whether a scenario was effective? The test is
not whether you got the future right. That is fairly easy if you
consider multiple scenarios. The real test is whether anyone
changed his behavior because he saw the future differently. And,
did he change his behavior in the right direction? Did he do the
right thing?
For example, when we judged our scenario work at Shell, we
were certainly pleased with our anticipation of perestroika. But the
test of our scenarios, the justification for their practice, was the fact
that Shell prospered because of them. They cut costs on the Troll gas
fields. They did not buy oil fields when oil was thirty dollars, when
everyone else did; they bought them after the price fell to fifteen.


---PAGE BREAK---

Scenarios gave them a huge long-term advantage and allowed them
to think in long-term strategies. They could act with the confidence
that comes from saying, “I have an understanding of how the world
might change, I know how to recognize it when it is changing, and
if it changes, I know what to do.”
An effective scenario almost always changes behavior. For
example, the scenario about race relations in America is of direct
concern to me. I’ve just become a parent. If the scenario of racial
conflict comes to pass in my highly diverse community of Berkeley,
California, it could make public schools into combat zones. On the
other hand, if racial diversity leads to cooperation and awareness,
then I want my kid in the public schools, growing up comfortable
with that diversity. (I want that in any case, but not at the price of
exposing my child to violence.) One warning sign, for me, is crack
babies. I know that my school district will soon face crack babies in
its elementary classrooms. If the school can effectively deal with the
children of addicts, then I feel more confident about its ability to
deal with races. If the system sets up crack kids in conflict with
other children—for the school’s resources, and for the teachers’
attention—then I feel less optimistic about having my kid attend
there.
Many people in the United States are concerned about education
and so we are now focusing our time and attention on schools:
Should we pay teachers more? Should we reform the curriculum
again? Should we add computers? But the problems of education lie
less with schools and more with communities, families, and our way
of life. So we will put almost all of the resulting effort in the wrong
arena. A scenario process would look at the student in the context of
the significant questions. Why are today’s students performing
worse than the previous students? What must we change to have
today’s students improve more? One would research the differences
in performance, and no doubt find social factors as part of the
reason: neighborhoods, families, and other factors that motivate
people. This is an old realization, but politics in America is not
supposed to invade the arena of the family—fortunately. So a
scenario might look at what would happen if those policies that


---PAGE BREAK---

could be changed were changed: welfare policies, tax policies, and
housing policies could all be rewritten with a focus on making
communities more cohesive and supportive.
The leverage available in those policies is much lower, however.
It takes time to reshape a community. Thus, a policymaker might
emerge from the scenario process with a more realistic time frame.
Education in America is not a five-year problem. It took us twenty-
five years to destroy education, and it will take twenty-five years to
rebuild it. I have discussed this with policymakers in Washington
and it is not something they want to look at. They have a
Department of Education whose function is to look at schools—not
at the community. Moreover, announcing a twenty-five-year
solution is not politically realistic. But it may be the only solution
available.
Scenarios can open up your mind to policies you might not
otherwise consider. One reason that the “drug war” is so persuasive
in America is that most people see only two possible courses: Either
a crackdown on supply, which is expensive, often tragic for
individuals, and actually increases the drug supply (as noted
earlier). Or legalization, which sends a message of social hypocrisy
and impotence: “We don’t believe in a society with drugs, but we
can’t do anything about it, so we’ll change our values: they’ll be
acceptable from now on.” But there is a third scenario, suggested in
1989 in the Economist magazine. What if the United States passed a
law creating a new legal category called “unacceptable practices”?
Unacceptable practices would be those things which the majority
of people in a community or nation would like to ban, stop, and
prevent—but cannot do by legal means, at least not with any
effective enforcement. Right now in America, this might include
such 
things 
as 
alcohol, 
tobacco, 
marijuana, 
cocaine, 
and
pornography. These would be treated differently from murder and
robbery; the practitioner would be regarded as someone who was
doing something to him or herself. Society’s problems would be the
social effects: the crime after a drink, the poor performance on the
job, the added danger to others. Society would neither officially
condone these things nor officially say that practitioners were


---PAGE BREAK---

criminal. Instead, the government would define strategies for
minimizing use. One strategy might be making criminal penalties far
more severe if an unacceptable practice were involved: a train
engineer who took cocaine and then plowed his locomotive into a
car, for instance, would be severely punished.
The United States has such a strategy for alcohol already. It
includes severe drunk driving penalties, restrictions for minors,
limits to the availability of alcohol (it is sold only during certain
hours, or in certain stores), and general availability of Alcoholics
Anonymous. People accept those limits. The most we could imagine
adding is a substantial increase in taxes on alcohol to diminish its
use. We have an increasingly effective strategy on tobacco, making
it increasingly awkward and socially unpleasant for people to
smoke. (The change about alcohol is slower, probably because
there’s more social hypocrisy involved.)
What is the right decision? It varies from case to case, but after
doing scenarios for twenty years, I believe there is one common
element to all correct decisions. They include a consideration of the
bigger picture. Each of us should have a personal stake in the
quality of the global environment, in the growth of the global
economy, and in the increasing quality of education everywhere.
Our fates are interconnected. People have had a very hard time
grasping these connections because for most of human civilization,
the connection was not as important. A community might
occasionally be affected by war or invasion, but most of the time its
life was isolated and complete in itself. Today the international
economic relationships, our impact on the natural environment and
the globe-spanning technologies, have made a tangible difference in
that old attitude. On the most mundane level, a tiny business such
as Smith & Hawken has its fate coupled to the values of the Thai
currency, the yen, the pound sterling. On the loftiest level, our
fulfillment on earth depends literally, as never before, on allowing
the possibility of fulfillment for individuals everywhere. Scenarios
help us perceive the nature of these interconnections.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

EPILOGUE:
TO MY NEWBORN SON
October 1990
Dear Benjamin,
Your birth comes at a time of perpetual novelty. Your future will
be filled with ample challenges and inspiring goals; it will be a good
future, a future of good people. I am confident of this, deeply
confident, despite the fact that we do not live in a time of vision—
no dream of a better world to come, and no image in my mind of
dynamic new world orders or transcendent technologies. The future
will not be filled with the fulfillment of promises and dreams, but
with something better: surprises.
When I began my career as a futurist I believed a free society
required promises and dreams—not just by experts, but by
everyone. How could we, the people of a society, choose wisely if
we did not know where we were headed? But now I see uncertainty
as the necessary handmaiden of freedom. For freedom to have
meaning, our choices must have consequences. If we could always
be sure that everything would turn out well, then what we think
and do would not matter much. We must be able to get it wrong.
Instead of being confident in our plans, we can be confident in
ourselves. What does it mean to be confident in yourself? In part it
means believing in your own ability to take a long view and act
accordingly. It means knowing that you are prepared for anything—
that you have maneuvering room no matter what happens, that you
can make meaningful choices and will not have to be a complete
prisoner of circumstances.
In the increasingly crowded world you’ll live in, having the scope
to make meaningful choices will depend on other people. You won’t
be able to escape to a frontier; there aren’t any left. Besides yourself,


---PAGE BREAK---

you will need to have confidence in others—in your mother and me,
and others you care about personally in your life—but also in the
general population. I hope you will learn to see people for what they
are, without illusion; but that will not mean giving up on them.
You can confidently presume that more and more people in the
world will act with the long view; not everyone, but enough to
preserve and enhance life. I think the world has changed to make
this so. More and more people, whether or not they think they are
in control of their lives, feel as if their actions have more
consequences. They feel more entwined with the global community.
They thus are learning to look at the future of the world, and at
each other. People who engage in this process become less
dangerous; they begin to take everyone’s interest to heart.
Twenty years ago I would not have written these hopeful
sentiments to you. Indeed, I was so pessimistic about the future that
I did not want to be a father at all. I could not imagine bringing a
child into a world like this. I was worried about nuclear death,
about environmental devastation, about dozens of other threats, and
about the self-centered ignorance that (I thought) kept people from
solving these problems.
Now I admit that there are crack addicts on the streets, crumbling
schools, and other problems so grave that they would have once
made me give up hope. Some of these problems will be worse by the
time you come of age. But I have confidence in democracy; I believe
individuals make good choices in the end.
I was convinced, in part, by the “macro” events of the last few
years before your birth—the end of the Cold War, for instance. I saw
powerful people admit that they had been wrong, and overcome the
boundaries of their own egotism and eminence. When I was in
England in the mid-1980s, I heard people tell Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher about environmental protection and global
warming. Instead of pooh-poohing or stonewalling them she said, in
effect, “My God, you’re right; we really ought to do something.” It
surprised me, at first, that governments and companies were capable
of learning to look ahead. But after a while I came to see it as


---PAGE BREAK---

natural; their leaders knew that paying attention to the long run,
instead of narrow self-interest, had to serve them best.
People in private life know that too. I can think of many examples
to tell you about, but I’ll only choose one for now. Several years ago
I visited my uncle in Hungary, where I was born and where my
family came from. My visit took place during the first signals of the
bloodless upheaval that would bring democracy to the Iron Curtain
countries. In fact, I was there officially for Royal Dutch/Shell, to
find out what was going on. My uncle was the business manager of
the biggest newspaper in Hungary, very much the puppet newspaper
of the State. And yet he also had a foot in the new world. Hungary
was the first socialist country to try to transform itself into
capitalism; the Hungarians’ efforts went back almost twenty years.
Their example was therefore studied very closely by other
Communist countries which wanted to change their economies,
including Gorbachev’s Soviet Union. During this transitional time in
the mid-1980s, my uncle was one of many Hungarians who knew
what they were doing was very important. He was not a pioneer, a
leader, or a public figure himself; but he did his part in helping the
shift take place smoothly and compassionately. For instance, he
published a weekly magazine called World Economy—a Hungarian
version of The Economist—to help inform his isolated countrymen
about how the rest of the world worked. He wanted to spread
information because he knew it would be important. He was
thinking ahead.
As you grow up, you will use many tools for thinking ahead. They
will include scenario planning, and probably computer simulations
of possible futures, that you will “visit” through virtual reality-style
installations. But the most important tool for taking the long view is
a quality of mind. Among my friends in Shell, it is expected that the
people who get to the top—besides being realistic, analytic, and
imaginative—will have a “good helicopter” in their heads. This
means the ability to see the big picture and zoom down to focus on
the key details simultaneously.
I can readily believe that you and your peers—people born, as
you were, in the last two decades of the twentieth century—will be


---PAGE BREAK---

better equipped to have such helicopters. With its speed of change
and uncertainty, the world will train you to have them. I see the
difference in kids now; they’re more sophisticated about the world,
steeped in its complexities, with more sense of their own potencies.
The games I played as a youngster were like “Monopoly”—we
followed a never-ending path around the board until somebody
won. In the games you’ll play, like (for instance) the “Carmen
Sandiego” games, the board itself changes depending on what the
players do. Regular exposure to such games, to cable news
networks, to travel, and to new types of contact with other people
will give you the intimate closeness to change that you need to
understand it, and the words to describe what you see.
Where will the challenges you face and the opportunities you
have come from? Three major forces will form the context of your
life. How you and your generation respond to these challenges and
opportunities will determine what kind of future your children will
have.
The economic and political systems of the world are ever more
intertwined at a global level. There is the possibility of a planetary
society of enormous abundance—a truly productive, open, and free
world. But the process of creating that global economy poses many
challenges. The world needs a framework of new international
institutions—a 
new 
global 
commons—to 
coordinate 
people
worldwide and help resolve conflicts over resources like oil and
territory, or the impact of pollution on a country’s neighbors. The
rich and the free need to assure the poor and repressed that they,
too, can have a realistic sense of hope for the future—that the gulf
between the top and the bottom does not widen so much that we
who are well off find ourselves living at the expense of a desperate
and angry mass.
Not only is the population of the earth growing, but its
remarkable diversity will be an intimate part of your life—as it was
not a part of mine. Today, I have Thai, Turkish, or Mexican
restaurants on my street. In your world, Thais, Turks, and Mexicans
will be your neighbors. As an American, you may still be set apart—
but not as I and my peers were; not in the same ways. Americans


---PAGE BREAK---

will be one of many nationalities, meeting more or less as equals.
You will probably spend time in cities like San Francisco, London,
and Bombay—sources of new ideas, invention, and tastes, because
the new cultures will intersect there.
Inevitably, there will be conflicts. But in the context of a genuine
appreciation for the virtues of diversity, those conflicts do not have
to be duels to the death. They will, however, pose enormous
demands upon you and your world for mutual understanding. The
war in the Middle East going on right now, for instance, is in part a
deep mutual misreading between Islam and the Christian world. The
Islamic tradition includes the ritualistic exchange of hostages to
prevent war. In the desert, tribal chiefs used to exchange members
to prevent one group from attacking another. But in the West, we
think of hostages as “kidnap victims”—a method of provoking, not
preventing, war. Probably neither George Bush nor Saddam Hussein
fully realizes that they mean two different things when they talk
about “hostage-taking.” Will people see those sorts of differences in
your world? And will they be able to find words to clarify and
overcome the misunderstandings?
One of the main sources of perpetual novelty is new knowledge,
both in science and technology. You will have a great deal of
learning to do. The new technologies of information, molecular
engineering, and biology will make possible increasing wealth for
more 
people 
and 
an 
increasing 
array 
of 
pleasures 
and
entertainments. However, that same technological progress comes
with a very high environmental price tag—perhaps even an
unsustainably high price. We need to find ways for our economy to
progress, for people to feel a sense of abundance and hope without
destroying the viability of the earth’s ecosystem. Furthermore, we
need to develop the maturity to enjoy the pleasures made possible
by the advance of knowledge without becoming imprisoned in a
mediated fantasy world, cut off from the fabric of human intimacy
and mutual responsibility. You may not choose a career in the new
science and technology, but you will not be able to escape their
impact on your life. They will be an overwhelming presence in your
world, as they move in from the fringes of my world.


---PAGE BREAK---

You are not just arriving into a world, but into a life entwined
with mine, and with your mother’s. I believe that both Cathleen and
I have long lives ahead of us. Maybe we will be more than father
and son; maybe we will be friends—most likely not at first, but
maybe eventually. Now, at the time of your birth, I am forty-four
years old. But when you are 100, I’ll be only 144. Maybe the type of
family that you are creating with us is a new type of community
nexus; Cathleen and I talk about it. Given the state of schools right
now, and the way technology is changing, the family may be the
center of your learning, not public education.
And it will be mutual learning. Already, you are forcing me to
confront the world in a way I wouldn’t otherwise. I can’t run away
from the collapse of schools, the decay of roads (or of governments),
or violence on the streets; I can’t be self-centered in the way I was
before. Nor can I gather you and your mother up, as I might have
done thirty years ago, in a little self-contained unit and try to
protect us against all outsiders. Our solution, instead, has been to
involve ourselves in communities—here in our town, and also across
the world. It took me, personally, ten years to make the transition. I
spent most of the 1970s doing it. You will grow up in the
community I created, but of course you will have to create your
own, in a form I could only guess at now. That will be one of your
challenges.
The world is changing just as fast for me as it is for you. We’re on
the same voyage, Benjamin—together. With love and hope for the
future,
Your
father,
Peter
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

AFTERWORD: THE VALUE OF A STRATEGIC
CONVERSATION
                       Corporate managers are often caught by surprise.
Corporate policies are often undone by unexpected changes in the
environment—by sudden rises or drops in the price of a raw
material, by a competitor’s technological breakthrough, or perhaps
by a change in the regulations that set the boundaries of the
company’s “playing field.” Being blindsided, managers often then
make decisions that, in the end, exacerbate the original problem. “If
we had only known what was going on,” the responsible managers
eventually say, “we could have avoided this crisis.”
But there is often a profoundly depressing moment, late in the
game, when the responsible managers realize that they did know
what was going on. Or, at least, they had access to the necessary
information. Somewhere within the corporation, there was a
perceptive executive (often more than one individual) who
understood the nature of the changes facing the company. But that
understanding never broke through to the awareness of the people
with the power to act.
Perhaps the understanding represented a view that dissented from
the conventional wisdom of the firm, and the corporate culture
subtly punished people for trying to express such views. Perhaps the
prophets within the firm were disregarded because they were new:
“They haven’t been around long enough to see things as we do.” Or
perhaps they came from a low-status division or function: “The R&D
people always talk about lost opportunities, but they don’t know
what’s going on.”
Or, most tragically of all, perhaps strategy—the setting of
priorities 
for 
the 
company’s 
long-term 
development—was
considered the province of specialists: senior managers and selected


---PAGE BREAK---

staff people who rarely communicate the strategic concerns and
questions to people throughout the organization. Therefore, at
various levels, different people understood different aspects of the
company’s environment, but never had a chance to talk about them,
and thus to put the pieces of the puzzle together. Because the story
was never fully formed, it never percolated to the specialists and
decision-makers who were responsible for the “strategy.” Is it any
wonder that the resulting strategy was narrow, and shockingly
uninformed?
Examples of organizations that have missed opportunities in this
manner are legion. IBM’s failure to anticipate and move with the
potential of distributed computer processing (brought about by the
personal computer) is a classic case of this. (It was particularly
poignant because IBM did such a good job of anticipating and riding
the first personal computer wave.) Another example is Apple
Computer’s refusal to license its operating system to other
manufacturers—while VHS and Betamax videotape formats were
staring them in the face. (VHS, as a widely licensed standard,
trounced Sony’s Betamax format.) The global auto industry regularly
endures episodes in which group-think leads to a dramatic shift
among winners and losers. Recently, for example, while nearly
every auto manufacturer was focusing on providing high-mileage,
low-emission vehicles, the customer base began abruptly buying
sport utility vehicles and light trucks. Honda, which had done
remarkably well in an earlier era, was suddenly caught off guard
with no suitable vehicles for that market.
There are also, however, a legion of companies that have thrived
on change. Motorola, Hewlett-Packard, and Rubbermaid, for
example, are known for their resilience in change after change, as
one business environment follows another. Yet the cultures of such
companies are strangely calm. Managers there are continually
involved in a collective inquiry into the deep structure of their
business and how it is changing. They are hunting for new
information, and they continually bring questions of possibility
—“What if an opportunity emerged?” “What if an unexpected crisis


---PAGE BREAK---

took place?”—before the attention of people throughout the
company.
In short, people at resilient companies continually hold strategic
conversations about the future.
Informal, Explicit, Relevant … and Fun
A strategic conversation is a carefully thought-out but loosely
facilitated series of in-depth conversations for the key decision-
makers throughout an organization. Strategic conversations don’t
exist in addition to existing planning efforts; they are effective ways
of framing the planning efforts that already take place, to further
illuminate the decisions that are already being made.
Perhaps most significant of all, a strategic conversation is informal
—or, more precisely, it combines formal and informal elements. To
understand the importance of this point, consider the formal
business planning process that most people think of when they hear
about an organization’s “strategy.” This process often involves
carefully scripted presentations, scheduled according to a structured
cycle, in which senior managers pronounce judgments on strategic
plans. But by the time proposals get to the final stage of
presentation, they have almost always gone through an elaborate,
but unacknowledged, informal process of development and testing to
assure that they will pass this hurdle. Once proposals reach that
stage, there’s no opportunity for engagement.
Meanwhile, informal conversations take place everywhere—in the
“invisible” strategy sessions of the elevator ride, the lunch room, or
the car pool. In these “non-threatening” locales, ideas are developed
and tested, and these ideas ultimately become part of the formal
proposals or strategic plan.
Unfortunately, since these informal conversations are almost
entirely organized on an ad hoc basis, they tend to produce ad hoc
answers that reinforce the conventional wisdom. People make no


---PAGE BREAK---

concerted effort to bring themselves in contact, regularly and
informally, with others who look at things differently, or who can
offer a perspective and knowledge that they lack.
However, when an informal set of conversations is established in
conjunction with a formal planning process, learning is encouraged.
People know they are free to raise and debate questions without
being held to account for the positions they take. Particularly when
scenarios are part of the conversation, they can “try on” different
futures and attitudes to see how they feel about them. Executives
begin to look at their own companies, see the fundamental
conditions of their success, and ask, “What if these were to change?”
How will they be stressed to evolve next, they wonder, and could
they anticipate that evolution before they feel the stress? The
process of considering scenarios together allows these corporate
leaders to question—and change—their old mental models. As a
result, the decision-makers have more confidence. They can move
ahead, knowing that they have already been forced to talk at length,
and muse together, about both the upside and the downside of their
strategy. They are much less likely to get trapped by unexpected
events.
This broadening is important because change in organizations is
inevitably the prerogative of groups, and not individuals. Much
writing about business creates the illusion of the CEO as a “general,”
who commands his (or, in all-too-rare cases, her) loyal troops. Those
troops, in turn, are supposed to transform themselves in whatever
direction the CEO points. In real life, CEOs of large organizations
are well aware that groups of people don’t work that way. Getting a
group to develop the capacity to change requires a high degree of
shared worldview, and a mutual commitment to change. The
magnitude of the commitment is critical; without it, no one can
hope to divert, or even break the momentum of, a large, complex
system like a big company.
Moreover, the process is a great deal more fun for all involved
than the standard business planning process. I mean this in the best
sense of the word “fun”—the conversations are highly enjoyable
experiences that engage the creativity of everyone in the room. As


---PAGE BREAK---

former Shell planning coordinator (and learning theorist) Arie de
Geus has pointed out, fun—particularly in an organizational context
—is a necessary prerequisite for learning, particularly for the type of
strategic learning that is the source of an organization’s competitive
advantage.
The Global Strategic Environment
Why, then, don’t most organizations get involved in strategic
conversations? There are two reasons. First, they’re unfamiliar.
Managers are not accustomed to holding informal conversations that
explicitly feed into formal processes, even if conversations are
taking place all the time.
Second, managers don’t think change is needed. Even in the
1990s, managers tend to consider only a narrow range of strategic
options and ramifications. “Here are the costs of the new capital
project,” someone might say, “and the return on investment”—and
based on those two statements, the decision will be made to proceed
with or abandon the project. There is little consideration given to
how successful the project might be in a wide range of changing
circumstances.
Perhaps that approach worked well when decisions were
relatively small or events were relatively predictable. But in the
foreseeable future, corporate managers will be confronted by
situations that require large, difficult decisions. Once upon a time, a
Pacific Gas & Electric manager might have had to decide: “Should
the next power plant be based on oil or gas production?” Today, the
PG&E manager would be part of a team deciding: “Are we going to
get out of the electric-generating business entirely and just become
distributors of power? Should we sell all our existing plants in
America? Should we build plants in Indonesia instead?”
The ordinary planning process does not prepare people well for
decisions like these. And such decisions are replicated in industry


---PAGE BREAK---

after industry. Book publishers must now consider whether they
should remake their production processes, and how they should
cope with the increasing (but unpredictable) evolution of the online
information environment. Chemical and mining companies must
decide if their futures exist as commodity producers, as specialty
chemical and drug producers, or as both, and they must seek the
opportunities that come from the dematerialization (the increasing
efficiency with shrinking material) of the industrial world.
Or consider the women’s clothing industry. This is a particularly
good example because its managers are acclimated to change—or
think they are. They know how to respond to abrupt demand for
new colors or shifting hemlines. But now, in their business, the
nature of change is changing. New methods of manufacturing make
it possible to manufacture clothing almost anywhere, on a small
scale with very high quality. New shopping malls have provided an
oversupply of look-alike stores. And women, whose leisure time has
decreased sharply in recent decades, spend less time (and money)
shopping for new clothes. (For the last several years, women’s
apparel sales have fallen about 3 percent per year.) Certainly, some
observers and fashion writers pointed out these possible changes as
early as 1987, while they were still nascent, but the industry largely
failed to prepare, in part because industry leaders assumed that the
“new simplicity” in women’s clothing was just another fad that
would last a few seasons and fade.
But it didn’t fade. For it, and the other fashion industry crises, are
the kinds of discontinuities that require strategic thinking and
conversation. They are not like hemline and color shifts. They
cannot be dealt with in the traditional business-as-usual way.
Instability is the inevitable reality for every business in the near
future. It is being driven in part by increasing knowledge, in the
form of science and technology; by the ability to change more and
more of the human condition by design; and by the increasing use of
global-scale media (such as Cable News Network) by people around
the world. CEOs and senior executives must ask themselves: Do the
large-scale changes that we see (in our organizations and outside
them) represent a one-time set of phenomena? Will the turbulent


---PAGE BREAK---

rapids of change clear out into a smooth, rapidly flowing stream of
progressive stability, as the futurist Herman Kahn suggested? Or, as
management writer Peter Vaili remarks, are we heading into an
environment of “permanent white water?” And if so, can we build
organizational forms that help us navigate through continual
change?
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

USER’S GUIDE: HOW TO HOLD A STRATEGIC
CONVERSATION
                        It might seem as if anyone could hold strategic
conversations immediately, without any further preparation, simply
by scheduling time for them. They will be much more fruitful,
however, if they are built around the scenario method, which
systematically raises people’s understandings of their environment
and of each other. The scenario method is designed to produce the
kind of mutual understanding that allows people to act toward
common ends.
Here, then, is a set of precepts for designing a strategic
conversation process, based in part on the scenario methods
described in this book. As with any “recipe” for managers, this
should serve as only a rough guide. Every organization is different,
and every manager will want to construct strategic conversations to
meet the needs and size of that organization. A key here is to
recognize that it is not always necessary to add new dimensions to
the formal planning processes already underway in the company.
Often it is a matter of using the ones that already exist far more
effectively, to build them into a conversational mode.
1. Create a Hospitable Climate
Start by doing what you can to make your organizational culture
welcome diverse points of view and lively discussion. You should
state, up front, that the group is open to new information. No one
should be penalized for raising questions or ideas. In meetings,


---PAGE BREAK---

allow fierce give and take, but make sure that there is time to
consider every point people make, no matter how strong the knee-
jerk response may be to “shoot down anything that isn’t mine.”
Motorola is a good example of a hospitable climate for strategic
conversations. Motorola executives know how to debate with each
other in an intense, highly coherent, well-focused, and impersonal
fashion. People can have furious debates and still walk out of the
conference room as friends and collaborators. Senior managers
encourage this discussion style and teach it to their subordinates.
There is also a formal mechanism called the “minority report”:
anyone in the company can file a report on any technical issue, and
the chairman will respond. Minority reports have led to several
important corporate successes over the years, which makes people
realize that divergent views are not only tolerated but welcomed.
This style is not a function of Motorola’s industry. Indeed, one of
Motorola’s key competitors has a similar attitude toward change and
self-renewal. But this competitor’s culture rewards rapid consensus;
people see conflict as personal or political, and thus to be avoided.
This organization has far more difficulty adopting strategic
conversation; people simply take the conversation too personally.
2. Establish an Initial Group Including Key Decision Makers
and Outsiders
The group should include most of the key decision makers, as well
as selected “experts” and others who have valuable perspectives.
The senior decision makers may not go out and conduct scenario
research themselves, but their presence at the conversations is vital.
They must live through the scenarios, experience the forces that
have created them, and consider, in depth, how their own options
might be affected by them.
Other members of the group should be deliberately sought from a
variety of backgrounds, including (if possible) finance, science


---PAGE BREAK---

and/or technology, the humanities, and basic “common-sense
wisdom.” All these views blended together will probably produce a
far more insightful environmental picture than one that is
aggressively homogenous.
In large companies, there are often several sets of strategic
conversations going on at once. Royal Dutch/Shell has established a
set of “business panels”—groups of the most senior executives,
organized around large-scale issues facing the company. One panel
considers energy; another, technology; a third, the environment.
Panel meetings offer an opportunity for issues to be presented,
discussed, and debated, without any immediate agenda other than
the shared interest in the subject and the sense that it might be
relevant soon.
A strategic conversation might involve as few as fifteen or as
many as thirty people. Occasionally I’ve seen fifty or more people
take part, but in those cases most of the participants are spectators.
3. Include Outside Information and Outside People
I believe strongly in the role of outsiders. At Global Business
Network, my own company, we make a point of bringing in people
from the outside. A purely internal conversation will rarely be able
to achieve breakthrough thinking—in fact, I can’t think of any
example of one that has.
You also need to expand the range of information you take in.
Many organizations limit the range of information that they pull in
from the outside. This is a survival strategy: It simplifies a
confusing, ambiguous, and uncertain world. But it also leads to a
narrowly conceived perception of the world, based on a
homogenous internal mental environment. That is why it is vital to
keep abreast of unlikely and even “irrelevant” information, under
the guidelines given on this page–this page of this book.


---PAGE BREAK---

Recently, I participated in a large-scale strategic conversation, at
Xerox, on the future of white-collar work. The scenarios we
considered were, frankly, very depressing. White-collar work would
be like blue-collar work—full of layoffs and stresses, subject to an
uncertain economy. We couldn’t see any plausible alternatives, or
any enthusiastic future for Xerox, until we turned to two outside
sources that challenged our thinking. The first was a book: The End
of Work by Jeremy Rifkin. Rifkin suggested that people may
redefine their values and respond, through social and political
change, to this stress. The other source was economist Paul Roemer,
of the University of California at Berkeley, whom we invited into
some of the conversations. He convinced us that there was a
plausible scenario, in which changes in technology will drive
economic growth after a difficult period of transition. Once we saw
this one possible future, we were able to talk about Xerox’s desired
role, and capabilities, in a way that will be important in any future.
4. Look Ahead Far in Advance of Decisions
An important characteristic of strategic conversations is their
timing. It takes time for an organization to absorb fundamental new
ways of looking at the world. Introducing new perspectives at the
moment of decision, when an organization is confronted with the
need to act, will inevitably be inadequate. The need to act
overwhelms any willingness people have to learn. Thus, well-
designed strategic conversations occur long before the moment of
decision. They are not oriented to crises, but to the ongoing affairs
of the enterprise.
For example, Pacific Gas & Electric began to use scenarios in the
late 1980s, after having struggled with serious crises (including
expensive write-offs associated with the excessive construction costs
of the Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant). Those scenario exercises
helped senior leaders develop new policies and recover financial


---PAGE BREAK---

stability. But the strategic conversation has continued into more
stable times. The current CEO, Stanley Skinner, recently said,
“There’s nothing immediately on our plate that worries me. But this
absence of worry—that worries me.”
In most companies, executives know months or even years in
advance about most of the significant decisions coming up: a new
distribution system, a major capital investment, a product
introduction. Yet in startlingly few cases do they make an effort to
learn and consider the ramifications of that decision in advance. A
strategic conversation can instill a learning orientation within the
company, so that the ramifications of decisions are considered as
early as possible. Alternatives take shape in managers’ minds long
before the appearance of short-term factors that make reflection
more difficult.
A typical strategic conversation might take place over three to
nine months, with sessions every few weeks or so for a half day at a
time. These informal conversations can be structured—that is, they
can have deliberate schedules, agendas, and lists of participants—
but they do not necessarily fit the formal planning schedule. They
can include ad-hoc meetings, called to discuss a particular issue that
is pending; or they can include regular Friday afternoon “work
sessions” (as opposed to “bull sessions”), in which the topics may
range widely but the concerns remain fixed on the key decisions
that must be made. The only requirement is a basic core of members
that remains the same, so that the group can build upon its
continued experience.
5. Begin by Looking at the Present and Past
Before you can look ahead through scenarios, you need to
understand your organization as it has acted in the past, and your
environment as it exists in the present. Start by asking, “Where are
we now?”


---PAGE BREAK---

For example, if you were an executive in a women’s fashion
business, wanting to build conversations that would help you look
at the new economic dynamics of your industry, you might start by
looking at what has happened in the past. Talk at some length about
the ways you have traditionally dealt with change. How have you
responded to trends in fashions, hemlines, and materials? What
changes have you dealt with effectively, and which have taken you
by surprise?
Then take a look at the trends going on around you. In women’s
fashion, these might have to do with changes in the nature of retail
and shopping patterns, in the role of women and the workplace, and
in economics.
Talk informally about these matters, ask each other questions,
casually elicit opinions about what is important. You will find
yourself saying, “We really ought to learn more about such-and-
such.” As a result, you might form a working group to look at the
nature of the retail system, another to look at women and the
workplace, and another to look at the future of household income.
6. Conduct Preliminary Scenario Work in Smaller Groups
A large meeting involving all the key players is the best way of
starting—and continuing—a strategic conversation. But subgroups
of that meeting are the most effective way to study individual issues
in depth. Each subgroup, in effect, will have its own strategic
conversation, focused and framed by a small scenario effort that
might last a few weeks, with one or two meetings per week. These
smaller conversations are particularly effective because the scenario
process feeds both diversity and consensus. At some stages, people
diverge, offering widely different points of view and information.
And then, people converge, fitting those different views into
common story lines.


---PAGE BREAK---

Each subgroup might emerge with two or three specific scenarios
to present to the full strategic conversation team. Because every
member of the team has been a part of a subgroup, each will be
eager to see the other subgroups’ reports. In our hypothetical
women’s fashion business, those on the retailing team will want to
see how those forces studied were viewed by the women’s future
team, or whether the economy team saw something that they
missed. Since the scenarios are all couched around real concerns,
the discussions that follow these presentations are heated, vital, and
expressive, and they gradually coalesce into a full set of scenarios
for the larger group.
7. Playing Out the Conversation
By now, several months have gone by. You know your present
and your past, and you have scenarios for your future. So what?
Now you can ask, “What are we going to do as an organization?”
You are no longer trapped in the paradigms of conventional
wisdom. You can more easily distinguish evanescent trends from
deeper structural changes, because your conversations have forced
you to question each other about the distinction. The workers in our
fashion company will no longer be prone to say, “Well, this is a
fashion-driven industry. There are always trends, and we don’t need
to do anything about them.”
Now you might want to structure a few workshops in different
parts of the company, to spread the message to those who did not
participate in the strategic conversation.
You raise some questions. Should we think about opening our
own retail chain? Or getting out of the retail business? Should we be
looking at mail order? Moving up market? Or down market? You
might “wind-tunnel” each of these options, testing them against
each of the scenarios you’ve developed. “Would mail order work as
a strategy in Turmoil World? How about in Fast-Tech Future?”


---PAGE BREAK---

Various hypotheses will be raised—not answers. Now you’ve got
some real questions that merit further work. Probably you form new
working groups around some of these options. One group looks at
dropping out of the retail business, while another looks at changing
the focus on the kind of women you’re trying to reach as apparel
customers.
After a month, the new subgroups come back and say, “Here’s
what it would cost to close the retail operation, and open the mail
order operation.” Or, “Here’s what would be involved in changing
the market focus.”
And you are ready to continue another round of strategic
conversation.
8. Living in a Permanent Strategic Conversation
You may have gotten the idea, by now, that the strategic
conversation never ends. It just moves into different venues. It
becomes the model for discourse in the company.
Along the way, other habits change. People start reading the
newspapers and the trade press differently. “I saw this article in
Women’s Wear Daily,” they might say, “and boy, did that fit what we
were studying when we looked at the changing role of women.”
They start passing around articles. The scenarios influence the
informal conversations that take place in the lunchroom or car pool.
And that informal, unstructured material becomes part of the
context of the more established conversations as well.
Individual observations are now data for group consideration.
Somebody comes back and says, “I just saw for the first time the
Levi’s computer system for custom-manufacturing jeans.” They start
putting their experiences into the framework of their collaborative
dialogue. No longer do you hear people complain, “Gee, I wanted to
talk about my concerns at the meeting, but I didn’t think anybody
else would listen.”


---PAGE BREAK---

Now they’re ready to make serious decisions. They feel relatively
confident about them, because they are continuing to digest a wide
range of data and collaboratively make sense of it. They know that
outlying views will be accepted. In a sense, in their conversation,
they’ve already tested their decisions against experience, as if the
scenarios had already taken place. (Indeed, the conversations are a
kind of modeling process for their decision making.)
The Question of Identity: Evading the “Official Future”
One issue that will come up, inevitably, in any strategic
conversation, is the question of the organization’s identity. This
issue, though it may seem abstract at first, lies at the heart of the
resistance people may feel to new ideas.
New strategy always implies change, and the potential of new
strategy is often threatening to the existing success formula.
Managers, like all human beings, are attached to their self-images,
which they see as the basis of their success. Any change of direction
or strategy signifies the desire to turn away not just from the
practices, but from the core of identity that made the organization
successful in the past. That identity is the core business idea that
propels an organization forward. A central part of the strategic
conversation is first articulating the business idea and then testing it
against the evolving realities of the business, especially its business
environment. The challenge to the identity is a challenge to the core
business 
idea. 
To 
fully 
embrace 
personal 
computer-based
workstations, IBM’s managers would have to move away from their
identity as “the people who controlled the design of the computers
that brought together the organization.” To fully embrace changing
roles of women, fashion industry managers would have to give up
their identity as “the people who anticipate trends.”
Until this identity shift takes place, many conversations about
scenarios seem to return, again and again, to the “Official Future”


---PAGE BREAK---

scenario described on this page. This is a future based on the idea
that “things will work out okay tomorrow, because tomorrow will
basically continue the experience of today.” Most organizational
conversations encourage some form of the Official Future, as a kind
of built-in reinforcement of the company’s self-image.
Strategic conversations must perennially challenge the Official
Future. Even if it comes to pass, the organization will be stronger,
and more resilient, because it has considered alternatives. And in
the current global environment, very few organizations will enjoy a
long existence within their Official Future.
Strategic Conversation on a Small Scale
The method described here is well-suited to a large firm, where
subgroups can be formed. But it can also be adapted to a small-scale
company. We engage in exactly this type of process, for example, at
Global Business Network, which has about thirty full-time
employees.
As I write this, we are in the middle of a strategic conversation
initiative that literally involves everybody who works full-time in
the company. We aren’t aiming it at a specific product or decision;
our goal is to create a developmental learning process for the
organization. Because we’re small, we can’t afford to have only
some employees know what’s going on with our future. Everyone in
the office needs to understand the business deeply, from the
receptionist to the bookkeeper to the principals. Each person may
not be able to deliver every piece of the service, but they need to
understand how their part fits into the whole. And because our
services and customers are evolving constantly, that means everyone
needs to be a part of a conversation about our evolution.
We conduct part of our conversation in a private conference on a
computer conferencing system called The WELL (see this page of
this book), and part of the conversation in person. It had a


---PAGE BREAK---

forerunner, in a sense, in our regular Wednesday morning meetings,
which we have held since we organized our company nine years
ago. We would sit in a circle and everyone would report, simply, on
what they were doing.
Those meetings, which still continue today (with ever-increasing
significance and sophistication), helped establish a climate in which
a strategic conversation could take place. The climate was also
abetted by a deliberate attempt to keep information open. For
example, the latest financial statistics are available in the
controller’s office. Everybody in the company knows how much
we’ve got in the bank, what we’re billing, what we’re owed, what
we owe, and how profitable we are.
But this openness, in itself, was not enough; there were still
concerns about the future that we left unspoken. Our current
strategic conversations began early in 1995, when Eamon Kelly, a
“scholar in residence” from Scotland, wrote a paper on the future of
GBN. “I’ve been watching things,” he said, “and here are my
thoughts.” Another staff member, Gerald Harris, reacted to the
paper by bringing it to other people’s attention: “Here’s how I think
we ought to carry these points forward.” Together, they took the
initiative to organize a series of conversations based upon the paper.
The conversations may continue indefinitely; they may evolve
into other collaborative, reflective activities. Perhaps the best aspect
of them is their emergent quality. No CEO or partner had to say,
“Here, you look at the future of the company,” to a staff member. In
a strategic conversation, the initiative stems from the commitment
that people hold to the organization as a whole. The conversation
channels and rewards that commitment by making the organization
more worthy of it; and it allows that commitment—and the
company’s environment—to evolve and develop.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

APPENDIX: STEPS TO DEVELOPING SCENARIOS
Step One: Identify Focal Issue or Decision
When developing scenarios, it’s a good idea to begin “from the
inside out” rather than “from the outside in.” That is, begin with a
specific decision or issue, then build out toward the environment.
What will decision-makers in your company be thinking hard about
in the near future? What are the decisions that have to be made that
will have a long-term influence on the fortunes of the company?
Scenarios that are developed on the basis of differences in the
macro-economy—high growth versus low growth, say—may not
highlight differences that make a difference to a particular
company. To a movie studio different paths for the diffusion of new
distribution technology would generate more useful scenarios than
simple variations on economic growth. An automobile company will
want to see scenarios built around variations in energy prices. A
forest products company might want to look at scenarios that differ
around the number of housing starts. Like them, a person buying a
home will want to think about interest rates and the housing
market.
How can you be sure that the differences that distinguish your
scenarios will really make a difference to your business or your life?
The best way is to begin with important decisions that have to be
made and the mind-set of the management making them:
“Shall we build the major capital facility now on the drawing
boards?”
“Shall we launch a major new direction for R&D?”
“Shall we make an acquisition in a new industry?”
“Shall I change careers?”


---PAGE BREAK---

Most of all, what is it that keeps me awake at night?
Step Two: Key Forces in the Local Environment
If the identification of a focal issue or decision is the first step,
then listing the key factors influencing the success or failure of that
decision is the second step—facts about customers, suppliers,
competitors, etc. What will decision-makers want to know when
making key choices? What will be seen as success or failure? What
are the considerations that will shape those outcomes?
Step Three: Driving Forces
Once the key factors have been listed, the third step involves
listing driving forces in the macro-environment that influence the
key factors identified earlier. In addition to a checklist of social,
economic, political, environmental, and technological forces,
another route to the relevant aspects of the macro-environment is
the question: What are the forces behind the micro-environmental
forces identified in Step Two? Some of these forces are
predetermined (e.g., often demographics) and some are highly
uncertain (e.g., public opinion). It is very useful to know what is
inevitable and necessary and what is unpredictable and still a
matter of choice.
It can be useful to imagine oneself in the future saying, “If only I
had known that” inflation would fall, or that a new competitor
would emerge from another country, or that regulations would
change drastically. It is not too hard to remember such comments in
the past. What guidance do they provide for the future?
This is the most research-intensive step in the process. In order to
adequately define the driving forces research is usually required.


---PAGE BREAK---

Research may cover markets, new technology, political factors,
economic forces, and so on. One is searching for the major trends
and the trend breaks. The latter are the most difficult to find;
novelty is difficult to anticipate.
Step Four: Rank by Importance and Uncertainty
Next comes the ranking of key factors and driving forces on the
basis of two criteria: first, the degree of importance for the success
of the focal issue or decision identified in step one; second, the
degree of uncertainty surrounding those factors and trends. The
point is to identify the two or three factors or trends that are most
important and most uncertain.
Scenarios cannot differ over predetermined elements like the
inevitable aging of the baby boomers, because predetermined
elements are bound to be the same in all scenarios.
Step Five: Selecting Scenario Logics
The results of this ranking exercise are, in effect, the axes along
which the eventual scenarios will differ. Determining these axes is
among the most important steps in the entire scenario-generating
process. The goal is to end up with just a few scenarios whose
differences make a difference to decision-makers. If the scenarios
are to function as useful learning tools, the lessons they teach must
be based on issues basic to the success of the focal decision. And
those fundamental differences—or “scenario drivers”—must be few
in number in order to avoid a proliferation of different scenarios
around every possible uncertainty. Many things can happen, but
only a few scenarios can be developed in detail, or the process
dissipates.


---PAGE BREAK---

While in the end one may boil the logic down to the directions of
a very few variables the process for getting there is not at all simple
or mechanical. It is more like playing with a set of issues until you
have reshaped and regrouped them in such a way that a logic
emerges and a story can be told.
Once the fundamental axes of crucial uncertainties have been
identified, it is sometimes useful to present them as a spectrum
(along one axis), or a matrix (with two axes), or a volume (with
three axes) in which different scenarios can be identified and their
details filled in.
The logic of a given scenario will be characterized by its location
in the matrix of most significant scenario drivers. For example, if an
automobile company determines that fuel prices and protectionism
are two of the most important scenario drivers, there will be four
basic scenario logics: (1) high fuel prices in a protectionist
environment—where domestic suppliers of small cars will have an
advantage; (2) high fuel prices in a global economy—where fuel-
efficient imports may capture the low end of the market; (3) low
fuel prices in a protectionist environment—where American gas
guzzlers will have a good market at home but not abroad; (4) low
fuel prices in a global economy—where there will be intense global
competition for fuel-efficient models, but larger cars may enjoy
strong foreign markets.
The scenario will usually want to be extended beyond such simple
logics to encompass, for example, more subtle issues like the
evolution of consumer markets or automotive regulation. Thus the
resulting scenarios may find their core of logic less in the variations
of the cells in a matrix and more in the themes and plots of a story.
In Chapter Eight we discussed the various types of plots that can
organize a scenario. The challenge here is identifying the plot that
(1) best captures the dynamics of the situation and (2)
communicates the point effectively. For example, one of the auto
scenarios above for a U.S. automaker might be built around the
logic of challenge and response: the challenge of foreign
competition and high gas prices.


---PAGE BREAK---

Step Six: Fleshing Out the Scenarios
While the most important forces determine the logics that
distinguish the scenarios, fleshing out the skeletal scenarios can be
accomplished by returning to the lists of key factors and trends
identified in steps two and three.
Each key factor and trend should be given some attention in each
scenario. Sometimes it is immediately apparent which side of an
uncertainty should be located in which scenario, sometimes not. If
two scenarios differ over protectionist or nonprotectionist policies,
then it probably makes sense to put a higher inflation rate in the
protectionist 
scenario 
and 
a 
lower 
inflation 
rate 
in 
the
nonprotectionist scenario. It is just such connections and mutual
implications that scenarios should be designed to reveal.
Then weave the pieces together in the form of a narrative. How
would the world get from here to there? What events might be
necessary to make the end point of the scenario plausible? Are there
known individuals whose ascendency in the public eye might
facilitate or help to characterize a given scenario, such as Russian
Premier Boris Yeltsin or U.S. Senator William Bradley?
Step Seven: Implications
Once the scenarios have been developed in some detail, then it is
time to return to the focal issue or decision identified in step one to
rehearse the future. How does the decision look in each scenario?
What vulnerabilities have been revealed? Is the decision or strategy
robust across all scenarios, or does it look good in only one or two
of the scenarios? If a decision looks good in only one of several
scenarios, then it qualifies as a high-risk gamble—a bet-the-
company strategy—especially if the company has little control over


---PAGE BREAK---

the likelihood of the required scenario coming to pass. How could
that strategy be adapted to make it more robust if the desired
scenario shows signs of not happening?
Step Eight: Selection of Leading Indicators and Signposts
It is important to know as soon as possible which of several
scenarios is closest to the course of history as it actually unfolds.
Sometimes the direction of history is obvious, especially with regard
to factors like the health of the overall economy, but sometimes the
leading indicators for a given scenario can be subtle. How, for
example, should one calibrate the speed of economic restructuring
from a smokestack economy toward an information-intensive
economy?—by help-wanted advertising according to different SIC
codes?—by union memberships?—by subscriptions to indicative
periodicals?
Once the different scenarios have been fleshed out and their
implications for the focal issue determined, then it’s worth spending
time and imagination on identifying a few indicators to monitor in
an ongoing way. If those indicators are selected carefully and
imaginatively, the company will gain a jump on its competition in
knowing what the future holds for a given industry and how that
future is likely to affect strategies and decisions in the industry.
If the scenarios have been built according to the previous steps,
then the scenarios will be able to translate movements of a few key
indicators into an orderly set of industry-specific implications. The
logical coherence that was built into the scenarios will allow logical
implications of leading indicators to be drawn out of the scenarios.
Additional Considerations for Creating Scenarios


---PAGE BREAK---

Some rules of thumb have been gained from long years and much
experience with scenario development in many companies and
settings:
1. Beware of ending up with three scenarios, though in practice
we often do. People not familiar with scenarios or their use will be
tempted to identify one of the three as the “middle” or “most likely”
scenario and then will treat it as a single-point forecast, and all the
advantages of multiple-scenario methodology will be lost. But also
avoid having too many scenarios. When one is working with more
than four scenarios, they begin to blur and lose their meaningful
distinctions as decision tools.
2. In general, avoid assigning probabilities to different scenarios,
because of the temptation to consider seriously only the scenario
with the highest probability. It may make sense to develop a pair of
equally highly probable scenarios, and a pair of potentially high-
impact but relatively low-probability “wild card” scenarios. In no
case does it make good sense to compare the probability of an event
in one scenario against the probability of another event in another
scenario, because the two events are assumed to take place in
radically different environments, and the assignment of probabilities
depends on very different assumptions about the future.
3. Pay a great deal of attention to naming your scenarios. Names
should succeed in telegraphing the scenario logics. If the names are
vivid and memorable, the scenarios will have a much better chance
of making their way into the decision-making and decision-
implementing process across the company. Because the name
evoked such a powerful and evocative concept, Shell’s “World of
Internal Contradictions” (WIC) scenario survived for more than a
decade as a useful tool even as the world changed.
4. Selection of the scenario development team should be guided
by three major considerations. First, support and participation from
the highest levels of management is essential. Those who make and
implement decisions should be involved in the creation of these
tools for decision-making. Second, a broad range of functions and
divisions should be represented on the scenario development team.


---PAGE BREAK---

Third, look for imaginative people with open minds who can work
well together as a team.
5. You can tell you have good scenarios when they are both
plausible and surprising; when they have the power to break old
stereotypes; and when the makers assume ownership of them and
put them to work. Scenario making is intensely participatory, or it
fails.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

ENDNOTES
THE PATHFINDER’S TALE
The planner and the executive are partners in taking a long view.
1 Pierre Wack, “The Gentle Art of Reperceiving” (two-part article),
Harvard Business Review: “Scenarios: Uncharted Waters Ahead”
(September-October, 1985), pp. 73–89; “Scenarios: Shooting the
Rapids” (November-December, 1985), pp. 139–150.
“Unpredictability in every field is the result of the conquest of the whole
of the present world by scientific power.”
2 Paul Valéry, The Outlook for Intelligence. Translated by Denise
Folliot and Jackson Mathews. Edited by Jackson Mathews.
(Princeton, N.J.: Bollingen Foundation/Princeton University Press,
1962; New York: Harper & Row, 1963; paperback, 1989).
THE SMITH & HAWKEN STORY: THE PROCESS OF SCENARIO-
BUILDING
Paul had a varied background: he had founded the Erewhon natural
foods distribution company …
3 Paul Hawken, The Magic of Findhorn (New York: Harper & Row,
1975).
This phenomenon resonated with a trend we had been tracking, and
which Paul would later describe in his book …
4 Paul Hawken, The Next Economy (New York: Holt, Reinhart, and
Wilson, 1983).
There is a wonderful book by novelist John Gardner …
5 John Gardner, The Art of Fiction: Notes on Craft for Young Writers
(New York: Knopf: Distributed by Random House, 1983).
THE SCENARIO-BUILDING ANIMAL


---PAGE BREAK---

People have an innate ability to build scenarios, and to foresee the
future.
6 William H. Calvin, The Cerebral Symphony: Seashore Reflections on
the Structure of Consciousness (New York: Bantam Books, 1989).
But we humans are capable of planning decades ahead, able to take
account of extraordinary contingencies far more irregular than the
seasons.
7 William H. Calvin, The Ascent of Mind (New York: Bantam Books,
1991).
We all, of course, share that same blindness to reality as well.
8 Arie P. de Geus, “Stockton Lecture,” London Business School, May
3, 1990, p. 8.
Historian Barbara Tuchman puts it this way: “Men will not believe what
does not fit in with their plans or suit their prearrangements.”
9 Barbara W. Tuchman, Practicing History (New York: Knopf, 1981).
Denial, for example, is the first of the psychological stages that we
undergo to protect ourselves from bad news …
10 Elisabeth Kübler-Ross, On Death and Dying (New York:
Macmillan, 1969).
When decision-makers begin to look at the future, denial acts as an
automatic shut-off valve …
11 Herman Kahn, On Thermonuclear War: Thinking About the
Unthinkable (New York: Horizon Press, 1962).
“Scenarios deal with two worlds,” wrote Pierre Wack. “The world of
facts and the world of perceptions.”
12 Pierre Wack, “Scenarios: Shooting the Rapids,” Harvard Business
Review (November-December, 1985), p. 140.
Anthropologist Mary Catherine Bateson offers the story of her father,
philosopher Gregory Bateson, who used to tell a joke about a man who
asked a computer …
13 Gregory Bateson, Mind and Nature (New York: Bantam Books,
1979).
In a famous essay …
14 Isaiah Berlin, The Hedgehog and the Fox (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1966).


---PAGE BREAK---

All these cultural norms emerged over Japan’s long history; they can be
understood only as part of a story about Japan, just as the American
Dream is part of a story about the United States.
15 James M. Fallows, More Like Us: Making America Great Again
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1989).
“Myths are ‘the way things are’ as people in a particular society believe
them to be …”
16 James O. Robertson, American Myth, American Reality (New York:
Hill & Wang, 1980).
AT&T’s view of “universal service” is an example. Beginning with that
great servant to humanity Theodore Vail …
17 Alvin Toffler, The Adaptive Corporation (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1985).
UNCOVERING THE DECISION
“If you look at your life on the level of historical time, as a tiny but
influential part of a century-long process, then at least you can begin to
know your own address.”
18 Michael Ventura, Shadow Dancing in the USA, 1st ed. (Los
Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1985).
Consider population: most people think of the staggering growth of world
population with foreboding …
19 Paul R. Ehrlich and Anne H. Ehrlich, The Population Explosion
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990).
When starting a scenario process about population, however, you would
consider: “Is there any optimistic aspect to this problem?”
20 Julian L. Simon, The Ultimate Resource (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1981).
INFORMATION-HUNTING AND -GATHERING
We began looking for evidence of new political ideologies in Russia, and
found none. Instead, we found obscure essays published in 1983 …
21 Tatyana Zaslavskaya, informal paper on Soviet Reform, Institute
of Economics of the Siberian Academy of Sciences in Novosibirsk
April 1983.


---PAGE BREAK---

Another example is the computer interface called “virtual reality,” which
has been brewing for years outside the mainstream.
22 William Gibson, Neuromancer (New York: Berkeley Publishing
Group, 1984).
I look at poll data as well. Some of it is the expensive, privately
commissioned kind. Much of it comes from the newspaper.
23 “Majority Opposes Increasing Offshore Drilling and A-Plants,”
San Francisco Chronicle (August 10, 1989), p. A2.
Ventura traces the roots of Presley’s music (the “long snake,” as he calls
it) back to nineteenth-century voodoo, when slave Irish and slave African
culture melted together in the hot Caribbean.
24 Michael Ventura, Shadow Dancing in the USA, 1st ed. (Los
Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1985).
At the same time, there is more acceptance of ethnic music by white
media than ever before. An interesting example of World Music …
25 Peter Gabriel, Passion and Passion Sources (Wiltshire, U.K.:
Realworld Records, 1989).
If you read the CoEvolution Quarterly magazine in the mid-1970s, you
encountered a new idea called “the Gaia Hypothesis.”
26 Lynn Margulis and James Lovelock, “The Atmosphere as
Circulator of the Biosphere—The Gaia Hypothesis,” CoEvolution
Quarterly (Summer 1975), pp. 30–40.
27 James Lovelock, The Ages of Gaia: A Biography of Our Living Earth
(London: Oxford University Press, 1988).
Amory Lovins argued in the mid-seventies that improved technology
could reduce energy consumption …
28 Amory Lovins, Soft Energy Path: Toward a Durable Peace (New
York: Penguin, 1977).
Today, one of the most useful fringe areas is “nanotechnology”—the self-
reproducing machinery, no larger than molecules …
29 Eric K. Drexler, Engines of Creation (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor
Press/Doubleday, 1986).
Few people would consider management consultant and Harvard
Business School professor Michael Porter “fringe” …
30 Michael E. Porter, The Competitive Advantage of Nations (New
York: Free Press, 1990).


---PAGE BREAK---

Meanwhile, telephone network “phone phreaks” were surreptitiously
exploring the ins and outs of the country’s communications system.
31 Paul Freiberger and Michael Swaine, Fire in the Valley: The
Making of the Personal Computer (Berkeley, Calif.: Osborne/McGraw-
Hill, 1984).
 … the ways planning works as a process of learning.
32 Donald N. Michael, On Learning to Plan—and Planning to Learn
(San Francisco: Josey-Bass, 1973).
What I look for in my book reading is surprises—perceptions that are
new to me, and then become part of my own perception. Popular science
books can be invaluable this way …
33 William H. Calvin, The Cerebral Symphony: Seashore Reflections on
the Structure of Consciousness (New York: Bantam Books, 1989).
… (about the role of computers and complexity in the modern world) …
34 Heinz R. Pagels, The Dreams of Reason: the Computer and the Rise
of the Sciences of Complexity (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1988).
… (about a recent paradigm shift that cuts across all the sciences).
35 James Gleick, Chaos: Making a New Science (New York: Viking
Press, 1987).
Occasionally I get a jump on the popular books: the role of chaos in
complex systems was already visible in the mid-1970s in the writings of
an obscure Belgian mathematician …
36 René Thorn, Structural Stability and Morphogenesis; An Outline of a
General Theory of Models (Reading, Mass.: W. A. Benjamin, 1975).
Another important book for me, Terry Eagleton’s Literary Theory, led
me to understand the value of looking at how people extract meaning
from information.
37 Terry Eagleton, Literary Theory: An Introduction (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1983).
I read some fiction avidly … but do not find most novels, even science
fiction novels, useful in scenario research. The ideas are not surprising
enough. Occasionally, there is an exception.
38 William Gibson, Neuromancer (New York: Berkeley Publishing
Group, 1984).
The last essay was particularly excruciating, in the “I wish I’d
writtenthat” sense; called “The Next 200 Years,” it was the best writing


---PAGE BREAK---

I’ve read about the future in a long time.
39 Michael Ventura, Shadow Dancing in the USA (Los Angeles: J. P.
Tardier, 1985).
“You’re Peter Schwartz, aren’t you? You write about the future, right?
You’re interested in computers and kids, aren’t you? You ought to read a
book called …”
40 Seymour Papert, Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful
Ideas (New York: Basic Books, 1980).
“Good writers have charisma. Mediocre writers improve. Pushy or
insensitive writers get ignored. People learn to articulate their emotions
more explicitly to avoid being misunderstood.”
41 Stewart Brand, editor. Whole Earth Software Catalog (Garden City,
N.Y.: Quantum Press/Doubleday, 1984).
CREATING SCENARIO BUILDING BLOCKS
General Motors and American Telephone and Telegraph both tried to
reshape their businesses during the 1980s.
42 W. Brook Tunstall, Disconnecting Parties: Managing the Bell System
Break-up (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1985).
ANATOMY OF A NEW DRIVING FORCE: THE GLOBAL
TEENAGER
The results of this baby boom will not be the same as the impact of the
youth culture of the 1960s in America; the world is a bigger and more
diverse place, and the social mood is different from what it was twenty
years ago.
43 Will Baker, “The Global Teenager,” Whole Earth Review (Winter
1989), pp. 2–35.
They interviewed teenagers from twelve countries about their ambitions,
and the pressures on their lives.
44 Will Baker, Backward: An Essay on Indians, Time and Photography
(Berkeley, Calif.: North Atlantic Books, 1983).
“Young people that I have seen in the so-called Third World countries
remind me of a juggernaut—hungry and rapacious—thrust into a world
of tremendous uncertainty.”


---PAGE BREAK---

45 Paul Hawken, GBN Network Meeting, 1989.
“The youth of the world,” wrote Will Baker, “wants or is capable of
wanting every taste treat and fashion switch [marketers] can devise …”
46 Will Baker, “The Global Teenager,” Whole Earth Review (Winter
1989), pp. 2–35.
COMPOSING A PLOT
The French historian Fernand Braudel offered a coherent way to
understand the world.
47 Fernand Braudel, Civilization and Capitalism (New York: Harper &
Row, 1982–84).
In 1974, our seminal scenario project for the Environmental Protection
Administration offered a mere ten scenarios. [We] narrowed those
further into a book called Seven Tomorrows.
48 Paul Hawken, James Ogilvy, and Peter Schwartz, Seven
Tomorrows: Toward a Voluntary History (New York: Bantam Books,
1982).
This plot starts with the perception that the world is essentially limited,
that resources are scarce, and that if one side gets richer, the other side
must get poorer.
49 Lester C. Thurow, The Zero-Sum Society: Distribution and the
Possibilities for Economic Change (New York: Basic Books, 1980).
In the past, this logic has led to war. Historian Barbara Tuchman
describes a winners and losers standoff …
50 Barbara W. Tuchman, The Guns of August (New York: Macmillan,
1962).
If you were a U.S. auto worker or executive thinking about your future
in 1980 you should have considered a scenario based on a logic of
winners and losers.
51 David Halberstam, The Reckoning (New York: Morrow, 1986).
It’s no accident that his hero, bond broker Sherman McCoy, thinks of
himself as a potential “Master of the Universe.”
52 Tom Wolfe, The Bonfire of the Vanities (New York: Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, 1987).


---PAGE BREAK---

In 1963, planner/futurist Don Michael foresaw that the world would
forever be different when he looked carefully at the demographics of the
early 1960s.
53 Donald N. Michael, The Next Generation: The Prospects Ahead for
the Youth of Today and Tomorrow (New York: Random House, 1965).
THE WORLD IN 2005: THREE SCENARIOS
In the United States twenty-four-year-olds will decline by 7.8
percent; the number of twenty-five- to twenty-nine-year-olds will
decline by 19.2 percent; and the number of thirty- to thirty-four-
year-olds will decline by 13.6 percent.
54 Global Business Network, The 1989 GBN Scenario Book
(Emeryville: Global Business Network, 1989).
The tension between isolationism and the global economy creates what
George Kennan called “fateful alliances”: multinational power blocs.
55 George F. Kennan, The Fateful Alliance: France, Russia, and the
Coming of the First World War (New York: Pantheon Books, 1984).
REHEARSING THE FUTURE
A book of that presentation became a best seller in South Africa. p. 202
Clem Sunter, The World and South Africa in the 1990s (Cape Town:
Ituman & Rousseau Tafelberg, 1987).
“When people play with [mental models of the world], they are actually
creating a new language among themselves that expresses the knowledge
they have acquired.”
56 Arie de Geus, “Planning as Learning,” Harvard Business Review
(March-April 1988) pp. 70–74.
AFTERWORD
The Value of a Strategic Conversation
57 This section is based upon a body of work developed by Kees van
der Heijden and myself, with significant contributions from others at
Global Business Network, Emeryville, California.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

SCENARIO PLANNING: SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Concepts
Barnett, Steve. “Futures, Probable and Plausible.” Anthropology
Newsletter, October 1994.
Churchman, C. West. The Design of Inquiring Systems. New York:
Basic Books, 1971.
de Geus, Arie. “Planning as Learning.” Harvard Business Review 66,
no. 2 (1988): 70–74.
Douglas, Mary. How Institutions Think. Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse
University Press, 1986.
Forrester, Jay Wright. Industrial Dynamics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1961.
Galer, Graham, and Kees van der Heijden. “How Planners Create
Organisational Learning.” Marketing Intelligence and Planning 10,
no. 6 (1992): 5–12.
Griffin, Emilie, ed. “Decisionmaking” [interview with Napier
Collyns]. In The Reflective Executive, 117–124. New York:
Crossroads, 1993.
Ingvar, David H. “Memories of the Future: An Essay on the
Temporal Organisation of Conscious Awareness.” Human
Neurobiology 4, no. 3 (1985): 127–136.
Jungermann, Helmut, and M. Thuring. “The Use of Mental Models
for Generating Scenarios.” In Judgment Forecasting, edited by
George Wright and Peter Ayton. Chichester: Wiley, 1987.
Kolb, David A. Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of
Learning and Development. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall,
1984.


---PAGE BREAK---

Michael, Don. On Learning to Plan and Planning to Learn. New York:
Jossey-Bass, 1973.
Mintzberg, Henry. “That’s Not Turbulence, Chicken Little, That’s
Really Opportunity.” Planning Review 22, no. 6 (1994): 7–9.
van der Heijden, Kees. “Probablistic Planning and Scenario
Planning.” In Subjective Probability, edited by George Wright and
Peter Ayton. Chichester and New York: Wiley, 1994.
Vickers, Geoffrey, Sir. Human Systems Are Different. London and New
York: Harper & Row, 1983.
Methodology
Leemhuis, J. P. “Using Scenarios to Develop Strategies.” Long Range
Planning 18, no. 2 (1985): 30–37.
Mason, David H. “Scenario-based Planning: Decision Model for the
Learning Organization.” Planning Review 22, no. 2 (1994): 6–11.
Ogilvy, James. “Future Studies and the Human Sciences: The Case
for Normative Scenarios.” Futures Research Quarterly 8, no. 2
(1992): 5–65.
Schoemaker, Paul, and Kees van der Heijden. “Integrating Scenarios
into Strategic Planning at Royal Dutch/Shell.” Planning Review 20,
no. 3 (1992): 41–46.
Schwartz, Peter. “Composing a Plot for Your Scenario.” Planning
Review 20, no. 3 (1992) 4–8, 46.
Simpson, Daniel G. “Key Lessons for Adopting Scenario Planning in
Diversified Companies.” Planning Review 20, no. 3 (1992): 10–17,
47–48.
Wilkinson, Lawrence. “How to Build Scenarios: Planning for ‘Long
Fuse, Big Bang’ Problems in an Era of Uncertainty.” Wired:
Scenarios Special Edition, October 1995.
Practice
Bonnett, Thomas W., and Robert L. Olson. Scenarios of State
Government in the Year 2010. Washington, D.C.: Council of


---PAGE BREAK---

Governors’ Policy Advisors, 1993.
Boroush, Mark A., and Charles W. Thomas. “Alternative Scenarios
for the Defense Industry after 1995.” Planning Review 20, no. 3
(1992): 24–29.
Cohen, Elliott A., and John Gooch. Military Misfortunes. New York:
Free Press, 1990.
Coplin, William D., and Michael O’Leary. “1992–97 World Political
Risk Forecast.” Planning Review 20, no. 2 (1992): 24–31.
Dutch Central Planning Bureau. Scanning the Future. The Hague: SDU
Publishers, 1992.
Esterhuyse, Willie. “Scenarios for South Africa—Instability and
Violence or Negotiated Transition?” Long Range Planning 25, no. 3
(1992): 21–26.
Kahane, Adam. “The Mont Fleur Scenarios.” Weekly Mail and The
Guardian Weekly (Bellville, South Africa), 1992.
——. “Scenarios for Energy: Sustainable World vs. Global
Mercantilism.” Long Range Planning 25, no. 4 (1992): 38–46.
Kleiner, Art. “The End of the Official Future: Why Pacific Gas and
Electric Isn’t Building Any More Nuclear Power Plants.” Garbage,
March/April 1992: 54–57.
Mason, David H., and James Herman. “Mapping the Future of
Computing and Communications.” UniForum Daily, January 23,
1992.
Ogilvy, James. “Education and Community: Four Scenarios for the
Future of Public Education.” The Deeper News (Emeryville, Calif.:
Global Business Network) 6, no. 1 (1995).
——. “The Future of Hawaii: Higher Education.” Thought & Action:
The N?? Higher Education Journal 9, no. 1 (1993): 69–124.
——. “Three Scenarios for Higher Education.” The Deeper
News(Emeryville, Calif.: Global Business Network) 3, no. 1 (1992);
reprinted in Thought & Action: The N?? Higher Education Journal 9,
no. 1 (1993): 25–67.


---PAGE BREAK---

Roseli, Steven A., et al. Changing Maps: Governing in a World of Rapid
Change. The Second Report of the Project on Governing in an
Information Society. Ottawa: Carleton University Press, 1995.
Schipper, Lee, and Stephen Meyers. “Using Scenarios to Explore
Future Energy Demand in Industrialized Countries.” Energy Policy
21, no. 3 (March 1993): 264–275.
Schwartz, Peter. “The New World Disorder.” Wired: Scenarios Special
Edition, October 1995.
Stokke, P. R., W. K. Ralston, T. A. Boyce, and I. H. Wilson. “Scenario
Planning for Norwegian Oil and Gas.” Long Range Planning 23, no.
2 (1990): 17–26.
Sunter, Clem. The New Century, Quest for the High Road. Cape Town:
Ituman & Rousseau Tafelberg, 1992.
Wack, Pierre. “Scenarios: The Gentle Art of Reperceiving.” Harvard
Business School working paper. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
College, 1984.
——. “Scenarios: Shooting the Rapids.” Harvard Business Review63,
no. 6 (1985): 139–150.
——. “Scenarios: Uncharted Waters Ahead.” Harvard Business Review
63, no. 5 (1985): 72–79.
Yergin, Daniel, and Thane Gustafson. Russia 2010 and What It Means
for the World. New York: Random House, 1993.
OceanofPDF.com


---PAGE BREAK---

