# List of Figures

viii 
LIST O F FIGURES
 6.6 Technology Corporation’s Business Idea
 6.7 Rummler and Brache’s (1995) Nine Performance Variables
 6.8 Swanson’s (2007) Performance Diagnosis Matrix 
 6.9 Technology Corporation’s Performance Diagnosis Matrix
 7.1 The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Development Phase
 7.2 Brainstorming Key Forces
 7.3 Technology Corporation’s Brainstorm Activity
 7.4 Ranking Forces by Relative Impact on the Strategic Agenda
 7.5 Technology Corporation’s Brainstormed Forces—Simpliﬁed and Ranked 
by Relative Impact on the Strategic Agenda
 7.6 Ranking Forces by Relative Uncertainty
 7.7 Uncertainty/Impact Matrix for Technology Corporation
 7.8 Quadrants of the Ranking Space
 7.9 Technology Corporation’s Quadrants
 7.10 The Critical Uncertainties
 7.11 Developing the Scenario Matrix
 7.12 Technology Corporation’s Scenario Matrix
 7.13 Developing the Scenario Matrix Using Additional Critical Uncertainties
 7.14 Technology Corporation’s Scenario Matrix
 7.15 Template for Scenario Plot Construction
 7.16 The Scenario Quality Assessment Checklist
 7.17 The Scenario Quality Assessment Checklist—Technology Corporation
 8.1 Performance-Based Scenario Planning—Scenario Implementation Phase
 8.2 Technology Corporation’s Revised Business Idea
 8.3 Signals for Technology Corporation Scenarios
 8.4 Using Scenarios to Examine Organizational Elements 
 8.5 Wind-Tunneling Summary for Technology Corporation
 9.1 The Performance-Based Scenario System—Project Assessment Phase
 9.2 Participant Satisfaction Survey
 9.3 Stakeholder Satisfaction Survey
 9.4 The Conversation Quality and Engagement Checklist


  
LIST O F FIGURES 
ix
 9.5 The Scenario Expertise Audit
 9.6 The Strategic Gains and Losses Matrix
 9.7 The Strategic Gains and Losses Matrix for Technology Corporation
 9.8 A Comprehensive Plan for Assessing Scenario Projects
 9.9 Comprehensive Scenario Project Assessment for Technology Corporation
 10.1 The Scenario Project Worksheet
 12.1 The Performance-Based Scenario System


This page intentionally left blank 


 xi
Foreword
Louis van der Merwe
IT COMES AS NO SURPRISE that in our world of discontinuities and vola-
tility, the use of scenarios as part of strategic planning processes has taken 
off. According to the Bain & Company annual survey of the most-used 
management tools, scenario work has risen considerably. Scenario use has 
risen from 40 percent of those surveyed in 1999 to 70 percent in 2006 
(Economist, 2006). The Economist goes on to say, “As a result of its scenario 
planning, the New York Board of Trade decided in the 1990s to build a 
second trading ﬂoor outside the World Trade Centre, a decision that kept it 
going after September 11th, 2001.”  
As the environment becomes more volatile, one wrong assumption 
about future conditions or markets could put you out of business or set your 
organization back years. Leaders of organizations and governments need to 
skillfully use state-of-the-art tools and methods in order to steer their orga-
nizations away from dangers and to identify new opportunities. Appreciat-
ing how a speciﬁc method works and its underpinning theory is important 
for practitioners and leaders alike.
Lewin’s (1951) famous quote “There is nothing so practical as a good 
theory” (p. 169) is probably overused. However, it is particularly relevant 
for scenario planners, because the practical utility of theory has not yet been 
emphasized.
This book is aimed at the evolving community of practitioner-scholars 
involved in scenario work across the globe. Chermack’s theory building, to-
gether with that of scholars such as Richard Swanson, Susan Lynham, and 
others, is based on traditional scientiﬁc inquiry (Swanson & Holton, 2005), 
naturalistic inquiry (Denzin & Lincoln 2000), as well as action research 
(Reason & Bradbury, 2001). Chermack has based this work on his own ex-
perience as a practitioner and researcher as well as what he has learned from 
the deep tradition of scenario practitioners. This book provides the emerg-
ing scenario builder with a practical and theoretical foundation on which to 
build a competent practice.
