# Foreword

xii 
FO REWO RD
For the ﬁrst time, the theoretical foundations of scenario planning 
have been put forth.
Providing the theoretical foundations for the scenario method for the 
ﬁrst time through this book is important and essential for advancing prac-
tices. An example for thinking about scenario use can be illustrated by re-
calling what happened when you last purchased a car. What did you notice 
when you drove your car out onto the streets? You probably noticed how 
many people were driving the same car! It may have appeared as though 
there were many more cars like yours than you had noticed before, when in 
fact there is only one more of the same car on the road—yours! Becoming 
aware of your selective observation (which is a skill that develops when sce-
nario work is done well) enables you as a decision maker to notice relevant 
dynamics more quickly than someone who has not explored the what-ifs.
A rigorous theory base stabilizes scenario practice and lays the founda-
tions for establishing best practice. Chermack’s work provides an excellent start 
to articulating this body of theory. Theory can be deﬁned as “a scholarly descrip-
tion of what works best and why.” This book provides that basis and will 
guide practitioners and leadership toward best practice. While it provides 
practical how-to’s, it argues strongly for the theory underpinning this prac-
tice, as well as useful metrics for measuring the impact of scenario work. 
Chermack’s writing takes the reader onto the cutting edge of strategy 
making—namely, strategy making as strategic conversation. Here you will 
get the big picture of scenario-based strategy in a framework that allows you 
great freedom to bring in your own experiences as tools. Alternatively, if you 
are new to scenario planning, a high level of detail is shared. For example, 
a calibrated instrument for measuring the quality of strategic conversation 
is provided, as well as recommended tools for measuring other aspects of 
dynamic organizations. Chermack has contributed an emphasis on perfor-
mance. It may be assumed that scenarios add value, but it is in the best 
interests of the art of scenario planning to create a tradition of documenting 
the actual results.
The discipline of scenario planning needs to establish a track record of 
its contributions. Assessing scenario work is overdue, and, like the estab-
lishment of underlying theory, doing so will stabilize scenario practice and 
boost quality. Chermack has described an elegant approach to assessment 
that provides the practitioner with many different tools for pinning down 
scenario impact. The invitation is for scholar-practitioners to add to this 


  
FO REWO RD 
xiii
body of knowledge, through their action research, reﬂection, and inquiry. A 
comprehensive, theory-based practice that emphasizes assessment will create 
a professional cadre of competent practitioners for scenario work.
We have learned from MIT’s Peter Senge and the community of prac-
titioners building learning organizations that learning faster than competi-
tors is the ultimate competitive advantage. Scenario-based strategy is in 
essence a learning and unlearning methodology. Pioneers such as the late 
Don Michael (1973) in his book Learning to Plan and Planning to Learn and 
Arie de Geus (1988) in his popular Harvard Business Review article “Plan-
ning as Learning,” ﬁrst drew attention to the fundamental role of learning 
in organizations as the basis for competitive advantage.
While developing the scenario method in Royal/Dutch Shell, Group 
Planning, Pierre Wack aimed scenario work at shifting the assumptions in 
the minds of decision makers. This process enabled them to notice emergent 
dynamics in the environment, before competitors, as they had visited and 
studied them during the scenario-building process. This capacity of aligned 
assumptions with the capability to self-correct early provided Royal/Dutch 
Shell with a signiﬁcant competitive advantage when oil prices were volatile 
in the 1970s. The assumptions on which they had based their decisions were 
inﬂuenced by the scenario development process and therefore held a wider 
view of their world.
Because scenarios can be powerful tools, they have been used in widely 
differing application areas. Herman Kahn used them to shift attention 
onto the impending dangers of a nuclear holocaust, and Royal/Dutch 
Shell leaders used scenarios for decision-making. In South Africa, sce-
narios were used to push people toward “the high road” and away from 
“the low road” of racial conﬂict and economic destruction. Engaging the 
emerging South African national leadership in a conversation about the 
future scenarios they might be confronted with resulted in avoiding popu-
list policies that compromised the future of the economy. The list of ap-
plication areas grows.
Initially, scenario practice was learned via an apprenticeship model. 
If you were fortunate enough to be a member of the Royal/Dutch Shell 
Group Planning, you could learn from the masters, such as Pierre Wack, 
Ted Newland, Arie de Geus, Kees van der Heijden, and Peter Schwartz. 
The ﬁrst public courses for learning the craft of scenario development 
emerged in the early 1990s. Early teaching was based on simulating a typical 


xiv 
FO REWO RD
scenario project providing practice and coaching in the essentials of the var-
ious phases of developing a set of scenarios.
The recently established Scenario Planning Institute at Colorado State 
University is destined to provide a home for scholar-practitioners and capac-
ity building for scenario-based strategy. It promises to become a center for 
high-quality scenario work, training of skilled scenario practitioners, and 
the dissemination of performance-based scenario planning. 
I wish you all the success with the scenarios you develop. May you grow 
with other practitioners in the ﬁeld and use this book and scenarios to make 
the world a better place.
Louis van der Merwe
Centre for Innovative Leadership 
June 2010


 xv
Preface 
THE FUTURE OFTEN ACTS like a drunken monkey stung by a bee—it is 
confused and disturbing, and its behavior is completely unpredictable. Or-
ganization leaders are struggling with an uncertain and fast-changing en-
vironment. Many are frustrated by the promise of tools for managing the 
future that come up short. A variety of terms has been used to describe the 
environment, such as whitewater, the rapids, VUCA (volatile, uncertain, com-
plex, and ambiguous), and turbulent. These terms all emphasize that business 
decision making is an activity that has reached high levels of frustration and 
confusion. Signs point to increasing complexity and uncertainty. This means 
choosing among options will become even more challenging, and carving a 
path into the future will require more diligent use of better tools.
Traditional approaches to business planning have had their day. Linear 
approaches to strategic planning worked in the 1950s and 1960s because 
the environment was relatively stable. Linear approaches only lead to disap-
pointment in today’s environment because they cannot account for uncer-
tainty—they assume that the environment of tomorrow will be the same as 
today’s. Scenario planning is a revolutionary alternative to traditional stra-
tegic planning because it recognizes the unpredictable nature of the future. 
Early scenario planners helped organization leaders see that the future was 
not going to consist of historic trends, projected forward. Instead, recogniz-
ing their problematic assumptions of a stable environment, decision makers 
found a way to think about alternatives in scenario planning. Scenario plan-
ning makes uncertainty a part of the plan. Many companies have been able 
to avoid major strategic losses due to the alternative way of thinking found 
in scenario planning.
The most valuable advantage of creating and using scenarios is the rec-
ognition that uncertainty is a basic feature of organizational environments. 
By accepting the reality of uncertainty—and making it a part of how plan-
ning happens—decision makers can widen the scope of what is assumed 
