# Preface

xvi 
P REFACE
to be true about what the future might hold. A more open view of what is 
possible allows decision makers to be more prepared and adjust with mini-
mal delay and disruption. An expanded view of the terrain is developed by 
changing perceptions among key people in organizations. A primary out-
come of scenario planning is to shift perceptions. Scenario planning is a tool 
for helping decision makers reperceive the potential future in alternative 
ways. Having these alternative ways of seeing helps decision makers avoid 
surprises and prepare for a variety of plausible futures. 
Over the last thirty years, scenario planning has been used in a variety 
of contexts and organizations (Ogilvy, 1995, 2002; Ogilvy & Schwartz, 
2000). For example, scenarios have been employed with great success in 
anticipating the oil shocks in the 1970s, potential outcomes of Hurricane 
Katrina, the events of September 11, 2001, and developing responses to 
bridge collapses and other emergencies. Certainly, each of these events had 
numerous management issues, and some were more effectively directed 
than others. In each case, scenarios were developed that told stories quite 
similar to how reality unfolded (D’arcy, O’Hanlong, Orszag, Shapiro, & 
Steinberg, 2006; Hoffman, 2002; Lynch, 2005). Although there are many 
anecdotes of scenario use, few have rigorously studied scenario planning, 
and the process has been modiﬁed and changed as needed. As a result, sce-
nario planning means different things to different people, and the reported 
approaches are incomplete. 
The purpose of this book is to provide a complete approach to sce-
nario planning that includes key pieces missing from existing literature. 
These missing pieces are the theoretical foundations of scenario planning, 
a detailed guide to using scenarios once they have been developed, and a 
structure for assessing the impact of scenario projects. The theoretical foun-
dations of scenario planning are important for understanding how scenario 
planning works. Such an understanding is critical for anyone serious about 
using scenario planning to steer an organization into the future. Precisely 
how to use scenarios is not well covered in the literature, either. This book 
provides detailed suggestions for putting scenarios into practice and using 
them to support organizational change. Finally, not a single text on the 
topic deals with how to assess the impact of scenario projects. This book 
provides a clear, concise guide to assessing the beneﬁts of scenario planning 
in organizations. These three contributions make a complete scenario plan-
ning system that is the focus of this book.


  
P REFACE 
xvii
AUDIENCES
This book is for thoughtful people trying to move their organizations for-
ward—leaders, managers, decision makers, practitioners, consultants, and 
executives. This book provides the tools for facilitating scenario planning in 
organizations and is therefore a guide. This book is also a text for university 
courses focused on organization and business planning. Although this sug-
gestion may indicate two separate audiences, I argue that they are one and 
the same. Students in business planning courses are usually also managers, 
decision makers, practitioners, consultants, or executives. Again, these are 
people struggling to move their organizations forward amid a great deal of 
chaos and uncertainty. 
STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK
This book features three parts: (1) Foundations of Scenario Planning, (2) 
Phases of the Performance-Based Scenario System, and (3) Leading Sce-
nario Projects.  
Part One is focused on the foundations of scenario planning. These 
chapters review scenario planning, its history, development, and inﬂuen-
tial ﬁgures. Performance-based scenario planning—the contribution of this 
book—is described and explained. Chapter 1 describes the development 
and evolution of scenario planning. Key deﬁnitions, outcomes, and major 
approaches are reviewed. Chapter 2 is a synthesis of the theoretical foun-
dations of scenario planning, and is a comprehensive review of the major 
content disciplines that inform the practice of scenario planning. Chapter 3 
situates scenario planning in the organization system, and Chapter 4 pres-
ents a case study. Part One provides a sense of the context in which scenario 
planning was developed as a strategic tool, as well as an understanding of 
the position of scenario planning inside organizations.
Part Two presents the phases of the scenario system. These are Chapters 
5 through 9, covering the major phases of scenario planning: (1) project 
preparation, (2) scenario exploration, (3) scenario development, (4) scenario 
implementation, and (5) project assessment. These are the chapters that be-
come a guide for using the scenario system. Detailed examples are provided, 
and the core case study that is presented in Chapter 4 is expanded further 
in each subsequent chapter. The examples illustrate key outcomes of each 
phase.


xviii 
P REFACE
Part Three presents tips for managing and leading scenario projects. 
Chapter 10 describes several pitfalls in scenario planning and how they can 
be avoided or overcome. Chapter 11 summarizes some cutting-edge neurol-
ogy research and how it relates to cognitive activity and human perceptions 
in the scenario process. Finally, Chapter 12 offers suggestions for getting 
started on your own scenario projects, followed by a summary of the book. 
MY OWN FASCINATION WITH  
SCENARIO PLANNING
What continues to fascinate me about scenario planning is its potential ap-
plication to almost any context, problem, issue, or situation, and its evolv-
ing nature. There are many nuances throughout the facilitation of scenario 
projects. As a result, there are always opportunities for improving scenario 
planning and ﬁnding ways to increase its effectiveness. For timely examples, 
Noah Raford is studying how to maintain dialogue over electronic media 
such as Twitter, Facebook, and other Web 2.0 technologies in scenario plan-
ning (see http://news.noahraford.com/?p=129). Others are working on 
how scenario planning is used in nonproﬁt organizations, communities, 
and nations. As the world’s problems evolve in their complexity, there is 
only increasing utility for scenario planning.
Scenario planning is a decision-making tool that can be used to explore 
and understand a variety of issues in a variety of organizations and issues. 
For example, scenarios can be used to consider the future of global climate 
change, global water supply, natural resources, as well as business and com-
munity decisions (such as in the Mont Fleur scenarios that explored the end 
of apartheid in South Africa). These are all issues that involve complex dy-
namics including diverse sets of stakeholders and varying knowledge bases, 
and they are likely to require interdisciplinary collaboration to address. Any 
situation in which a group of people is trying to work out how to create 
aligned movement toward a common goal can consider scenario planning a 
potentially useful tool.
Human perceptions in scenario planning are another fascinating topic 
for me. As I continue to witness strategic insights among participants in 
scenario projects, I wonder why some participants have them and some 
don’t. What are the characteristics of individuals that lend them to thinking 
deeply about problems? What are the characteristics of scenarios that help 


  
P REFACE 
xix
people open up their thinking? These questions pose challenges to what is 
known about scenario planning and how to maximize its impact. Neurosci-
ence research is getting close to helping us understand how the brain learns 
and what happens physiologically during these strategic insights, but there 
is still a long way to go. 
A lot about scenario planning remains unknown. Each scenario project 
I work on reveals more about how to do it better next time. This book in-
troduces scenario planning and its foundations, explains how to do it, and 
describes how to tell whether it produces beneﬁts. This is a book for people 
who want to improve the way their organizations prepare for the future. 
Readers are encouraged to access the latest research on scenarios from my 
website (www.thomaschermack.com) and to e-mail me reports of their ex-
periences. I have also recently established the Scenario Planning Institute at 
Colorado State University, and readers who want to get more involved can 
engage at www.scenarioplanning.colostate.edu.
Finally, scenario planning is a lot of fun! Scenario planning is a blend 
of creative and analytical activities. There’s nothing like arranging complex 
variables into stories that make sense, are rigorously researched, and can 
move an audience. Seeing the moment when new understanding comes to-
gether for a participant is exciting and rewarding. Indeed, helping people 
think in new and interesting ways has immediate impact that can be applied 
in a variety of situations. Wack (1984) may have put it best when he wrote, 
“In our times of rapid change and discontinuity, crises of perception—the 
inability to see a novel reality emerging by being locked inside obsolete as-
sumptions—have become the main cause of strategic failures” (p. 95). Sce-
nario planning is a way to avoid such crises of perception by learning how to 
see the environment differently and perhaps a little more completely. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Some people say that writing a book is an inherently personal endeavor. 
Mine has been a humbling experience. This book is the result of thou-
sands of interactions, conversations, scholarly debates, e-mails, and other 
exchanges with a variety of people over the last ten years. So, while it has 
been a personal experience, I could not have written this book by myself.
Richard A. Swanson’s name should appear as the second author of this 
book. I offered it to him, but he would not accept it. He read, critiqued, 


xx 
P REFACE
edited, moved, improved, shifted, guided, and reviewed every word on these 
pages. His contributions made the ﬁnal product much more useful than it 
would have been without his generosity. Thanks are not enough to cover 
my appreciation for his direction and guidance, but it is all I can do in this 
preface. Thank you, Dick.
Thanks to Susan A. Lynham and Louis van der Merwe for their men-
torship and guidance. Many conversations, experiences, and stories from 
Susan and Louis have been foundational to my thinking about scenario 
planning. I am grateful for the guidance and advice of two such accom-
plished professionals. Thank you, Susan and Louis.
Thanks to Evie Chenhall, Janet Colvin, Jennifer Fullerton, Maggie 
Glick, Lea Hanson, Chris Harper, Stacey Herr, Martin Kollasch, Kyle 
Stone, and Joy Wagner. Their contributions appear in some of the materials 
for the Technology Corporation case, and their comments, suggestions, and 
reviews have improved this book.
Thanks to Ziad Labban, Dave Peck, John Weatherburn, Paul Grim-
mer, Steve Beck, Joanne Provo, and Monica Danielson. Writing a book 
about scenario planning requires experience in using its tools. These indi-
viduals all provided learning opportunities and gave me access to situations 
in which to learn how to apply scenario techniques.
Thanks to Kees van der Heijden, Art Kleiner, Peter Schwartz, Napier 
Collyns, George Burt, George Wright, Paul Schoemaker, and Louis van der 
Merwe. These individuals have inﬂuenced and inspired me, and their ef-
forts have established the scenario planning discipline. Thank you.
Thanks to the late Pierre Wack and Ted Newland. These two visionary 
thinkers sought a way to think differently about the future. Their work has 
inspired many and is certainly the foundation of my own thinking about 
scenario planning in organizations. 
Finally, thank you to the outstanding team at Berrett-Koehler and, in 
particular, Steve Piersanti and Jeevan Sivasubramaniam. 
Thomas J. Chermack
December 2010  
Fort Collins, Colorado
www.thomaschermack.com
www.scenarioplanning.colostate.edu 


 1
P
A
R
T
O
N
E
FOUNDATIONS OF 
SCENARIO PLANNING
C H A P TE RS
 
1 Introduction to Performance-Based Scenario Planning
 
2  Theoretical Foundations of Scenario Planning 
 
3 The Performance-Based Scenario System 
 
4 Scenario Case Study 
IF WE LOOK BACK over the history of planning in organizations, we can 
see a fundamental illusion that is beginning to come to light. The illusion 
is that planning can function like a machine, that the steps of organiza-
tional planning need only be carried out. The basis of that illusion is an as-
sumption that things more or less stay the same. Today, our rhetoric would 
indicate we have realized our erroneous assumption, but actions indicate 
otherwise. The world is changing faster than ever, yet many planners and 
decision makers behave in opposition to what they know is true about the 
world—they seek the answer, as if there is only one correct answer and their 
job is to ﬁnd it.
A key premise of this book is that things are ever-changing. Planning 
therefore needs to take a different approach, one that assumes tomorrow’s 
world will be fundamentally different from today’s. Scenario planning ex-
plores a variety of outcomes, a variety of potential answers, and uses them 
to create awareness and readiness. The hardest part of scenario planning is 
