# PART ONE: FOUNDATIONS OF SCENARIO PLANNING

2 
F O UNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
recognizing our desperate clinging to a single answer and consciously shift-
ing toward an open future of vast potential—both positive and negative. 
This book asks its readers to take a journey. To interact with their environ-
ment. To ask difﬁcult questions that lead to more difﬁcult questions. To 
become comfortable with ambiguity. 
Part One consists of Chapters 1 through 4. These chapters provide a 
working knowledge of scenario planning. 
Chapter 1, “Introduction to Performance-Based Scenario Planning,” es-
tablishes the nature of the business environment, describes why traditional 
approaches to strategy are no longer effective, and lays out the development 
of scenario planning as a major evolution in planning under uncertain con-
ditions. This is an extensive chapter that provides a comprehensive back-
ground of the need for scenario planning, and the critical breakdowns of 
existing approaches to scenario planning. Unlike existing approaches, per-
formance-based scenario planning provokes conversations about expecta-
tions, delivers a variety of options for putting scenarios to use, and makes 
assessment a required part of the project. 
Chapter 2, “Theoretical Foundations of Performance-Based Scenario 
Planning,” presents the major disciplines that form the theoretical basis for 
scenario planning. This chapter examines the connections between scenario 
planning and learning theory, mental model theory, decision-making the-
ory, and performance improvement theory, among others. This chapter is a 
comprehensive treatment of the knowledge required for effective scenario 
planning. While not required for immediate application, this chapter re-
veals many nuances about what scenario planning is and how it works.
Chapter 3, “The Performance-Based Scenario System,” situates scenario 
planning within the organization. Drawing on system theory concepts, this 
chapter generally outlines the position of scenario planning as a subsystem 
in organizations. This chapter also presents the performance-based scenario 
system, which is the focus of Part Two.
Finally, Chapter 4, the “Scenario Case Study,” presents a short descrip-
tion of a real organization (disguised for the purposes of conﬁdentiality). 
The case illustrates the phases of the performance-based scenario system 
described throughout Part Two.


 3
Introduction to  
Performance-Based  
Scenario Planning
This book describes a method for including the realities of uncertainty in 
the planning process. Uncertainty and ambiguity are basic structural fea-
tures of today’s business environment. They can best be managed by includ-
ing them in planning activities as standard features that must be considered 
in any signiﬁcant decision. 
This book focuses on avoiding crises of perception. Scenario planning 
is a tool for surfacing assumptions so that changes can be made in how deci-
sion makers see the environment. It is also a tool for changing and improv-
ing the quality of people’s perceptions. Uncertainty is not a new problem, 
but the degree of uncertainty and the effects of unanticipated outcomes are 
unprecedented. Learning how to see a situation—complete with its uncer-
tainties—is an important ability in today’s world.
This chapter presents some of the challenges posed by today’s fast-
changing environment. A tool for dealing with those challenges has tradi-
tionally been strategic planning. Basic approaches to strategic planning are 
described; however, the rate and depth of change have increased over time 
to the point that those methods are no longer useful. Scenario planning 
emerged as an effective solution in the 1970s, and the ensuing history of 
scenario planning is discussed here. This chapter also describes a variety 
of major approaches to scenario planning, including their shortcomings. 
The fundamental problem with existing approaches to scenario planning 
is that they are not performance based. Evidence of this critical oversight is 
presented by reviewing the deﬁnitions and outcomes of scenario planning as 
1
