# 1 Introduction to Performance-Based Scenario Planning

4 
F O UNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
they are described by major scenario planning authors. The outcomes they 
promote are generally vague and unclear. Finally, this chapter introduces 
performance-based scenario planning—which is the contribution of this book.
DILEMMAS
Some authors prefer to use the term dilemma instead of problem because the 
term problem can imply that there is a single solution (Cascio, 2009; Johan-
sen, 2008). Most often, strategic decision making involves ambiguity and 
a realization that numerous solutions are possible. Each usually comes with 
its own caveats and difﬁcult elements that must be considered. Hampden-
Turner (1990) saw dilemmas as a dialectic and used the description “horns 
of the dilemma” to describe this way of observing speciﬁc dynamics in the 
environment. This way of describing complex dynamics takes a ﬁrst step 
into looking for underlying systemic structure.
This book focuses on complex problems or dilemmas with unknown so-
lutions. Therefore, its intent is to develop the understanding and expertise 
required to explore difﬁcult, ambiguous problems and consider a variety 
of solutions in a wildly unpredictable and turbulent environment. Because 
there are no clear answers to questions of strategy and uncertainty, decision 
makers are compelled to do the best they can. These types of problems are 
the most complex, most ambiguous, and often the most deeply rooted. Ex-
perienced scenario planning practitioners have demonstrated their capacity 
to detect blind spots, avoid surprises, and increase the capacity to adjust 
when needed. Most important, modern-day dilemmas take place in an en-
vironment the likes of which we have never seen before. 
THE ENVIRONMENT
Organizations operate in environmental contexts. These contexts include 
and are shaped by social, technological, economic, environmental, and po-
litical forces. The external environment has received much attention in liter-
ature from a variety of disciplines. Emery and Trist published a seminal work 
on the importance of the external environment in 1965. They suggested a 
four-step typology of the “causal texture” of the external environment: 
Step 1—a placid, randomized environment
Step 2—a placid, clustered environment


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
5
Step 3—a disturbed, reactive environment
Step 4—a turbulent ﬁeld
Few would disagree that most contemporary organizations are heavily 
steeped in turbulent ﬁelds. Turbulent ﬁelds are worlds in which dynamic 
processes create signiﬁcant variance. These turbulent ﬁelds embody a seri-
ous rise in uncertainty, and the consequences of actions therein become in-
creasingly unpredictable (Emery & Trist, 1965). These four different types 
of environments have existed over time, but today we are dealing with tur-
bulent ﬁelds beyond the original conceptualization. 
Reminding readers of Emery and Trist’s classiﬁcation, Ramirez, Selsky, 
and van der Heijden (2008) use the ideas of turbulence and complexity to 
frame their edited book Business Planning for Turbulent Times. They make 
their case that turbulence and environmental complexity are undeniable 
features of the business environment by citing research showing signiﬁcant 
increases in published material focused on turbulence and uncertainty. It 
could be argued that these descriptors are more relevant today than they 
were in 1965. 
Another description of the external environment uses the terms volatil-
ity, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity for the acronym VUCA (Johan-
sen, 2007). VUCA originated at the U.S. Army War College, which has 
since become known as VUCA University. Indeed, the elements of volatil-
ity, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity are undeniably present in the 
operating environment of any organization—the only question is the degree 
to which each element may be in play. 
These external environment elements have equal and opposite forces 
that must be understood and emphasized. For example, to overcome volatil-
ity, one must use vision; to address uncertainty, one must develop under-
standing; complexity yields to clarity; and ambiguity can be addressed with 
agility. Each of these solutions is based on an open-ended, continuous learn-
ing orientation (Johansen, 2007).
The general societal environment and organizations within it continue 
to evolve to new heights of complexity, turbulence, volatility, uncertainty, 
and ambiguity. The rate of change is not likely to slow, and most decision 
makers are simply trying to keep up. Timelines for strategic thinking are 
short. Organizations operating on a minimum of resources will ﬁnd that 
eventually something must be given up. For many, the time to think stra-
tegically is sacriﬁced. Logically, this reaction is just the opposite of what is 


6 
F O UNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
required if decision makers are to have any chance at navigating a chaotic 
environment that is challenging them.
A BRIEF EVOLUTION OF STRATEGIC PLANNING
Military planning has long concentrated on strategy principles dating 
back to early Chinese philosophers such as Sun Tzu and Japanese philoso-
phers such as Miyamoto Musashi, as well as ancient scholars like Niccolò 
Machiavelli. These early opinions about battle positioning have heavily 
inﬂuenced modern thinking about strategy (Cleary, 1988; Greene, 1998). 
Through several world and national wars, the notion of planning for stra-
tegic warfare positioning has evolved dramatically (Frentzell, Bryson, & 
Crosby, 2000). While the history of military planning is extensive and has 
evolved in many ways completely on its own, military strategy has bor-
rowed and contributed concepts from and to corporate planning over the 
years (Frentzel et al., 2000).
Alfred Sloan advanced corporate planning practices at General Motors 
in the 1930s. The concept of planning as a central organizational activity 
was further advanced by Igor Ansoff and Alfred Chandler. These strategy 
thinkers spent their time in the 1950s and 1960s trying to convince managers 
that their companies needed strategies. During this period, frequent links and 
parallels were drawn with military strategy and the events of the era. Eco-
nomic forecasting was the key tool in the strategist’s arsenal of weapons for 
blasting a path to the desired future. This approach to planning continued 
through the 1960s and generally involved three phases—namely, deﬁning 
the desired future, creating the plan (or steps to achieve the desired fu-
ture), and then implementing the plan (Micklethwait & Woolridge, 1996). 
These phases also denoted the initial division between strategy formation 
and implementation, with the formation being a process reserved for senior 
executives and the CEO, and implementation being the job of managers. 
Strategic planning became increasingly complex over the next decade with 
the introduction of several levels of planning. A notable contribution of this 
time period was the Boston Consulting Group’s Growth Share Matrix. The 
matrix was intended to indicate a general strategy to executives and manag-
ers based on templates of opportunities and strategies in any industry.
In response to the demands of World War II, planning became a top 
priority for most industries. The military also heightened its connection to 


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
7
the research coming out of the RAND Corporation that was headed by 
Herman Kahn (Kahn & Weiner, 1967; Ringland, 1998). The developments 
in Kahn’s “future-now thinking” quickly translated into military efforts to 
predict the future (Kahn & Weiner, 1967), and military planning groups 
added physicists and mathematicians specializing in modeling (Ringland, 
1998). Although much of the planning strategies used by the military were 
classiﬁed, it seems clear that the thinking going on in Stanford Research 
Institute’s Futures Group, and that of Herman Kahn himself at the Hud-
son Institute, provoked what became more widely known as simulations, or 
events that positioned participants in hypothetical situations.
Later, Forrester’s (1961) work at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology also contributed greatly to the development of simulations, and his 
expertise was sought for military operations on several occasions. One of the 
applications of Forrester’s systems dynamics modeling was to uncover counter-
intuitive possibilities in the future. The essence of the Forrester systems 
dynamics models is to develop the underlying causal relationships that drive 
a speciﬁc dynamic. Through a process of identifying and modeling the size 
of stocks and the strength of ﬂows, complex dynamics could be captured. 
These models also enabled an evidence-based argument about how speciﬁc 
dynamics might unfold in the future.
Military groups began using simulations to allow individuals to experi-
ence situations without the implications of their actions in those situations 
translating into reality (Frentzel et al., 2000). The emphasis on war games, 
the advent of computer modeling, and other technology produced by the 
military and industry in the 1950s and 1960s have led to elaborate train-
ing strategies involving virtual reality and devices such as ﬂight simulators. 
Military planning has incorporated some of the early scenario planning 
concepts, but the core point of differentiation has been a lasting focus on 
prediction in military planning (Frentzel et al., 2000).
Michael Porter’s work on business strategy took a cue from some of the 
military planning concepts and applied them to business organizations. His 
work concentrated on the idea that there can be both unique solutions to 
strategic problems and general solutions that may be examined for relevance 
to any strategic situation (Porter, 1985). Porter’s work then shifted to the 
idea of competitive advantage and that, indeed, generic paths for achieving 
competitive advantage are freely available to any corporation and its plan-
ning analysts (Porter, 1985). Porter also stressed the idea that organizations 


8 
F O UNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
should think of themselves as value chains of separate activities. Planning 
took a serious turn to focus on analysis until Japanese companies were per-
forming as anomalies in Porter’s planning framework. Lengthy, formal, and 
involved approaches to planning came under tough scrutiny by overseas 
business leaders; eventually, even the Harvard Business School explored 
more simpliﬁed approaches to strategy.
The shift in thinking toward simplicity had an effect on most organiza-
tions. Many corporations ridded themselves of their planning departments 
as the concept of reengineering took center stage in the 1990s. Strategy con-
sulting ﬁrms like McKinsey and the Boston Consulting Group shifted their 
expertise to reengineering to capture the rising demand. Planning practices 
in the 1990s and early 2000s became hybrids of everything from formalized 
annual retreats that attempted to re-create the days of planning, to simple 
strategies that could be communicated and rolled out to employees on busi-
ness cards.
In light of the negative and devastating effects of many reengineering 
efforts, some companies have attempted to revive practices of strategic 
thinking in their organizations, and some companies have managed to 
hold onto their formal planning processes. The 1990s also brought about 
a concentration on developing strategic vision. Jim Collins, in his best-
selling book Good to Great (2001), demonstrated how vision-led organiza-
tions are sustainably more proﬁtable than others. He combined this point 
with a leadership theory called Level Five leadership that he described as 
a combination of ﬁerce resolve and humility. This approach was thought 
to be the solution—somewhere between the bureaucratic formalized plan-
ning that was deemed a failure in the past and a strategy written on a 
cocktail napkin.
PHILOSOPHICAL VIEWS ON STRATEGY
There are three overarching paradigms of strategy (van der Heijden, 1997, 
2005b). These philosophies are critical to understanding the context in 
which planning takes place. Although it is tempting to “choose” one of 
these philosophies with which one ﬁnds alignment, it is important to realize 
that all three of these views are valid. To place scenario planning in context, 
we must consider the backgrounds of each of these views: rationalist, evolu-
tionary, and processual. 


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
9
THE RATIONALIST SCHOOL
The rationalist school features a tacit and underlying assumption that there 
is indeed one best solution. The job of the strategist becomes one of produc-
ing that one best solution or the closest possible thing to it. Classic ratio-
nalists include Igor Ansoff, Alfred Chandler, Frederick Taylor, and Alfred 
Sloan (Micklethwait & Woolridge, 1996). The rationalist approach to strat-
egy dictates that an elite few of the organization’s top managers convene, 
approximately once each year, and formulate a strategic plan. Mintzberg 
(1990) lists other assumptions underlying the rationalist school:
• Predictability; no interference from outside
• Clear intentions
• Implementation follows formulation
• Full understanding throughout the organization
• The belief that reasonable people will do reasonable things
The majority of practitioners and available literature on strategy is of 
the rationalist perspective (van der Heijden, 1997, 2005b). Although it is 
becoming clear that this view is limited, and as the belief in one correct 
solution wanes, the rationalist perspective is still alive and well, and fully 
embedded in many organizational planning cycles.
THE EVOLUTIONARY SCHOOL
With an emphasis on the complex nature of organizational behavior, the 
evolutionary school suggests that a winning strategy can only be articulated 
in retrospect (Mintzberg, 1990). Followers of this theory believe that sys-
tems can develop a memory of successful previous strategies. In this case, 
strategy is thought to be a “process of random experimentation and ﬁltering 
out of the unsuccessful” (van der Heijden, 1997, p. 24). Organizations with 
strong cultures and identities often have trouble seriously thinking about 
alternative futures because the company brand is so inﬂuential.
The issue with this perspective is that it is of little value when consider-
ing alternative futures. This view can sometimes reduce organization mem-
bers to characters of chance, inﬂuenced by random circumstances.
THE PROCESSUAL SCHOOL
The processual school asserts that although it is not possible to deliver opti-
mal strategies through rational thinking alone, organization members can 


10 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
instill and create processes within organizations that make it a more adap-
tive, whole system, capable of learning from its mistakes (van der Heijden, 
1997, 2000). Incorporating change management concepts to inﬂuence pro-
cesses, the processual school supports that successful evolutionary behavior 
can be analyzed and used to create alternative futures. Van der Heijden 
(1997, 2000) offers the following examples of metaphors for explaining the 
three strategic schools:
• The rationalistic paradigm suggests a machine metaphor for the 
organization.
• The evolutionary school suggests an ecology.
• The processual school suggests a living organism.
Because van der Heijden views scenarios as a tool for organizational 
learning, he advocates the integration of these three strategic perspectives. 
“Organizational learning represents a way in which we can integrate these 
three perspectives, all three playing a key role in describing reality, and 
therefore demanding consideration” (van der Heijden, 1997, p. 49). It is 
widely accepted that effective scenario building incorporates all three of these 
perspectives (Georgantzas & Acar, 1995; Ringland, 1998; Schwartz, 1991).
HISTORY OF SCENARIO PLANNING
Scenario planning is a participative approach to strategy that features di-
verse thinking and conversation. Diverse thinking and conversation are 
used to shift how the external environment is perceived (Selin, 2007; Wack, 
1984, 1985a, 1985b). The intended outcomes of scenario planning include 
individual and team learning, integrated decision making, understanding 
of how the organization can achieve its goals amid chaos, and increased 
dialogue among organization members (Chermack 2004, 2005). These 
outcomes collectively prepare individuals and organizations for a variety of 
alternative futures. When used effectively, scenario planning functions as 
an organizational “radar,” scanning the environment for signals of potential 
discontinuities.
Scenario planning ﬁrst emerged for application to businesses in a com-
pany set up for researching new forms of weapons technology in the RAND 
Corporation. Kahn (1967) of RAND pioneered a technique he titled 
“future-now thinking.” The intent of this approach was to combine detailed 


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
11
analyses with imagination and produce reports as though people might 
write them in the future. Kahn adopted the name “scenario” when Holly-
wood determined the original term outdated and switched to the label 
“screenplay.” In the mid-1960s, Kahn founded the Hudson Institute, which 
specialized in writing stories about the future to help people consider the 
“unthinkable.” He gained the most notoriety around the idea that the best 
way to prevent nuclear war was to examine the possible consequences of 
nuclear war and widely publish the results (Kahn & Weiner, 1967).
Around the same time, the Stanford Research Institute (SRI) began 
offering long-range planning for businesses that considered political, eco-
nomic, and research forces as primary drivers of business development. The 
work of organizations such as the SRI began shifting toward planning for 
massive societal changes (Ringland, 1998). When military spending in-
creased to support the Vietnam War, an interest began to grow in ﬁnding 
ways to look into the future and plan for changes in society. These changing 
views were largely a result of the societal shifts of the time.
The Hudson Institute also began to seek corporate sponsors, which ex-
posed companies such as Shell, Corning, IBM, and General Motors to this 
line of thinking. Kahn and Weiner (1967) then published The Year 2000, 
“which clearly demonstrates how one man’s thinking was driving a trend in 
corporate planning” (Ringland, 1998, p. 13). Ted Newland of Shell, one of 
the early corporate sponsors of scenario planning, encouraged Shell to start 
thinking about the future. 
The SRI “futures group” was using a variety of methods in 1968–1969 
to create scenarios for the U.S. education system reaching to the year 2000. 
Five scenarios were created; one entitled “Status Quo Extended” was se-
lected as the ofﬁcial future (ofﬁcial future is a generic term to denote a de-
sired future that has been “selected” by senior management). This scenario 
suggested that issues such as population growth, ecological destruction, and 
dissent would resolve themselves. The other scenarios were given little at-
tention once the ofﬁcial future was selected. The ofﬁcial future reached the 
sponsors, staff at the U.S. Ofﬁce of Education, at a time when President 
Richard Nixon’s administration was in full swing in 1969. The selected 
scenario was quickly deemed impossible because it was in no way compat-
ible with the values that Nixon was advocating then (Ringland, 1998). The 
ofﬁcial future provided little insight into major issues of the time, and it 
failed to do more than present a report of present trends playing out into 


12 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
the future as they were expected to. The SRI went on to do work for the 
Environmental Protection Agency, with Willis Harman, Peter Schwartz, 
Thomas Mandel, and Richard Carlson constructing the scenarios.
Earlier, Jay Forrester (1981) of MIT was using similar concepts to de-
scribe supply-and-demand chains. The use of scenario concepts in his proj-
ect was speciﬁcally aimed at stirring up public debate rather than solving a 
dilemma or issue. In other words, he used scenarios as tools for entertaining 
multiple sides of an issue and exploring the various viewpoints. The results 
were published by Meadows, Meadows, and Randers in 1992. 
Scenario planning at Shell was well on its way. Ted Newland suggested in 
1967 that thinking six years ahead was not allowing enough lead time to ef-
fectively consider future forces in their industry (Wack, 1985a). Shell began 
planning for 2000. Newland was joined by Pierre Wack, Napier Collyns, 
and others. When the Yom Kippur War broke out in 1973 and oil prices 
rose sixfold, Shell was prepared. The ability to act quickly has been credited 
as the primary reason behind the company’s lead in the oil industry over 
the years.
Shell’s success with the scenario planning process encouraged numer-
ous other organizations to begin thinking about the future in this different 
way. Because the oil shock was so devastating to views of a stable future, by 
the late 1970s the majority of the Fortune 100 corporations had adopted 
scenario planning in one form or another (Linneman & Klein, 1979, 1983; 
Ringland, 1998).
The success of scenario use was short-lived. Caused by the major re-
cession and corporate stafﬁng reductions of the 1980s, scenario use was 
on the decline. It is also speculated that planners oversimpliﬁed the use of 
scenarios, confusing the nature of storytelling with forecasting (Godet & 
Roubelat, 1996; Ringland, 1998; Sharpe, 2007; Wright, van der Heijden, 
Burt, Bradﬁeld, & Cairns, 2008). According to Kleiner (1996, 2008), the 
time had come for managers to realize that they did not have the answers to 
the future. Porter (1985) led a “back to the basics” approach suggesting that 
corporations use external forces as a platform for planning. In this time of 
evaluating how planning happens, many consulting ﬁrms began developing 
scenario planning methodologies. Huss and Honton (1987) described three 
approaches of the time: (1) intuitive logics, introduced by Pierre Wack; (2) 
trend-impact analysis, the favorite of the Futures Group; and (3) cross-
impact analysis, implemented by Battelle. Royal Dutch/Shell continued 


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
13
to have success with scenario planning through two more oil incidents in 
the 1980s, and slowly, corporations cautiously began to reintegrate the ap-
plication of scenarios in planning situations. Scenario planning has been 
adopted at a national level in some cases, and its methods have been suc-
cessful in bringing diverse groups of people together (Kahane, 1992; van 
der Merwe, 1994). For example, scenarios were used to explore the potential 
transformation of South Africa at the end of apartheid (Kahane, 1992). Sce-
narios have also been used as tools for community building and dialogue 
(van der Merwe, 1994).
PUBLICATION ACTIVITY IN FUTURES  
AND SCENARIO PLANNING
As the world has become more uncertain, the need and therefore the popu-
larity of scenario planning have increased. Scenario planning has seen con-
siderable growth as a topic of publication in academic journals since the 
mid-1990s (Ramirez et al., 2008). In addition, scenario planning as a spe-
ciﬁc strategic management tool has also seen a rise in use, according to Bain 
& Company’s annual Management Tools Survey (Ramirez et al., 2008).
DEFINITIONS OF SCENARIO PLANNING
Scenario planning is still a relatively young discipline, and many variations 
have been developed. The diversity of thought concerning scenario plan-
ning is an asset in that it has brought about a variety of interpretations 
about what scenario planning is. However, the use of a variety of methods 
mandates close and careful study to determine what is effective and what 
is not. Variety can also be found in the available deﬁnitions and stated out-
comes of scenario planning. Figure 1.1 provides a list of deﬁnitions in the 
scenario planning literature.
OUTCOMES OF SCENARIO PLANNING
Many of the deﬁnitions examined here do not explicitly state the outcome 
variables of scenario planning, which indicates that some authors may be 
unclear about the aims of their deﬁnitions. This also suggests that scenario 
planning professionals are just beginning to consider the importance of 


14 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
F I G U R E  1.1 Scenario Planning Definitions and Outcome Variables
Author
Date
Definition
Dependent Variables
Porter
1985
“An internally consistent view of what the 
future might turn out to be—not a forecast, 
but one possible future outcome” (p. 63)
A view of one 
possible future 
outcome
Schwartz
1991
“A tool for ordering one’s perceptions about 
alternative future environments in which one’s 
decisions might be played out” (p. 45)
Ordered perceptions 
about alternative 
future decision-
making 
environments
Simpson
1992
“The process of constructing alternate futures 
of a business’ external environment” (p. 10)
Constructed 
alternate futures 
Bloom and 
Menefee
1994
“A description of a possible or probable 
future” (p. 223)
A described possible 
or probable future
Collyns
1994
“An imaginative leap into the future” (p. 275)
An imagined future
Thomas
1994
“Scenario planning is inherently a learning 
process that challenges the comfortable 
conventional wisdoms of the organization by 
focusing attention on how the future may be 
different from the present” (p. 6)
Challenged 
comfortable 
conventional 
wisdoms about the 
future
Schoemaker
1995
“A disciplined methodology for imagining 
possible futures in which organizational 
decisions may be played out” (p. 25)
Imagined possible 
decision-making 
futures
Van der 
Heijden
1997
(1) External scenarios are “internally 
consistent and challenging descriptions of 
possible futures”; (2) an internal scenario is  
“a causal line of argument, linking an action 
option with a goal,” or “one path through a 
person’s cognitive map” (p. 5)
Descriptions of 
possible futures; 
explicit cognitive 
maps
De Geus
1997
“Tools for foresight-discussions and 
documents whose purpose is not a prediction 
or a plan, but a change in the mind-set of the 
people who use them” (p. 46)
Changed mind-sets
Ringland
1998
 “That part of strategic planning which relates 
to the tools and technologies for managing 
the uncertainties of the future” (p. 83)
Managed future 
uncertainties 
Bawden
1998
“Scenario planning is one of a number of 
foresighting techniques used in the strategic 
development of organizations, which exploit 
the remarkable capacity of humans to both 
imagine and to learn from what is imagined”
Human imagination 
and learning made 
explicit
(continued)


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
15
deﬁning what they do and explicitly stating what they intend to achieve by 
doing it.
Figure 1.1 shows that almost half of the available deﬁnitions date from 
1997 to the present. Such a surge of publication activity related to scenario 
planning suggests a recent increased use of this strategic tool. Of interest 
is that the ﬁrst available deﬁnition of scenario planning is offered in 1985, 
yet the process has been applied in practice since the 1960s. The increase in 
recent scholarly literature around scenario planning suggests that the pro-
cess is developing and maturing with the help of professionals concerned 
F I G U R E  1.1 Scenario Planning Definitions and Outcome Variables (continued)
Author
Date
Definition
Dependent Variables
Fahey and 
Randall
1998
“Scenarios are descriptive narratives of 
plausible alternative projections of a specific 
part of the future” (p. 6)
Plausible alternative 
projections of a 
specific part of the 
future
Alexander 
and Serfass
1998
“Scenario planning is an effective futuring 
tool that enables planners to examine what is 
likely and what is unlikely to happen, 
knowing well that unlikely elements in an 
organization are those that can determine its 
relative success” (p. 35)
Examined future 
likelihoods and 
unlikelihoods
Tucker
1999
“Creating stories of equally plausible futures 
and planning as though any one could move 
forward” (p. 70)
Stories of equally 
plausible futures that 
inform planning
Kahane
1999
“A series of imaginative but plausible and 
well-focused stories of the future” (p. 511)
Plausible stories of 
the future
Kloss
1999
“Scenarios are literally stories about the  
future that are plausible and based on  
analysis of the interaction of a number of 
environmental variables” (p. 73)
Informed, plausible 
stories about the 
future
Wilson
2000
“Scenarios are a management tool used to 
improve the quality of executive decision 
making and help executives make better, 
more resilient strategic decisions” (p. 24)
Improved executive 
strategic decision 
making
Godet
2001
“A scenario is simply a means to represent  
a future reality in order to shed light on 
current action in view of possible and 
desirable futures” (p. 63)
A represented future 
reality


16 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
that scenario planning does not suffer the same inadequacies and criticisms 
that have been leveled against general strategic planning processes (Fahey & 
Randall, 1998; Mintzberg, 1994). 
The dependent variables of Figure 1.1 can be synthesized into four ma-
jor outcome categories of scenario planning:
• changed thinking, 
• informed narratives or stories about possible or plausible futures, 
• improved decision making about the future, and 
• enhanced human and organization learning and imagination. 
Of signiﬁcant note is that none of the available deﬁnitions of scenario 
planning includes an outcome of performance improvement. Due to the 
depth of expertise and high costs usually associated with the practice of 
scenario planning, it is surprising that performance improvement has not 
been an explicit outcome of this strategic process. Some may simply assume 
that scenario planning will result in performance improvement. However, 
although such an assumption may be logical or known based on practical 
experience, there is little evidence that the practice of scenario planning 
actually results in performance improvement. Building this evidence can 
only help bolster the practice of scenario planning as a strategic activity. The 
lack of focus on performance improvement may be attributed to general 
difﬁculties in measuring the effects of scenario planning projects. Perfor-
mance must be included and developed as a critical outcome expectation of 
scenario planning and as part of the deﬁnition of scenario planning. One 
approach to linking scenario planning to performance is described in detail 
in Chapter 9.
In an attempt to construct an integrative deﬁnition of scenario plan-
ning, it is important to include the outcomes stated in the available deﬁni-
tions highlighted in the next chapter in Figure 2.4. The following deﬁnition 
of performance-based scenario planning synthesizes the outcomes in Figure 
2.4 and adds the performance orientation:
Performance-based scenario planning is a discipline of building a set of 
internally consistent and imagined futures in which decisions about the 
future can be played out, for the purpose of changing thinking, im-
proving decision making, fostering human and organization learning 
and improving performance.


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
17
The performance orientation changes the game for scenario planning. 
An expectation of performance improvement forces a conversation about 
outcomes, without diminishing the capacity to wonder about the future. 
Having a performance improvement perspective means that there will be 
a way of determining whether the scenario project produced any beneﬁts 
for the organization. So far, this question has been infrequently asked, and 
answers are often vague and unrelated to the initial reason for engaging in 
scenario work. It is important to clarify that a performance orientation does 
not preclude additional unexpected outcomes from emerging. They often 
do, and they can be very powerful. The performance orientation deﬁnes 
targets, identiﬁes areas of potential leverage, and works to shift the think-
ing inside the organization. Logically, a performance orientation mandates 
assessment of the project. As noted, Chapter 9 lays out a comprehensive ap-
proach to assessing scenario projects. 
LEARNING
Scenario planning most certainly involves learning. Arie de Geus (1988, 
1997) wrote the foundational treatise “Planning as Learning” and later a 
book titled The Living Company in which he compiled decades of research 
showing that the companies in history with the greatest longevity were 
those that framed planning as a learning process and used tools like sce-
nario planning to keep learning about how to maintain ﬁt in their environ-
ments. Most likely, de Geus’s views were inﬂuenced by Pierre Wack and 
Ted Newland at Royal Dutch/Shell as Wack was famous for stressing, “Our 
real target was the microcosms of our decision-makers: unless we inﬂuenced 
the mental image, the picture of reality of critical decision-makers, our sce-
narios would be like water on stone” (Wack, 1984, p. 58). 
Don Michael’s (1995) view of strategic learning (detailed in his book 
Learning to Plan and Planning to Learn) is quite suitable to the purpose of 
scenario planning: 
It is imperative to free the idea of learning from its conventional seman-
tic baggage. Learning used to mean (and for the most part still means) 
learning the answer—a static shift from one condition of knowledge 
and/or know-how to another. This deﬁnition of learning leads to organiza-
tional and stakeholder rigidiﬁcation. But in the current and anticipated 


18 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
conditions of dramatic unpredictability, learning must be a continuous 
process involving:
1. Learning to re-perceive or re-interpret a situation,
2. Learning how to apply that re-perception to the formulation of pol-
icy and the speciﬁcation of action (including evaluation of policy 
and action),
3. Learning how to implement those policies and intended actions, 
and
4. Learning how to keep these three earlier requirements alive and 
open to continual revision. (p. 46)
APPROACHES TO SCENARIO PLANNING
There are varying approaches to scenario planning. Each has developed out 
of various schools of thought, and it is important to review the alterna-
tives here before proceeding. The major approaches to scenario planning 
reviewed here include these:
• Royal Dutch/Shell and Global Business Network
• The French School
• The Futures Group
• Wilson and Ralston
• Lindgren and Bandhold
• Reference scenarios
• Decision Strategies International
• Procedural scenarios
• Industry scenarios
• Soft creative methods
These approaches to scenario planning have all developed in practice. No 
doubt, the different techniques have evolved under slightly different circum-
stances, and each contributes to the body of scenario planning knowledge. 
ROYAL DUTCH/SHELL AND GLOBAL BUSINESS NETWORK
The overarching view utilized by the Global Business Network (GBN) was 
born out of Shell’s application of scenario technology. GBN was founded by 
Peter Schwartz, Jay Ogilvy, Stewart Brand, Lawrence Wilkinson, and Na-
pier Collyns. Pierre Wack ﬁrst began applying Herman Kahn’s concepts in 


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
19
the 1960s and reﬁned them into a proprietary framework stressing the big 
picture ﬁrst, then zooming in on the details. Wack believed that to begin 
with the details was to miss some key dimensions of the building process. 
Schwartz took over as the head of Shell’s scenario division and eventually 
established a company, GBN, with a handful of other colleagues offering 
a variety of strategic business services worldwide. Schwartz (1991) gives a 
conceptual overview of the scenario building process in The Art of the Long 
View. At the center of GBN was a network of “remarkable people” (or RPs, 
as they became known) ﬁrst used by Wack to challenge and shift the think-
ing and assumptions of decision makers within Royal Dutch/Shell.
Step 1 is to identify a focal issue or decision. Scenarios are built around 
a central issue outward toward the external environment. Scenarios based 
ﬁrst on external environmental issues such as high versus low growth may 
fail to capture company-speciﬁc information that makes a difference in how 
the organization will deal with such issues (Schwartz, 1991). Accepted best 
practice is to engage the decision makers ﬁrst in a conversation to uncover 
their current assumptions and concerns about the external environment and 
how they might unfold.
The second step is to identify and study the key forces in the local en-
vironment, which is logical after selecting a key focusing issue or question. 
Step 2 examines the factors that inﬂuence the success or failure of the deci-
sion or issue identiﬁed in the ﬁrst step. Scenarios must be developed to shed 
light on the issue or question. Analyses of the internal environment and 
strengths and weaknesses are commonly conducted in this step as a way of 
identifying the internal dynamics that help or hinder strategy development.
Once the key factors have been identiﬁed, the third step involves brain-
storming the driving forces in the macroenvironment. These include po-
litical, economic, technological, environmental, and social forces. Driving 
forces may also be considered the forces behind the key factors in Step 2 
(Schwartz, 1991). 
Step 4 consists of ranking the key factors (from Step 2) and the driving 
forces (from Step 3) on the basis of two criteria: (1) the degree of importance 
for success and (2) the degree of uncertainty surrounding the forces themselves. 
“Scenarios cannot differ over predetermined elements because predetermined 
elements are bound to be the same in all scenarios” (Schwartz, 1991, p. 167).
The results of the ranking exercise are to separate the important few 
from the unimportant many forces that are at play in the environment. 


20 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
One method of developing distinctive story lines is to identify two axes along 
which the eventual scenarios will differ. Another method is to simply develop 
stories that can be contained within the key driving forces at work. Again, 
these stories are intended to shed light on the focusing issue or question. Step 
5, then, is the development and selection of the general scenario logics ac-
cording to the matrix resulting from the ranking exercise. The logic of a 
given scenario will be characterized by its location in the matrix. “It is more like 
playing with a set of issues until you have reshaped and regrouped them in such 
a way that a logic emerges and a story can be told” (Schwartz, 1991, p. 172). 
Step 6, ﬂeshing out the scenarios, returns to Steps 2 and 3. Each key 
factor and driving force is given attention and manipulated within the ma-
trix developed in the scenario logics of step 4. Plausibility should be con-
stantly checked from this point, for example, “if two scenarios differ over 
protectionist or non-protectionist policies, it makes intuitive sense to put a 
high inﬂation rate with the protectionist scenario and a low inﬂation rate 
with the non-protectionist scenario” (Schwartz, 1991, p. 178).
Step 7 examines the implications of the developed scenarios. The initial 
issue or decision is “wind tunneled” through the scenarios. It is important 
to examine the robustness of each scenario through questions such as these: 
What will we do if this is the reality? Does the decision look good across 
only one or two scenarios? What vulnerabilities have been revealed? Does a 
speciﬁc scenario require a high-risk strategy? 
The ﬁnal step is to select “leading indicators” that will signify that 
actual events may be unfolding according to a developed scenario. Once 
the scenarios have been developed, it’s worth spending some time selecting 
identiﬁers that will assist planners in monitoring the course of unfolding 
events and how they might impact the organization. 
THE FRENCH SCHOOL
When he took over the Department of Future Studies with SEMA group 
in 1974, Michel Godet began conducting scenario planning. His methodol-
ogy was extended at the Conservatoire Nationale des Arts et Métiers with 
the support of several sponsors. Godet’s work is based on the use of “per-
spective,” advocated by the French philosopher Gaston Berger (Ringland, 
1998). Godet’s approach began by dividing scenarios into two categories: 
situational scenarios, which describe future situations; and development 
scenarios, which describe a sequence of events that lead to a future situation 


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
21
(Georgantzas & Acar, 1995). Godet also identiﬁes three types of scenarios 
that may exist in either category: trend-based scenarios follow what is most 
likely, contrasted scenarios explore purposefully extreme themes, and ho-
rizon/normative scenarios examine the feasibility of a desirable future by 
working backward from the future to the present. Godet’s approach has 
evolved and now includes several computer-based tools that help highlight 
interdependencies between interrelated variables that may be ignored by 
more simple procedures (Ringland, 1998).
The French School approach is a structural analysis that is divided into 
three phases. Phase 1 begins the process by studying internal and external 
variables to create a system of interrelated elements. This approach focuses 
on a detailed and quantiﬁed study of the elements and compilation of data 
into a database. A cross-impact matrix is constructed to study the inﬂuence 
of each variable on the others.
Phase 2 scans the range of possibilities and reduces uncertainty through 
the identiﬁcation of key variables and strategies. Future possibilities are 
listed through a set of hypotheses that may point to a trend in the data. 
Advanced software reduces uncertainty by estimating the subjective prob-
abilities of different combinations of the variables.
Phase 3 is the development of the scenarios themselves. Scenarios are 
restricted to sets of hypotheses; and once the data have been compiled and 
analyzed, scenarios are built describing the route from the current situation 
to the future vision (Godet & Roubelat, 1996).
THE FUTURES GROUP
The Futures Group was a Connecticut-based consulting ﬁrm that devel-
oped a trend-impact analysis approach to scenario planning. This approach 
requires three phases: preparation, development, and reporting and utiliz-
ing (Ringland, 1998).
The preparation phase includes deﬁning a focus, issue, or decision, and 
then charting the driving forces. Several questions should be answered in this 
phase: What possible future developments need to be probed? What variables 
need to be looked at for assistance in decision making? What forces and 
developments have the greatest ability to shape future characteristics of the 
organization?
The development phase includes constructing a scenario space, select-
ing alternative worlds to be detailed, and preparing scenario-contingent 


22 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
forecasts. Selecting a scenario space means examining the various future 
states that the drivers could produce. Illogical and nonplausible situations 
should be rejected. Selecting alternative worlds to be detailed involves lim-
iting the number of future stories, since it would be impossible to explore 
every option. The key is to select plausible futures that will challenge cur-
rent thinking. Preparing scenario-contingent forecasts is listing trends and 
events that would be required for the plausible future to exist. Depending 
on the assumptions of each alternative world, indicators are selected that 
might “signal” the direction in which the organization is heading.
Reporting and utilizing scenarios are covered brieﬂy and quickly with-
out enough detail for a user to apply. However, the futures group is one of a 
few approaches to even mention these activities.
DECISION STRATEGIES INTERNATIONAL
Paul Schoemaker has outlined an approach to scenario planning with many 
similarities to the methodology used by the Global Business Network, as 
might be expected since Schoemaker spent a bit of time in the planning 
department at Royal Dutch/Shell.
Step 1 deﬁnes the scope of the project. This includes setting a time 
frame, examining the past to identify rates of change, and roughly estimat-
ing the expected future rate of change. “The unstructured concerns and 
anxieties of managers are good places to start” (Schoemaker, 1995, p. 28).
Step 2 is to identify the key stakeholders. Obvious stakeholders include 
customers, suppliers, competitors, employees, shareholders, and government 
workers. The identiﬁcation of the roles that each of these groups might play, 
how the roles have changed in past years, and the distribution of power ac-
cording to the issue are all factors to be examined in this step.
Basic trends are identiﬁed in Step 3. The political, economic, societal, 
technological, legal, environmental, and industry trends are analyzed in 
connection with the issues from the ﬁrst step. “Brieﬂy explain the trend, 
including how and why it exerts its inﬂuence on your organization” (Schoe-
maker, 1995, p. 28). Trends can be charted in inﬂuence diagrams or matri-
ces to help make relationships explicit. Examining trends can be useful, but 
remember that trends are put together by experts, and scenarios ask, “What 
if the experts are wrong?”
Step 4 considers the key uncertainties. What events, whose outcomes are 
uncertain, will signiﬁcantly affect the issues of concern to the organization? 


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
23
A further examination of political, societal, economic, environmental, legal, 
and industry forces emphasizing the most uncertain elements “will reveal 
the most turbulent areas” (Schoemaker, 1995, p. 28). Relationships among 
the uncertainties should also be identiﬁed. For example, “if one economic 
uncertainty is ‘level of unemployment’ and the other ‘level of inﬂation,’ 
then the combination of full employment and zero inﬂation may be ruled 
out as impossible” (Schoemaker, 1995, p. 29). 
Once the trends and uncertainties have been identiﬁed, initial scenario 
construction can begin. A simple approach is to identify extreme worlds 
by putting all positive elements in one and all negatives in another. Alter-
natively, various strings of outcomes can be clustered around high or low 
continuity, ﬁnding themes, or the degree of uncertainty. The most common 
technique is to cross the top two uncertainties of a given issue.
Step 6 checks the initial scenarios for plausibility. Schoemaker identi-
ﬁed three tests for internal consistency, dealing with the trends, the outcome 
combinations, and the reactions of major stakeholders. The trends must be 
compatible with the chosen time frame; scenarios must combine outcomes 
that ﬁt (e.g., full employment and zero inﬂation do not ﬁt); and the major 
stakeholders must not be placed in situations they do not like but have the 
power to change (e.g., OPEC will not tolerate low oil prices for very long) 
(Schoemaker, 1995).
From the process of developing initial scenarios and checking them for 
plausibility, general themes should emerge. Step 7 is to develop learning sce-
narios by manipulating plausible outcomes. The trends may be the same in 
each scenario, but the outcomes, once considered plausible, can be shifted 
and given more or less weight in different scenarios. These scenarios “are 
tools for research and study rather than for decision-making” (Schoemaker, 
1995, p. 29).
After constructing learning scenarios, areas that require further research 
are identiﬁed. These are commonly referred to as “blind spots” (Georgantzas 
& Acar, 1995; Schoemaker, 1995; Schwartz, 1991; van der Heijden, 1997). 
Companies can use these scenarios to study other industries—for example, 
to consider plausible outcomes of advances in multimedia and then study 
current research in that area.
Step 9 reexamines the internal consistencies after completing additional 
research. Quantitative models are commonly developed in this stage. For 
example, Royal Dutch/Shell has developed a model that keeps oil prices, 


24 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
inﬂation, gross national product (GNP), growth, taxes, and interest rates in 
plausible balances. Formal models can be used to ﬂesh out possible second-
ary effects and also to serve as another check for plausibility. The models 
can also help to quantify the consequences of various scenarios.
Step 10 is to determine the scenarios to be used for decisions. Trends 
will have arisen that may or may not affect or address the real issues of 
the organization. Schoemaker identiﬁed four criteria for effective decision 
scenarios. First, scenarios must have relevance to be effective but also chal-
lenge current thinking in the organization. Second, scenarios must be in-
ternally consistent and plausible. Third, scenarios must be archetypal, or 
they should describe fundamentally different futures, rather than simply 
vary on one theme. Finally, each scenario should describe an eventual state 
of equilibrium. “It does an organization little good to prepare for a plausible 
future that will be quite short” (Schoemaker, 1995, p. 32), yet many argue 
that planning cycles are getting shorter.
WILSON AND RALSTON
Perhaps the most detailed procedural account of scenario planning yet pub-
lished, Ian Wilson and Bill Ralston based their 2006 book The Scenario-
Planning Handbook on the Shell method but have made modiﬁcations 
throughout. Based on over ﬁfteen years of experience as senior consultants 
at SRI, Ralston and Wilson have put their experience and knowledge to the 
test. This is a modern method that lays out an all-encompassing how-to 
manual for corporate executives. Wilson and Ralston’s approach is detailed 
in Figure 1.2.
LINDGREN AND BANDHOLD
In 2003, Mats Lindgren and Hans Bandhold published Scenario Planning: 
The Link between Future and Strategy. The book details their interpretation 
of the scenario planning process in a model they call the TAIDA method. 
TAIDA stands for tracking, analyzing, imaging, deciding, and acting; and 
the method is a simpliﬁed version of the intuitive logics approach to sce-
nario planning, which is based on the work led by Pierre Wack and Ted 
Newland at Shell. The book is essentially a practitioner’s shorthand manual 
for exploring the basic concepts of scenario planning, with a useful appen-
dix of methods that can be used in a variety of places throughout the sce-
nario planning process. 


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
25
REFERENCE SCENARIOS
Ackoff (1970, 1978, 1981) identiﬁed four modes for organizations to cope 
with external change. Inactivity involves ignoring changes and continuing 
with business as usual. Reactivity waits for changes to happen and then de-
veloping a response. Preactivity involves trying to predict changes and estab-
lishing organizational position before they happen, and proactivity calls for 
interactive involvement with the external environment in order to “create 
the future for stakeholders” (Georgantzas & Acar, 1995, p. 364). Within 
these four modes, Ackoff uses the term reference scenario to mean the refer-
ence projections a ﬁrm would have if no signiﬁcant changes occurred in the 
environment. Ackoff’s call for strategic turnaround starts with an idealized 
scenario of a desirable future. To be effective, such a scenario should be in-
teresting and provocative—it should show what to change to evade the mess 
of problems in an organization’s given strategic situation.
F I G U R E  1.2  Steps in Developing and Using Scenarios (summarized from 
Wilson and Ralston, 2006)
Step 1.  Develop the case for  
scenarios.
Step 2.  Gain executive under- 
standing, support,  
and participation
Step 3. Deﬁne the decision focus.
Step 4. Design the process.
Step 5. Select the facilitator.
Step 6. Form the scenario team.
Step 7.  Gather available data,  
views, and projections.
Step 8.  Identify and assess key  
decision factors.
Step 9.  Identify the critical forces  
and drivers.
Step 10.  Conduct focused research on 
key issues, forces, and drivers.
Step 11.  Assess the importance and un- 
certainty of forces and drivers.
Step 12.  Identify key “axes of 
uncertainty.”
Step 13.  Select scenario logics to cover 
the “envelope of uncertainty.”
Step 14.  Write the story lines for the 
scenarios.
Step 15.  Rehearse the future with 
scenarios.
Step 16.  Get to the decision 
recommendations.
Step 17.  Identify signposts to monitor.
Step 18.  Communicate the results to 
the organization.


26 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
PROCEDURAL SCENARIOS
Amara and Lipinski (1983) and Chandler and Cokle (1982) use very similar 
methods for constructing scenarios but prepare separate forecasts for each 
principal factor or variable. Chandler and Cokle (1982) “also deﬁne scenar-
ios as the coherent pictures of different possible events in the environment 
whose effect on a set of businesses should be tested through linked models” 
(p. 132). The manipulation of macroeconomic models is a mechanism by 
which vague assumptions are translated into projected values of wholesale 
prices, gross domestic product (GDP), or consumer expenditures for an 
entire industry. The models used in these approaches are computer driven 
(Georgantzas & Acar, 1995) and provide a good example of procedural sce-
narios incorporating intuitive and quantitative techniques. 
INDUSTRY SCENARIOS
Porter (1985) asserted that scenarios traditionally used in strategic planning 
have stressed macroeconomic and macropolitical issues. He further claimed 
that in competitive strategy the proper unit of analysis is the industry and 
deﬁnes industry scenarios as the primary, internally consistent views of how 
the world will look in the future (Porter, 1985). The essence of this view 
holds that there are two loops in building these industry scenarios. In this 
approach, industry analysis is within the larger unit of building industry 
scenarios. Industry-focused scenarios can help an organization in analyzing 
particular aspects of a business (Porter, 1985), but some have argued that 
beginning with a narrow focus will miss key dimensions (Wack, 1985a). 
SOFT CREATIVE METHODS APPROACH
Brauers and Weber (1988) formulated an approach with three basic phases: 
analysis, descriptions of the future states, and synthesis. The analysis phase 
brings organization members to a common understanding of the problem. 
Based on this consensus, the problem can be further bounded and struc-
tured. Brauers and Weber recommend the use of soft creative methods for 
the analysis phase, including morphological analysis, brainstorming, brain-
writing, and the Delphi technique. The second phase examines the possible 
development paths of the variables chosen in the analysis. The synthesis 
phase considers interdependencies among the variable factors to build dif-
ferent situations for the future states. These eventual scenarios are then fed 


  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  P E R F O R M A N C E-B A S E D  S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G 
27
through a complex computer program for linear programming and cluster 
analysis (Brauers & Weber, 1988).
WHERE EXISTING SCENARIO PLANNING 
METHODS HAVE FALLEN SHORT
This chapter has reviewed the major approaches to scenario planning avail-
able in published works. These approaches all have similarities, while some 
deviate largely from Pierre Wack’s original method. Important similarities 
among the existing methods include a technique for identifying items that 
could potentially shift the organization and its focus, a structured way to 
think about the future that introduces multiple possibilities, and a craft of 
innovation and creativity. However, the existing methods lack some critical 
elements as well. Important pieces that are not found in available work on 
scenario planning are
• a presentation of the theoretical foundations, 
• a clear guide for how to use scenarios, and 
• a detailed guide for assessing the impact of scenario projects.
CONCLUSION
This book uses the scenario planning approach developed by Pierre Wack 
and Ted Newland at Royal Dutch/Shell and later documented by Peter 
Schwartz, Kees van der Heijden, and others at the Global Business Network 
as its key foundation. This approach features a qualitative, “intuitive logic” 
way of reasoning that separates organizational issues into things that are 
predetermined and things that are truly uncertain. When truly uncertain 
forces have been isolated, energy can be spent trying to understand those 
forces and how they might play out across a range of possible futures. Wack’s 
primary goal was to shift the thinking and the mental models of managers 
inside Shell, and thus also the assumptions that framed their decision mak-
ing. This book features an interpretation and extension of Wack’s work with 
a focus on performance. The foundation set by Wack and Newland at Shell 
is solid and effective, yet it also provides opportunities for improvement.
No doubt there are myriad other scenario planning processes based on 
combining various elements of those described in this chapter. The point is 


28 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
simply that scenario planning has been developed in practice by numerous 
practitioners in various kinds of organizations and parts of the world. Clari-
fying the approach selected for any scenario project is helpful in eliminating 
confusion about the philosophies, steps, and theoretical basis on which the 
project will be built. 
The unique contributions of this book are that it presents the underly-
ing theory and research that explain scenario planning as an effective orga-
nizational intervention, detailed descriptions of what to do with scenarios 
once they have been developed, and ways to assess the performance contri-
bution of a scenario project. None of the existing texts on scenario planning 
provide a theoretical explanation of how scenario planning works, and none 
provide detailed accounts of inquiry into what the outcomes of the experi-
ence really are. Nor do any cover a variety of methods for putting scenarios 
to use and checking to see that they were effective. As a result, this book 
targets reﬂective practitioners, executives, and academics who want to work 
through complex, ambiguous problems while at the same time understand 
how their actions affect the issues they are facing.
This chapter has described the state of the external environment that 
calls for scenarios and summarized the evolution of planning in organiza-
tions. A comprehensive list of scenario planning deﬁnitions has been pro-
vided, as well as the major approaches to scenario planning. The argument 
for performance-based scenario planning has been made. 


 29
Theoretical Foundations  
of Scenario Planning
Theory is a dirty word in some managerial quarters. That is rather 
curious, because all of us, managers especially, can no more get along 
without theories than libraries can get along without catalogs—and for 
the same reason: theories help us make sense of incoming information.
—mintzberg (2005, p. 249)
Pierre Wack told a story about approaching a cliff. He talked about how 
the odds of falling over the cliff increase as you walk closer to the edge. He 
asserted that the best way to avoid falling over a cliff is to help people see 
the characteristics of the cliff in advance. He helped them see how tall and 
steep the cliff is. He taught them to calculate how many different kinds of 
cliffs there are, how to recognize when a cliff is coming, and which kind it 
is. Pierre’s story was an attempt to explain what a cliff was and how the cliff 
worked to prevent people from falling over it.
Most strategy and scenario planning texts provide readers with processes. 
Follow the steps and “do” your corporate strategy, they claim. Instead, this 
book provides a framework with numerous tools. The framework is designed 
to give the user a domain in which to exercise judgment. The tools described 
are aimed at helping decision makers decide their own speciﬁc course of ac-
tion within the framework. Some have referred to scenario planning as more art 
than science. This chapter argues that scenario planning should remain artful, 
but it also must evolve into a theoretically and scientiﬁcally grounded art. 
The purpose of this chapter is to present the theoretical foundations 
of scenario planning. These principles are critical to understanding what 
2
