# 2 Theoretical Foundations of Scenario Planning

30 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
scenario planning is and how it works (Torraco, 1997). The performance-
based scenario system described in this book (presented in detail in Part 
Two) is based on the theories and theoretical principles outlined in this 
chapter. The tools and techniques provided in this book have been applied 
in the practice of scenario planning and have demonstrated results. 
THE UTILITY OF THEORY IN  
SCENARIO PLANNING
A discussion of theory in the context of scenario planning is important 
for several reasons. First, the topic of theory is generally absent from the 
scenario literature. The only scenario planning text that includes a discus-
sion of theory is Scenario-Driven Planning by Georgantzas and Acar (1995). 
However, their treatment of theory is limited to less than two pages. There 
are valuable insights to be gained from relevant theory domains that aid 
in understanding the practice of scenario planning. Scenario planning has 
grown as a practitioner’s art and has received little academic attention. A 
responsible analysis of any phenomenon should cover the theoretical basis 
that makes the logic clear for understanding why practitioners take the ac-
tions that they do. This can work in reverse as well: insights gained from 
practicing a phenomenon can lead to a great depth of knowledge. To date, 
the majority of what is understood about scenario planning is based on 
knowledge gleaned from years of practice. This chapter suggests that much 
can be learned by studying related theory disciplines with an ultimate goal 
of integrating knowledge from practice and knowledge from close and care-
ful study of the phenomenon.
A theory of scenario planning (Chermack, 2004, 2005) is used as an 
organizer for this chapter. The disciplines reviewed here provide support for 
this theory, as each discipline is reviewed in its relationship and contribu-
tion to the organizing theory.
THE SIX DOMAINS OF SCENARIO  
PLANNING THEORY
The proposed building blocks of a theory of scenario planning are based 
on extensive literature review (Chermack, Lynham, & Ruona, 2001; Geor-
gantzas & Acar, 1995; Schwartz, 1991; van der Heijden, 1997; Wack 1985a, 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
31
1985b). The literature around scenario planning puts forth six key domains 
from which theories can be drawn to establish a theoretical foundation of 
scenario planning (see Figure 2.1): 
• Dialogue, conversation quality, and engagement
• Learning
• Mental models
• Decision making
• Leadership
• Organization performance and change
These theoretical domains appear over and over again in the scenario litera-
ture. However, none of the current writings synthesize these elements in a 
comprehensive and clear manner. The use of these domains is intended to 
describe what the phenomenon of scenario planning is and how it works 
(Torraco, 1997). To be clear, this chapter presents a view of how scenario 
planning accomplishes its stated outcomes. 
Scenario
Planning
Organization
Performance
and Change
Dialogue,
Conversation
Quality and
Engagement
Learning
Decision
Making
Mental
Models
Leadership
Support
F I G U R E  2.1  A Theory of Scenario Planning


32 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
DIALOGUE, CONVERSATION QUALITY, AND ENGAGEMENT
Dialogue, conversation quality, and engagement are critical to the scenario 
planning process because they are the mechanism by which scenario plan-
ning happens. They are means for shifting the thinking inside the organiza-
tion. As the chapters on scenario development and scenario implementation 
will describe in detail, dialogue, conversation, and engagement are the fun-
damental means for sharing mental models and developing a shared under-
standing of the organization and its external environment. 
The speciﬁc work that informs how scenario planning involves dia-
logue, conversation, and engagement includes Rogers’s communication the-
ory; Nunnally, Miller, and Wackman’s communication work; Argyris and 
Schon’s work on advocacy and inquiry; and Lewin’s theorizing on group 
dynamics. Each of these is described later, and the link to scenario planning 
is illustrated.
Definition
Dialogue and conversation are deﬁned, respectively, as “conversation be-
tween two or more persons” (Oxford English Dictionary, 2001, p. 213) and 
“informal interchange of thoughts, information, etc., by spoken words; oral 
communication between persons; talk; colloquy” (Oxford English Diction-
ary, 2001, p. 187). Bohm’s work (1989) sheds additional light on the subject:
I give a meaning to the word “dialogue” that is somewhat different 
from what is commonly used. The derivations of words often help to 
suggest a deeper meaning. “Dialogue” comes from the Greek word dia-
logos. Logos means “the word” or in our case we would think of the 
“meaning of the word.” And dia means “through”—it doesn’t mean 
“two.” A dialogue can be among any number of people, not just two. 
The picture or image that this derivation suggests is a stream of meaning 
ﬂowing among and through us and between us. This will make possible 
a ﬂow of meaning in the whole group, out of which may emerge some 
new understanding. (p. 6)
Contrast this with the word “discussion,” which has the same root as 
“percussion” and “concussion.” It really means to break things up. It 
emphasizes the idea of analysis, where there may be many points of 
view, and where everybody is presenting a different one—analyzing 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
33
and breaking up. That obviously has value, but it is limited, and it will 
not get us very far beyond various points of view. (p. 7)
Description
Dialogue, conversation quality, and engagement, are the means by which 
ideas, experiences, knowledge, beliefs, assumptions, and tendencies are 
shared throughout the scenario project. Scenarios deal with the two 
worlds—the world of facts and data, and the world of ideas and percep-
tions (Wack, 1985a). Dialogue, conversation quality, and engagement allow 
people to experiment with ideas and perceptions by taking facts and data 
into imagined or speculative worlds.
Rogers’s Work on Communication Theory
Carl Rogers spent much of his career focusing on individual experience. He 
eventually posited three conditions for health in relating to other people: 
(1) congruence, (2) unconditional positive regard, and (3) empathetic un-
derstanding. By congruence, Rogers (1957) means “a match or ﬁt between 
an individual’s feelings and outer display” (p. 97). Otherwise, individuals 
match their thoughts and actions. Unconditional positive regard is simply 
an attitude that one consciously tries to hold toward people; Rogers found 
that he experienced deeper levels of trust by doing so (Rogers, 1961; Rogers 
& Skinner, 1956). In addition, Rogers found that when people were re-
minded to use this attitude, they developed deeper levels of trust with 
others. Rogers’s third condition, empathetic understanding, is focused on 
the beneﬁts of listening. A willingness to explore what it is like to be an-
other person is a skill that Rogers found to bring him closer to those he 
was trying to help (Rogers, 1961). Others have also drawn attention to 
empathy as a key skill for knowledge workers in the twenty-ﬁrst century 
(Pink, 2006). 
Miller, Nunnally, and Wackman’s Work  
on Communication in Families
Nunnally developed a large body of work in the area of communication 
in interpersonal relationships and among family members. These works 
feature the self-awareness wheel as their primary contribution to under-
standing communication, dialogue, and conversation (Miller, 1971; Miller, 
Nunnally, & Wackman, 1976, 1979; Miller, Wackman, & Nunnally, 1982; 


34 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Nunnally, 1971; Nunnally & Moy, 1989). The self-awareness wheel helps 
individuals recognize their own sensations, feelings, intentions, and actions 
in the context of how they relate to others (Miller et al., 1979). The wheel 
can be used as an individual or a 360-degree assessment tool, when appro-
priate levels of trust have been established 
While not speciﬁcally intended for use in scenario projects, the utility 
of the self-awareness wheel is to gain a better understanding of how any in-
dividual functions in relation to others. Linking to Rogers’s work, the goal 
is to develop congruence among these ﬁve aspects around a given issue.
Argyris and Schon’s Work on Advocacy and Inquiry
Argyris and Schon (1996) are well-known for their scholarship in balanc-
ing advocacy and inquiry in organizations. This balance is a combination 
of pushing for individual goals and respecting that humans are part of the 
larger organizational whole. They are most recognized for differentiating 
Model I and Model II learning loops. Argyris and Schon (1996) have pro-
posed that a signiﬁcant perceptual shift takes place when individuals begin 
to pay attention to their behavior and evaluate it as they would another 
person’s behavior. The ability to reﬂect on one’s own behavior is a uniquely 
human trait and constitutes Model II learning. When individuals focus on 
learning how they and others learn, a shift has taken place in terms of how 
that individual engages in learning activities. Emphasizing common goals, 
shared interests, and group efforts to achieve them, these understandings 
contribute to the idea of reﬂecting on the learning process. This reﬂection 
is known as Model II learning or double loop learning, and it contributes to 
the theoretical underpinnings of scenario planning.
Lewin’s Work on Group Dynamics
Lewin’s (1951) famous T-groups were a breakthrough in understanding 
communication among group members. The key contribution arose when 
researchers allowed a participant to be present for an analysis of her ob-
served behavior earlier in the day (Lewin, 1948). The participant happened 
to be a woman, and she argued directly with Lewin about his inaccurate 
interpretations of things she did (Lewin, 1951). Conversation ensued, and 
a new method of intergroup skills training was born. Certainly, group 
interactions are critical in scenario planning. The importance of sharing 
insights, perceptions, and ideas will become clear as this book unfolds.


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
35
Linking These Theories to Scenario Planning
These theories explaining what communication is and how it works are 
relevant in scenario planning because they describe the mode for creat-
ing shared understandings of the internal and external environments. The 
engagement of multiple stakeholders participating in an ongoing dialogue 
about organization strategy has been called the strategic conversation. 
Van der Heijden (1997) found that strategy is best approached as a con-
versation, rather than an activity bound as an annual event. The strategic 
conversation integrates all of the theories just described into a way of think-
ing and acting about the future. He believed both formal and informal as-
pects of strategy work together to form the strategic conversation. In other 
words, the informal, water-cooler conversations can be as important and 
inﬂuential as the strategy meetings that take place behind closed doors. The 
strategic conversation can take on a life of its own as organization members 
become involved in how their individual efforts link to the goals of the 
organization as a whole. The strategic conversation requires the kind of re-
ﬂective thinking and respectful, empathetic communication that has been 
described earlier. 
LEARNING THEORY
Learning theory is a critical foundational theory domain for scenario plan-
ning. In fact, several prominent scenario planning experts have described 
planning as essentially a learning activity (de Geus, 1988; Schwartz, 1991; 
van der Heijden, 1997), basing their argument on the logic that learning is a key 
driver of organizational performance (Swanson & Holton, 2001). The useful-
ness of learning in scenario planning is in the assumption that a core goal of any 
planning system is to reperceive (Wack, 1984) the organization and how it ﬁts 
with the environment (Godet, 1987, 2000; Wilson, 1992, 2000). 
Definition
Learning has been deﬁned in many ways, and there are many speciﬁc philo-
sophical orientations toward the learning process. Learning will be gener-
ally taken here to mean “the process of gaining knowledge or skill” (Oxford 
English Dictionary, 2001, p. 247). In the context of scenario planning, 
learning is deﬁned speciﬁcally as a process of gaining knowledge about the 
internal and external environments and how they interact.


36 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Description
The learning literature has identiﬁed ﬁve relevant meta-theories of learn-
ing—namely, behaviorism, cognitivism, humanism, social learning, and 
constructivism (Swanson & Holton, 2001). Each of these perspectives is dis-
tinctive in its purity, but it should be noted that in practice “they are usually 
adapted and blended to accomplish speciﬁc objectives” (Swanson & Holton, 
2001, p. 150). Scenario planning seems to most effectively incorporate a 
blend of social learning, cognitivsm, and constructivism (Chermack & van 
der Merwe, 2003; de Geus, 1997; van der Heijden, 1997). Thus, principles 
of social, cognitive, and constructivist learning are presented here to explain 
how learning takes place in scenario building and planning systems.
The Individual Construction of Meaning
Piaget (1977) used examples of biological adaptation to illustrate his con-
cepts of assimilation, accommodation, and equilibration. His early fascina-
tion centered on the variability of a snail’s adaptation to the surrounding 
environments. Piaget adopted the view that new behavior changes the genes 
of the organism and thus results in new structures. He eventually arrived 
at the belief that behavior and the organism must be viewed as a whole 
system, and the goal is to achieve a balance between organism and envi-
ronment. Piaget deﬁned this concept of equilibration as a dynamic process 
of self-regulated behavior that balances two intrinsic polar behaviors, as-
similation and accommodation. Equilibration is thought of as a dynamic 
process that is reached only occasionally as the learner is constantly taking 
in new information (assimilation), analyzing, and sometimes changing it 
(accommodation). 
Similarly, De Geus viewed the organization as a living entity. “Like all 
organisms, the living company exists primarily for its own survival and im-
provement: to fulﬁll its own potential and to become as great as it can be” 
(1997, p. 4). Because a critical aim of scenario planning is to reveal assump-
tions and mental models, individuals interpret and construct meaning, or, 
more precisely, reinterpret and reconstruct meaning once their assumptions 
have been revealed to them. This is a classic example of Piaget’s assimila-
tion and accommodation. De Geus (1997) stated, “Corporations also have 
a form of learning by accommodation. . . . [L]ong-lived companies ﬁnd 
ways to respond to signals of change in the business environment, by chang-
ing their own internal structure” (p. 18). Truly great companies have the 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
37
foresight and innovation required to change the environment and set the 
pace for the industry.
Participants in scenario planning are continuously constructing indi-
vidual meaning. They are taking in new information (assimilation) and 
modifying or changing it (accommodation) in attempts to reach equilibra-
tion (understanding). As information is processed, the mental models of 
the individuals change and result in new structures for understanding the 
business environment and how to negotiate within it. 
There are two major aspects of scenario planning where construction 
of individual meaning takes place (Wack, 1985b). One is the analysis and 
research that takes place during the development of scenario stories. The 
step of ranking the driving forces in the environment in terms of relative 
impact on the future provokes a conversation during which the individuals 
developing the scenarios adjust their assumptions. These adjustments are a 
result of the assimilation and accommodation process. The second example 
of construction of meaning is when scenario thinking/assumptions are em-
bedded in organizational decision making (Wack, 1985a). 
Social Influences on Construction
Vygotsky (1962/1986) introduced three social inﬂuence concepts relevant 
in scenario planning: (1) the zone of proximal development, (2) the idea of 
“scaffolding,” and (3) the cultural-historical approach. 
The Zone of Proximal Development. The zone of proximal development 
is deﬁned as “the distance between his actual development, determined with 
the help of independently solved tasks, and the level of the potential devel-
opment of the [learner], determined with the help of tasks solved by the 
[learner] under the guidance of [experts] and in cooperation with his more 
intelligent partners” (Vygotsky, 1962/1986, p. 84). Through intelligence 
testing, Vygotsky determined that there were “optimal” periods within which 
to teach speciﬁc subjects. In brief, the zone of proximal development is the 
optimal period for almost any learning, that space between what we can 
accomplish on our own and what we can accomplish with some guidance.
Scenario planning targets the zone of proximal development, and the 
zone is often perceived as the learning capacity of the client. Vygotsky 
(1978) referred to the zone of proximal development as “the place where the 
client’s newly acquired, but as yet disorganized concepts ‘meet’ the logic of 
experienced reasoning” (p. 24). The meeting of experienced reasoning with 


38 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
the disorganized concepts of the client often produces a novel insight into 
the strategic positioning of the organization (van der Heijden, 2005a)—
what has been referred to as an “aha” experience (van der Merwe, 2002).
The Idea of Scaffolding. Vygotsky proposed that as learners struggle 
to formulate concepts, an inner dialogue occurs, and he argued that the most 
effective learning occurs when the learner and the expert jointly construct 
meaning (of an experience) through dialogue, thus drawing the learner out 
to the potential level of performance (Fosnot, 1996). 
The notion of dialogue as a critical component of learning has been ex-
tended and developed into the concept of scaffolding. The famous example 
of this involves studying children and their mothers engaged in dialogues 
(Fosnot, 1996). Mothers often imitate babies, varying the response only 
slightly, but enough to provide an example for the child to imitate (Fos-
not, 1996). The mother and child are thought of as constructing meaning 
together, the mother providing the “scaffolding,” or the upper limit of the 
zone of proximal development. 
The role of the scenario planning facilitator is to provide “scaffolding” 
for members of the organization. “Scaffolds need to be built around the 
existing knowledge structure to allow the client to relate new experiences 
to existing knowledge” (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 56). Thus, the planners provide 
the necessary scaffolding to draw up clients’ thought-processing abilities to 
the limit of their zones of proximal development. Schwartz (1991) also em-
phasized the notion of drawing managers out to “think the unthinkable.” 
Changing the mental models of managers is a necessary condition for suc-
cessful scenario planning, and the scenario planner must be capable of pro-
viding the scaffolding required to do so.
Kolb’s Learning Loop
Van der Heijden (1997, 2005a) supported a view of learning based on the 
idea of continuous development rather than seeking one right answer. In 
so doing, he incorporated Kolb and Rubin’s (1991) learning loop into his 
description of effective strategic thinking. Kolb and Rubin’s learning loop 
integrates many of the ideas advocated by Piaget and others. The learn-
ing loop features (1) concrete experience, (2) leading to observation and 
reﬂection, (3) fueling the formation of abstract concepts, (4) which are then 
tested in new situations. These elements are involved in a continuous, rein-
forcing feedback loop.


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
39
The learning loop integrates several distinguishing features, according 
to van der Heijden (1997, 2005b). Among these features are the notions 
that learning is a process that originates with a given experience. Reﬂection 
on the experience brings an awareness resulting in new patterns and trends 
that were not previously perceived. Mental models are shifted through an 
internal process of incorporating new patterns into old models, new actions 
are taken to test the implications of our new models, and all of this results 
in yet another new experience (Kolb & Rubin, 1991). “The learning loop 
describes the strategy development process in its integration of experience, 
sense-making, and action into one holistic phenomenon” (Kolb & Rubin, 
1991, p. 34). 
The Social Construction of Reality
The basic tenet of the social construction of reality is implied by the term: 
that reality is constructed by society, and it is constructed socially. The ba-
sic proposition set forth by the concept of the sociology of knowledge is 
from Marx (1953)—that human consciousness is determined by social be-
ing. Social constructionism also draws from Marx’s concepts of ideology 
and false consciousness. The task for Berger and Luckmann (1966) was to 
address how the sociology of knowledge is concerned with what passes for 
knowledge in society. Berger and Luckmann approached reality from two 
perspectives, objective and subjective.
Objective Reality. In an examination of society as an objective real-
ity, Berger and Luckmann (1966) posited that being fully human requires 
social interaction: “the process of becoming human takes place in an inter-
relationship with an environment . . . the developing human interrelates 
with a given natural environment and also with a speciﬁc cultural and social 
environment” (p. 21). Thus, social order is a product of human interactions 
and cannot be “derived from the laws of nature.”
One critical element in formulating a social order is the natural ten-
dency for humans to habitualize (Berger & Luckmann, 1966). As human 
beings, we tend to form habits to reduce options so that we don’t have to 
think about every thing we do. Institutionalization occurs when there is a 
reciprocation of habitualization. For example, family roles are established 
through the reciprocal habitualization that a person will do X (Berger & 
Luckmann, 1966). Institutionalization implies control, and these recip-
rocal actions are built up “in the course of a shared history” (Berger & 


40 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Luckmann, 1966). Institutions become integrated through socially ar-
ticulated and shared meanings established between individuals (Berger & 
Luckmann, 1966). The shared meanings that are stored in the human con-
sciousness are referred to as sedimented. Intersedimentation takes place when 
several individuals share common experiences that are incorporated into the 
system of society. 
The concept of legitimation refers to the “second-order objectivation 
of meaning,” or the building from simple to complex social structures. Le-
gitimation explains and justiﬁes the institutional order by ascribing valid-
ity to meanings and designating normative characteristics to the meanings 
themselves (Berger & Luckmann, 1966). Legtimation occurs at several lev-
els—incipient (signaled by the presence of linguistics), theoretical proposi-
tions (folk sayings, proverbs), explicit theories (the purpose of a department 
within an organization), and symbols (theories that connect the theoretical 
propositions, such as the purpose of the entire organization).
Subjective Reality. The individual is not a born member of society; 
rather, the individual is inducted into society by a process. This process is 
called internalization. Berger and Luckmann (1966) referred to primary so-
cialization as “the ﬁrst socialization an individual undergoes in childhood, 
through which he becomes a member of society” (p. 37). Through this pro-
cess, objective reality becomes available and then is internalized into the 
individual consciousness. Secondary socialization is the internalization of in-
stitutional subworlds. “Secondary socialization requires the acquisition of 
role-speciﬁc knowledge” (Berger & Luckmann, 1966, p. 41)and refers to 
the process by which an individual is inducted into a further subgroup of a 
society. A ritual often signiﬁes this process. 
The maintenance of subjective reality is held within primary and sec-
ondary socialization. Socialization is an ongoing event; and although there 
are different levels of socialization, primary socialization is inevitable. 
Through each successive secondary socialization, reality moves further and 
further from the consciousness of the individual, as the meaning of reality 
is placed further into the social domain. “The most important vehicle of 
reality-maintenance is conversation” (Berger & Luckmann, 1966, p. 67). 
Speech takes place as the background of a world as it is taken for granted. It 
is through communicative interaction with other members of a society that 
meaning is derived and negotiated within a social structure. 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
41
DECISION-MAKING THEORY
Decision-making theory is critical to understanding what scenario planning 
is and how it works because decisions are often one of the outcomes of sce-
nario planning (Wright & Goodwin, 2009).
Definition
A decision is “an act or process of reaching a conclusion or making up one’s 
mind” (Oxford English Dictionary, 2001, p. 267).
Description
In the business context, decisions must have considerable forethought; how-
ever, one of the pitfalls of strategic planning has been in its inﬂexibility, 
causing planned decisions that do not account for changes within the envi-
ronment (Mintzberg, 1994; Morecroft, 1983). Brehmer (1990, 1992) speci-
ﬁed that decisions in applied contexts differ from the traditional cognitive 
decisions studied by psychologists in the following four ways:
• There is a series of decisions rather than a single decision.
• The decisions are interdependent—current decisions constrain future 
decisions.
• The environment changes autonomously and as a result of decisions 
made.
• It is insufﬁcient for the correct decisions to be made in the correct 
order—they must also be made at a precise moment in real time. 
Decision theory also clariﬁes four barriers to effective decision making:
• Bounded rationality
• Exogenous variables
• Knowledge stickiness and friction
• Policies and decision premises
Bounded Rationality. Bounded rationality is a main source of deci-
sion failure. Put simply, the mental abilities of human decision makers have 
limitations. Morecroft (1983) outlined the notion of bounded rationality 
as developed by the Carnegie School of Thought, a pioneering research 
foundation for decision making. Bounded rationality is deﬁned as “the severe 
limitations on the information processing and computing abilities of human 


42 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
decision makers” (1983, p. 133). According to Simon (1957), bounded 
rationality is a property of decision making that inhibits objectively ratio-
nal decisions because (1) all feasible alternative courses of action cannot be 
generated by the individual, (2) individuals cannot collect and process the 
information that would predict the consequences of an alternative, and (3) 
individuals cannot accurately assess the values of anticipated consequences. 
This simply means that humans cannot effectively cope with all of the 
available information and alternatives in making decisions. Furthermore, 
bounded rationality predicts that three main features will be present in hu-
man organizations:
• Factored decision making—decision making will be broken down into 
subdecisions for subgroups.
• Partial and certain information—research shows that ultimately, 
“decisions are made on relatively few sources of information that are 
readily available and low in uncertainty” (Morecroft, 1985, p. 133).
• Rules of thumb—rules of thumb, or heuristics, are built up over time 
that, through experience, make the gathering of information 
unnecessary.
Scenarios and Bounded Rationality. Scenarios appear to have util-
ity in reducing bounded rationality. Scenarios communicate a vast amount 
of information in a story. Research has shown that scenarios are effective 
because they are highly memorable, conversational, and narrative in na-
ture (Dorner, 1996; Martin, 1982; Morecroft, 1985). “Cognitive science 
research tells us that memorable information is more likely to be acted 
upon than is information that remains unconscious and not retrieved from 
memory. Therefore, anything that tends to make information more memo-
rable will have a greater likelihood of assuming signiﬁcance” (Martin, 1982, 
p. 103). This point explains the importance placed on the selection of ti-
tles for developed scenarios. Schwartz (1991) stated that “if the names are 
vivid and memorable, the scenarios will have a much better chance of mak-
ing their way into the decision-making and decision-implementing process 
across the company” (p. 248). Important information about the future is 
often too imprecise and complex for display in tables and graphs (Brehmer, 
1992), and thus, stories have several advantages: (1) they provoke an open-
ness to multiple perspectives, (2) they aid in coping with complexity, and (3) 
they give meaning to events (Martin, 1982). 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
43
In an experiment testing consumer preferences, Stanford MBA students 
were asked to assess the persuasiveness of an advertisement from a Califor-
nia winery (Martin, 1982). Given a choice among numerical data from the 
winery’s sales division, a policy statement about the winery’s strict quality 
standards, and a story about the founder of the winery and his procedures 
for delivering a quality product, results showed an overwhelming preference 
for the story precisely because it contained the same, or very similar, data 
in a form that was easy to remember. Although the use of stories in this 
context varies slightly from the use of scenarios in a planning context, some 
parallels can be drawn. For example, this research demonstrates the avail-
ability heuristic that suggests an event made more available from memory 
will be more easily acted upon. In this sense, events made more available 
from memory through inclusion in a scenario can reduce the time required 
for managers or individuals to react to signals in the environment.
Scenarios might be helpful to decision makers in coping with their own 
bounded rationality by providing a vast amount of information in a detailed 
story exhibiting features that are easily remembered. Although scenarios 
can be helpful in addressing this core cause of decision failure, it should 
be acknowledged that bounded rationality, as a feature of being human, 
can never be completely solved. What is further required is a series of case 
studies, or research regarding the speciﬁc impact of scenario planning on 
individual habits of information gathering, synthesis, and decision making.
Exogenous and Endogenous Variables
Exogenous variables are variables that are external to the process under con-
sideration and that come from outside the system. Decision makers have 
tended to think of all variables as exogenous, mainly because these variables 
are easily recognizable as external and are not often hidden by being coupled 
to the system. Forrester (1961, 1994) was among the ﬁrst to take issue with 
a tendency for models (and therefore decisions) to incorporate only exog-
enous or external variables. Forrester argued that some variables are actually 
coupled to the system and are embedded in the information feedback loops. 
These were referred to as endogenous variables. Endogenous variables are 
internal variables that are often produced in the feedback within the system, 
and they then become coupled with the inputs to the system. Policies often 
have endogenous variables associated with them. Decisions that consider 
only exogenous variables, therefore, overlook critical inputs to the system, 


44 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
and decisions made without considering such variables have consequences 
that become magniﬁed because of their association with feedback processes.
Scenarios and Exogenous Variables
There is a variety of scenario planning methods, and each of them differ 
slightly. However, all approaches advocate a systems view of the organiza-
tion. The important link between scenario planning and systems theory 
has been outlined in detail (Senge, 1990, 1994), the implications of which 
include the examination of internal and external elements of the system. 
Van der Heijden’s (1997, 2005b) approach to scenario planning begins with 
mapping the organization as a system in what he terms the business idea. 
Furthermore, he suggested the use of interviews, internal analysis, teams, and 
remarkable people as methods for avoiding a focus solely on external forces. 
Senge (1990, 1994) has developed systems archetypes that are essen-
tially common combinations of feedback loops that inhibit systems. The 
use of these archetypes as diagnosis tools forces scenario planners to con-
sider system outputs that become system inputs—exogenous variables that 
become endogenous variables, addressing Forrester’s (1961, 1994) concern. 
The systems view incorporates the consideration of internal and external 
variables and focuses on how they interact to change the system.
Stickiness and Friction
Stickiness and friction are characteristics of information and knowledge, 
respectively. Generally, the term stickiness refers to a characteristic of infor-
mation and is associated with the cost of its transfer. Friction is a character-
istic of knowledge that dampens motions in a social setting. Socialization 
itself causes a friction that catches minor errors before they can be magniﬁed 
through feedback processes to a point at which they can cause a catastro-
phe. Stickiness, or the cost associated with transferring information, causes 
a problem for decision makers when expertise is needed. With automation 
threatening to replace humans in many work and decision-related settings 
(thus eliminating social friction), a concern has emerged about potential 
increases in minor errors that lead to drastic decision failures.
Stickiness. Organizations are increasingly relying on knowledge-in-
tensive processes managed and operated by interdisciplinary teams (Ford & 
Sterman, 1998). Stickiness in this context refers to the difﬁculty in informa-
tion transfer between or among people. Von Hippel (1998) deﬁned stickiness 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
45
as “the incremental expenditure required to transfer that unit of information 
to a speciﬁed locus in a form useable by a given information seeker. When 
this cost is low, information stickiness is low; when it is high, stickiness is 
high” (p. 629). Discussions of stickiness have included the simple recogni-
tion that a cost is associated with the transfer of information, as well as the 
distinction between stickiness and friction (Rochlin, 1998). That informa-
tion becomes “sticky” is important in decision making because often exper-
tise or knowledge of a speciﬁc domain is required for decisions. For example, 
McKinsey consultants who are on call and will ﬂy anywhere in the world to 
make their expertise available are a result of the fact that knowledge becomes 
incredibly sticky and an example that the costs associated with transferring 
the information or knowledge can become quite high (Rochlin, 1998). 
Friction. In social and political realms, “morals, ethics, knowledge, his-
tory and memory may all serve as the sources of ‘social friction,’ by which 
gross motions are damped, impetuous ones slowed and historical ones ab-
sorbed. Such friction is essential to prevent the persistence and multiplica-
tion of social and political movements once their driving force is removed” 
(Von Hippel, 1998, p. 132). Friction can be described as the nuances and 
double-checks that occur in the social interactions among humans in work 
processes, such as those found in the operation of an aircraft carrier ﬂight 
deck (Rochlin, LaPorte, & Roberts, 1987). Such double-checks only exist 
as a result of social interaction among multiple individuals. Authors such as 
Roch lin (1998), Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1998), and Von Hippel (1998) argued 
that as technology threatens to replace many such human processes, deci-
sion failure will increase because the loss of friction will allow many errors to 
continue that were previously prevented during the course of normal social 
interaction among the humans involved in the process. For example, friction 
would not exist if computer automation were to take over the launching and 
landing procedures aboard aircraft carriers (Rochlin et al., 1987).
Frictionless knowledge (Rochlin, 1998) would initially be more efﬁ-
cient, but it would also allow for a drastic increase in decision errors. Drey-
fus and Dreyfus (1998) argued that their own model of novice, advanced 
beginner, competence, proﬁciency, and expertise provides the experiential 
elements required to reach the potential of true human intelligence. Fric-
tionless knowledge would be knowledge that develops a “set of rules and 
principles that produce expert-quality performance in an entire domain of 
skill” (Rochlin, 1998, p. 284). In this view, frictionless knowledge could 


46 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
be easily transferred to or among countless individuals, and it would not be 
sticky as there would be no cost in transferring the knowledge. However, 
Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1998) argued for the necessity of the experience and 
thus the buildup of friction required for true expertise. 
Scenarios, Stickiness, and Friction. Scenario planning is posited as a 
tool for reducing the cost of information transfer and increasing the friction 
among knowledgeable organizational decision makers. By reducing the cost 
of information transfer, in theory, decisions can be made more effectively 
and efﬁciently. By increasing the friction among decision makers, small er-
rors may be caught and perspectives can be added that might have otherwise 
been overlooked.
Scenarios and scenario planning seem to address information stickiness 
by providing a forum for multiple individuals to develop similar expertise 
about the potentials of the organization. The strategic conversation (van der 
Heijden, 1997, 2005b; Wright & Goodwin, 1999) is one example of how 
developing a shared mental model, and thus a shared language, can reduce 
the stickiness of information within the organization. The process of creat-
ing a shared mental model facilitates the process of information transfer. 
By requiring frequent and intense interaction, scenario planning reduces 
the cost of information transfer, making information less sticky (Wright & 
Goodwin, 1999). 
Scenarios might further help decision makers take full advantage of the 
necessary friction required for expertise in organizational decision making. 
The process of scenario building requires intense interaction for extended 
periods of time among managers and executives involved in the decision-
making process. Through this interaction and friction, important forces in 
the environment are often detected that would not have been if a single 
decision maker were attempting to construct scenarios individually. 
In scenario planning, van der Heijden (1997, 2005b) makes use of “re-
markable people” (Wack, 1985b) to provide even more friction. Remark-
able people are “those experts who are not in regular contact with the 
client organization, such that an original contribution can be expected” 
(Wack, 1984, p. 67). Remarkable people often provide insight, prevent 
groupthink, help with information gathering and processing, increase the 
friction and interaction among planning team members, and expand the 
rationality of the group. 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
47
Policies and Decision Premises. In this context, a policy is deﬁned 
as “a formal statement giving the relationship between information inputs 
and resulting decision ﬂows” (Forrester, 1994, p. 58). Policies, decision prem-
ises, and decision rules are all terms that describe this same phenomenon. 
“Informal policy results from habit, conformity, social pressures, ingrained 
concepts of goals, awareness of power centers within the organization, and 
personal interest” (Forrester, 1994, p. 58). Decision policies, premises, or 
rules can be thought of as the guiding norms within the context that help 
individuals make decisions when they are uncertain about the information 
at hand or the “best practices” that offer guidance. It is argued here that such 
policies, premises, or rules are developed according to the mental model in 
use as mental models house our biases, values, and beliefs about how the 
world works. Thus, to change or expand the decision rules, one must change 
the mental model.
Scenarios and Decision Premises. Decision premises and policies are 
linked to mental models. Because premises and policies “result from habit, 
conformity, social pressures, ingrained concepts of goals, awareness of power 
centers within the organization, and personal interest” (Forrester, 1994, 
p. 58), they can be changed through the alteration of mental models. The 
key idea with regard to decision premises is that through the expansion of 
mental models, guiding decision policies are revised to accommodate a more 
adequate view of the world and the system within which the individual is 
operating. 
Scenarios may also provide a venue for testing new decision policies by 
manipulating forces and potential responses to them in an experimental 
environment. Decision makers can play out the possibilities of given deci-
sion policies and examine their long-term effects. Furthermore, by creating 
shared mental models and a strategic conversation within the organization, 
policies undergo constant scrutiny, modiﬁcation, and adjustment to assure 
that they provide decision makers with an informed perspective when con-
fronted with an uncertain situation.
MENTAL MODEL THEORY (COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY)
Mental model theory is important in scenario planning because of its abil-
ity to help understand individual learning and perceptions in organizations 
(Morecroft, 1990, 1992; Senge, 1990; Wack, 1984; Weick, 1979, 1990). 


48 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Mental models encompass people’s assumptions, values, experiences, beliefs, 
and ideas. Reperceiving the organization and its environment is thought to 
occur through learning that forces participants to reexamine their assump-
tions and alter their mental models (Wack, 1984, 1985a). While it may 
sound simple, shifting mental models is a delicate process. Mental models 
are not like computer hard drives that, once full or faulty, can simply be 
removed or replaced. 
Definition
Doyle and Ford (1999) deﬁned a mental model as “a relatively enduring and 
accessible, but limited, internal conceptual representation of an external sys-
tem (historical, existing or projected) whose structure is analogous to the 
perceived structure of that system” (p. 414).
Description
Originally introduced by Forrester (1961), mental models are the lenses 
through which we see the world. They incorporate our experiences, learn-
ing, biases, values, and beliefs about how the world works. These models 
embody how individuals see the world, how individuals know and think 
about the world, and how individuals act in the world. Furthermore, as a 
result of action and learning, mental models are altered, leading to differ-
ent ways of seeing the world, knowing and thinking about the world, and, 
again, acting in the world. Mental models are constantly being adjusted, 
reﬁned, and re-created in dynamic and ever-changing environments. Men-
tal models both affect experience (active) and are affected by experience 
(passive). Having brieﬂy established the active and passive roles of mental 
models in the construction and interpretation of reality, we can now turn to 
a detailed attempt at deﬁning them.
Clarifying Mental Models. Different streams of decision-making lit-
erature refer to mental models, representations and cognitive maps. Each of 
these terms warrants clariﬁcation and description.
Mental Models. Allee (1997) stated that mental models are “important 
cornerstones for building knowledge and deﬁning some of the cognitive 
processes that support change and learning” (p. 11). Senge (1990) deﬁned 
mental models as “deeply ingrained assumptions, generalizations, or even 
pictures or images that inﬂuence how we understand the world and how we 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
49
take action. Very often, we are not consciously aware of our mental models 
or the effects they have on our behavior” (p. 8). 
Doyle and Ford (1998) explored the concept of mental models in de-
tail: “Mental models are thus the stock in trade of research and practice in 
system dynamics: they are the ‘product’ that modelers take from students 
and clients, disassemble, and reconﬁgure, add to, subtract from, and return 
with value added” (p. 4). After providing a comprehensive literature review 
of the terms from both the systems dynamics and cognitive psychological 
perspectives, and some discussion in Systems Dynamics Review, Doyle and 
Ford eventually offered the following revised deﬁnition of mental models: 
“A mental model of a dynamic system is a relatively enduring and acces-
sible, but limited, internal conceptual representation of an external system 
(historical, existing or projected) whose structure is analogous to the per-
ceived structure of that system” (p. 414). Weick (1979, 1985, 1990) has ar-
gued consistently that mental models guide, shape, and provide the basis on 
which individuals interpret and make sense of organizational life.
Representations. Cognitive psychology literature focuses on mental rep-
resentations. Representations refer to the way humans build “stand-ins” for 
reality in their minds. “One of the functions of representations is to stand 
in for things outside the system; once a system has representations, it can 
operate on them and not need the world” (Bechtel, 1998, p. 297). The con-
cept of representation can best be introduced by considering that the mind 
and brain are involved in “coordinating the behavior of an organism in its 
environment” (Bechtel, 1998, p. 297). To coordinate such behavior, an or-
ganism must create some working understanding of its environment, and it 
does so by constructing a mental representation, or model of that environ-
ment (Johnson-Laird, 1983). 
Freyd (1987) suggested that mental representations are also dynamic: 
“perceivers are sensitive to implicit dynamic information even when they 
are not able to observe real-time changes” (p. 427). The signiﬁcance of 
Freyd’s research is its suggestion that the human mind is itself anticipatory 
in its perception and construction of events. That is, the human mind natu-
rally anticipates possible future sequences of actions based on immediate 
perceptions.
Cognitive Maps. Cognitive maps apply metaphor to the notion of men-
tal models. Weick (1990) recounted a favorite story about a Hungarian mili-
tary unit on maneuvers in the Swiss Alps:


50 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Their young lieutenant sent a reconnaissance unit out into the icy wil-
derness just as it began to snow. It snowed for two days, and the unit 
did not return. The lieutenant feared that he had dispatched his people 
to their deaths, but the third day the unit came back. Where had they 
been? How had they made their way? Yes, they said, we considered our-
selves lost and waited for the end, but then one of us found a map in 
his pocket. That calmed us down. We pitched camp, lasted out the 
snowstorm, and then with the map we found our bearings. And here we 
are. The lieutenant took a good look at the map, and discovered, to his 
astonishment, that it was a map of the Pyrenees. (This story was related 
by the Nobel Laureate Albert Szent-Gyorgi and was turned into a poem 
by Holub, 1977.) (p. 4) 
Thus, the “cognitive map” refers to the way the mind creates a map 
or model of a territory, or situation that it uses as a reference point. Weick 
(1990) further explained that any map, no matter that it may be an incor-
rect one, provides some reference point and increases the likelihood that 
an individual or group will be able to navigate unfamiliar terrain. Weick’s 
point seems to be that it is better to operate with a set of assumptions that 
may be incomplete than to forego operating completely.
Global Business Network, a consulting ﬁrm with specialization in sce-
nario planning and strategic thinking, suggests a story of map use to illus-
trate its point—a point that differs a bit from that of Weick (1990):
This map [Figure 2.2] was made in 1701 by a Dutch mapmaker named 
Herman Moll, working in London. He based his map on the explora-
tions of the Spanish, who came up the western side of the Americas, 
and originally encountered the southern point on the map, the tip of 
today what we call the Baja Peninsula. And actually the ﬁrst maps were 
right. Everything north of that was drawn as terra incognitas, one great 
land mass. But then a few years later, around 1635, the Spanish sailed 
to the northern points along this map and encountered what we call the 
Straits of Juan de Fuca and the Puget Sound. Being good Cartesians, 
they connected the northern point with the southern point and created 
the Island of California. 
Now, this would only be a historical curiosity were it not for the problem 
of the missionaries, because the missionaries actually used this map. They 
would land near what is today Monterey and go inland to bring the word 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
51
of God to the American Indians. Now, if you’re on the western shores and 
you want to go inland, what do you have to do? Well, of course, you have 
to take your boats with you. So these poor missionaries disassembled their 
boats, packed them on mules, hauled them across California and 12,000 
feet up the Sierra Nevada, and then down the other side—only to ﬁnd a 
beach, that went on and on, and on, and on. Until, of course, they ﬁnally 
recognized that they were in the middle of the deserts of Nevada, and there 
was no Island of California. So they wrote to the map-makers in Spain and 
said, “Hey, listen, there’s no Island of California; your map is wrong!” And 
the mapmakers would write back and say, “No, no, no! You’re in the wrong 
place; the map is right!” 
Well, ﬁnally, in 1685, the Spanish changed their maps. Sixteen years 
later, when Moll was challenged by the Spanish about his map, he claimed, 
F I G U R E  2.2 A Map of North America


52 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
“I have actually talked to sailors who sailed all the way around the Island of 
California. It’s an island.” Finally, in 1721, he changed his maps too.
So, what’s the point? The point is, if you get your facts wrong, you get 
your map wrong. If you get your map wrong, you do the wrong thing. But 
worst of all once you believe a map, it is very, very hard to change. We all 
have deeply ingrained maps—all of us—and particularly successful corpo-
rate executives. Because, of course, they are successful precisely because they 
have had good maps of the world as they have understood it. They would 
not have risen to positions of power if they did not understand their busi-
ness, the business environment, the evolution of their industry, and also 
function effectively using this map. However, these executives have a prob-
lem: the map that got them to the top is unlikely to be the map that they 
need for the future. And worst of all, challenging those deeply ingrained 
perceptions takes an enormous amount of skill, intelligence, information, 
and judgment. (www.gbn.org/scenarios/maprap, accessed April 14, 2003)
These two stories illustrate conﬂicting notions about the purposes and 
pitfalls of cognitive maps. We are therefore left with something of a para-
dox: any map is better than no map; however, an inaccurate map often leads 
to an undesired location. Scenarios work to continuously adjust the maps, 
based on new understandings of the terrain. New understandings of the 
terrain come from rigorous research and constant “strategic” conversations 
with other “explorers” of the terrain. 
LEADERSHIP THEORY
Leadership is included here as a key ingredient of scenario planning because 
leadership is a critical component of any organization change and develop-
ment effort. As with any other change project, if the leadership of the orga-
nization is not involved and supportive, the project is likely to fail. Because 
leadership is such an extensive topic itself, a lengthy review will be avoided 
here. Instead, some recent research, led by colleagues Rochell McWhorter 
and Susan Lynham, is summarized as an emerging foundation for develop-
ing links between leadership capabilities/capacities and scenario planning. 
Definition
The Oxford English Dictionary (2006) deﬁnes leadership as “[a]n act or in-
stance of guidance or direction” (p. 549). 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
53
Description
Leadership is obviously critical in organizations. The body of work examin-
ing and analyzing leadership is far too vast to examine in depth here. Sufﬁce 
it to say that leadership is clearly a complex phenomenon concerned with 
how decision makers move organizations forward and inspire people around 
them. Leaders drive virtually all aspects of organizational life, including 
policy, human resource practices, structure, and compensation, among many, 
many others.
Emerging Research Linking Scenario Planning and Leadership
Research thus far on leadership as a critical component of scenario plan-
ning has focused on interviews with scenario planning experts (Lynham, 
1998, 2000a, 2000b, 2002a, 2002b; McWhorter, Lynham, & Porter, 
2008). Studies have explored the link between leadership development and 
scenario planning by asking experts to describe their interpretation of this 
relationship. Some exciting developments have included descriptions of sce-
nario planning used as a leadership development activity. Companies have 
been experimenting by asking emerging leaders to manage various aspects 
of the scenario planning effort as a development activity. Interviews have 
suggested that leaders in some organizations are realizing that planning will 
be an increasingly critical skill set for the future, and they expect their fu-
ture potential leaders to be familiar with scenario planning techniques (Mc-
Whorter et al., 2008). 
Kleiner and Roth’s (2000) Oil Change: Perspectives on Corporate Trans-
formation and Lynham’s (2000a) The Development of a Theory of Responsible 
Leadership for Performance provided strong additional conceptual starting 
points. Several emerging research studies are promising in that they suggest 
a clear link between leadership and scenario planning; however, such re-
search is in the early stages of documenting this link technique (McWhorter 
et al., 2008). Additional studies will clarify the strength and importance 
of the relationship between leadership development and scenario planning, 
but for now, the suggestion is that leadership must be involved with and 
supportive of any scenario project in order for it to succeed. Perhaps in the 
near future, scenario projects can be designed speciﬁcally as leadership de-
velopment activities. More research must be done to understand how leader-
ship is linked to scenario planning and how the two systems interact. 


54 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
ORGANIZATION PERFORMANCE AND CHANGE
Performance is one of the most talked-about aspects of organizational im-
provement efforts. Swanson’s (1999) discussion of performance improvement 
foundations provided a broad yet well-deﬁned perspective of performance 
along with the means to assess it, describe it, and explain it in more detail. 
Although the performance perspective has received criticism on the grounds 
that it neglects the human elements in organizations and improvement ef-
forts, “the best [performance improvement] theory and practice will in the 
end validate the need for and contribution of human expertise to [perfor-
mance improvement]” (Swanson, 1999, p. 4). The collective inﬂuence of 
dialogue, conversation quality and engagement, learning, decision making, 
mental models, and leadership on organization performance and change 
was shown in Figure 2.1. These elements combine to create performance-
based scenario planning.
Definition
Performance has been deﬁned as “the valued productive output of a system 
in the form of goods or services” (Swanson, 1999, p. 5). 
Description
Performance occurs in four core domains: organization, process, group, 
and individual. Performance has also been placed at the center of a lengthy 
debate over the intended outcome of organizational interventions. The 
perspective advocated here is that performance is necessary, although not 
necessarily sufﬁcient, for organizational effectiveness. Clearly, responsible 
scholars and practitioners must address both of these perspectives and 
concerns, and the position argued in this model is that the scenario plan-
ning system inherently requires that both learning and performance are 
necessary outcomes. Research in this area also suggests it is a promis-
ing area to continue exploring (Phelps, Chan, & Kapsalis, 2001; Visser & 
Chermack, 2009).
Levels of Performance
Regarding the link between performance and strategy, Rummler and Brache 
(1995) stated, “The most powerful strategy implementation tools we have 
found are those that help us effectively design and manage performance at 
the organization, process and job/performer levels” (p. 84). Thus, a clear 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
55
strategy for evaluating the outcomes of the scenario planning processes is to 
evaluate changes in performance at these three levels. 
The Organization Level. Rummler and Brache (1995) deﬁned per-
formance at the organization level in terms of three core variables: organiza-
tion goals, organization design, and organization management. Organization 
goals frequently include a focus on productivity, cycle time, cost, and proﬁt 
improvement efforts. Performance-focused analysts “design an organization 
that enables the goals to be met” (Rummler & Brache, 1995, p. 37); thus, 
a focus on the input-output relationships within the organization allow a 
design that accommodates and supports the organization’s goals. Goals, per-
formance, resources, and interfaces between functions are all areas requiring 
frequent assessment to “help identify what needs to get done (goals), the 
relationships necessary to get it done (design), and the practices that remove 
the impediments to getting it done (management)” (Rummler & Brache, 
1995, p. 43). The organization level of performance provides the foundation 
for understanding, analyzing, and managing performance at the process and 
individual levels.
The Process Level. Commonly viewed as how work is accomplished, 
processes can be more speciﬁcally deﬁned as value chains in which each step 
adds value to the previous step. Based on a view that effective process pro-
duces effective organizations, Rummler and Brache (1995) asserted that 
process goals, design, and management are the key variables to address for 
improving process performance. Process goals are considered subgoals of 
organization goals, and they should be designed to efﬁciently convert pro-
cess inputs to process outputs. Managing, analyzing, and adjusting processes 
goals, performance, resources, and interfaces ensure the maintenance of high 
levels of process performance (Rummler & Brache, 1995). Targeted as the 
level with the greatest opportunity to contribute to performance improve-
ment, the process level is largely ignored and often misunderstood. 
The Job/Performer Level. Jobs must be designed to support process 
steps, enabling the achievement of process goals and, in turn, organization 
goals. Job goals must be aligned with process goals, and jobs must be de-
signed and structured such that the performer can achieve those job goals 
(Rummler & Brache, 1995). Job management is considered a function of (1) 
performance speciﬁcations, (2) task support, (3) consequences, (4) feedback, 
(5) skills and knowledge, and (6) individual capacity. These components of 


56 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
job management, if effectively addressed, help job performers achieve pro-
cess goals, leading to the fulﬁllment of organization goals.
Scenario Planning and the Levels of Performance 
Improvement
The link between scenario planning and performance improvement theory 
seems obvious, yet scenario planning is increasingly applied without a per-
formance need and without a theoretical basis, making evaluation a difﬁcult 
exercise. Thus, the importance of the performance need in the performance 
improvement context cannot be overstated. Van der Heijden et al. (2002) 
identiﬁed a “lack of purposefulness” (p. 3) as a major reason that scenario 
projects fail. It is in the performance need, determined by a thorough analy-
sis, that such purposefulness can be discovered and acted upon (Holton, 
1999; Swanson, 1994).
Scenario Planning at the Organization Level
Scenario planning must produce results at the organization level. While 
evaluation efforts have been minimal, one study in particular attempted to 
analyze the link between engagement in scenario planning and ﬁrm perfor-
mance. Phelps, Chan, and Kapsalis (2001) evaluated scenario planning proj-
ects in the water and IT industries. In the water industry, ﬁrm performance 
measures included return on capital employed, water quality, variance in 
water pressure over time, and supply interruptions. In the IT industry, ﬁrm 
performance measures included annual growth rates of client companies, 
return on capital employed, and net proﬁts. The authors concluded that 
scenario planning had a considerable positive effect on ﬁrm performance 
in the water industry, although the service score showed a considerable de-
crease. The IT industry also showed a positive association between scenario 
planning and performance, although it was less powerful and was based on 
a questionably small sample size. Further studies such as these are needed 
to establish the link between scenario planning and performance in terms 
of economic beneﬁt. Studies focused on the relationship between scenario 
planning and the achievement of organization goals are particularly advo-
cated as one step in a comprehensive program of scenario evaluation.
Several case studies—for example, Royal Dutch Shell (Wack, 1985a, 
1985b), British Airways (Moyer, 1996), and Nokia (van der Heijden et al., 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
57
2002)—examine the abilities of organizations to revive and renew them-
selves, and the fact that these companies are still ﬂourishing despite some 
extremely challenging situations is one indicator that scenario planning 
might help an organization and its leaders cope with uncertainty. A compa-
ny’s ability to survive may be the most basic indicator of performance at the 
organization level. Other indicators may be speciﬁc to industry or company, 
but effective scenario planning will select these speciﬁc indicators, measure 
them, and address them. 
Scenario Planning at the Process Level
Only one study was found that explicitly examined the effects of scenario 
planning on process capabilities or functions. A case study by Burt and van 
der Heijden (in Ringland, 2002) had as one of its primary aims the recon-
ﬁguration of supply chain processes. While it is clear that scenario thinking 
might be used to develop alternative processes and explore more efﬁcient 
means of delivering products and services, scenarios have rarely been ap-
plied in this context. However, some scenario projects such as the IT com-
pany International Computers Ltd. (Ringland, 2002) have incorporated 
systems diagrams to map information markets in process formats; or, as 
in the case of Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Tessum, 1997), systems diagrams 
were used to map early warning systems as processes of contingency plan-
ning. Van der Heijden et al. (2002) suggested that organizational change is 
effectively brought about through process change, although “process gain 
requires persistence and consistency over an extended period” (p. 84). 
Some preliminary conceptual arguments for using scenarios in the pro-
cess context include the use of scenarios as “cognitive objects” (P. E. John-
son, personal communication, April 2003) in which scenarios are vehicles 
for process management and knowledge transfer. These are key areas for 
further investigation that might use scenarios to explore alternative pro-
cesses for improved efﬁciency and storage spaces for descriptions of knowl-
edge work. Research studies that document the effects of scenarios applied 
to processes would provide much value by potentially providing an addi-
tional application area for scenarios. As Rummler and Brache (1995) stated, 
“[T]he process level has been the least understood level of performance” 
(p. 44); as such, the process level provides the most potential for improving 
performance.


58 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Scenario Planning at the Job/Performer Level
Perhaps more than any other level, anecdotal evidence has supported the 
claim of individual performance improvement. Whether through learning 
via intense trend analysis (Wack, 1985b), shared mental models (van der 
Heijden, 1997), or increased availability of information for more precise, 
long-view-oriented decision making (Schwartz, 1991), virtually all reports 
of scenario application address the performance of the individual. However, 
none reports an empirical study, with measures of individual performance 
improvement. Van der Heijden et al. (2002) stated that scenarios help in-
dividuals reperceive reality from multiple perspectives, provide a forum for 
people to think creatively, and are effectively used as communications tools. 
These uses of scenarios are all aimed at improving performance, although 
there is little beyond participant claims of improvement in these areas.
INTEGRATING THE THEORETICAL 
FOUNDATIONS FOR A THEORY OF  
SCENARIO PLANNING
Scenario planning is believed to contribute to organization performance 
through the collective effect of each of the theories described in this chapter. 
To some, this explanation may seem obvious, but such a system of concepts 
explaining how scenario planning contributes to the organization and its 
goals is not found in the literature. The goal of this chapter has been to 
justify the theory of scenario planning and to capture what scenario plan-
ning is and how it works (Torraco, 1997). In the proposed theory, conversa-
tion quality and engagement, learning, decision making, mental models, 
and leadership are positioned as drivers of organization performance and 
change. What is unique about scenario planning is that it integrates these 
critical drivers of organization performance and change (Visser & Cher-
mack, 2009).
The components of the theory of scenario planning are useful in un-
derstanding what scenario planning is and how it works in numerous ways. 
First, the theory provides a thinking tool for conceptualizing how sce-
nario projects might be facilitated. It presents several “targets”—or items 
that scenario planning is designed to change. The results of these changes 
are intended to alter how participants view the internal and external envi-
ronments. Participants can therefore reperceive their environment and the 


  
T H E O R E T I C A L F O U N D A T I O N S O F S C E N A R I O  P L A N N I N G  
59
options contained within it. Second, the components of the theory provide 
convenient measurement points for assessing and evaluating the outcomes 
of scenario planning. Finally, this theory provides a way of categorizing new 
knowledge that is generated about scenario planning. To be sure, theories in 
organization sciences require adjustment, reﬁnement, and development as 
new insights are gained.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has reviewed the major theory domains that inform the prac-
tice of scenario planning: (1) dialogue, conversation quality, and engage-
ment; (2) organizational learning; (3) mental models; (4) decision making; 
(5) leadership, and (6) organization performance and change. These theo-
retical foundations have been explored in detail, with an aim of explaining 
how each one is relevant in scenario planning practices and models. The 
theoretical foundations were integrated into a theory of scenario planning 
that attempts to present a conceptual explanation of what scenario plan-
ning is and how it works. This chapter is critical in understanding scenario 
planning practices as theories, and theoretical foundations provide a set of 
“hooks” on which to hang knowledge as one navigates through the imple-
mentation of any scenario planning project. In addition, the theories pre-
sented in this chapter help to identify the elements that must be considered 
in any scenario planning project intended to contribute to enhanced orga-
nizational performance.


This page intentionally left blank 


 61
The Performance-Based 
Scenario System
This chapter situates scenario planning in the organizational context. It 
explains how scenario planning ﬁts into the organizational system as a sub-
system with its own inputs, processes, outputs, and feedback loops. 
To accomplish this goal, the state of the economic, business, and soci-
etal environment and its inﬂuence on organizational activity is described. 
Not only does the environment make the case for scenario planning, but it 
also sets up the reality of systems within systems and ever-changing condi-
tions. This chapter also explains organizations as systems, describes scenario 
planning as a system within the organization, and introduces the phases of 
scenario planning that form the content for Part Two of this book.
THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONTEXT
The nature of the environment was established in Chapter 1. To reiterate, 
things change too rapidly for forecasts or other predictive planning models 
to be useful. There are no signs that the rate of change will slow. Coupled 
with the rate of change is its depth. Economic hiccups are deeper and di-
sasters more devastating than ever. Decision makers are just trying to make 
sense of a context that changes signiﬁcantly and frequently. Many have tried 
other tools and been frustrated by the lack of ability to understand and ac-
count for uncertainty. Today’s business context plainly leaves people in the 
midst of turbulence. 
3
