# 4 Scenario Case Study

72 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
Technology Corporation. As with so many fast-growing technology ﬁrms, 
executives tend to describe planning as an essential part of daily activities 
while having no formal strategy process designed to focus on the external 
environment. 
COMPANY BACKGROUND
Technology Corporation was founded in 1971 and altered its focus to tech-
nology product research, design, and development in 1984, shortly after the 
U.S. government launched the Small Business Innovation Development 
Act. The act was designed to promote innovation through research and de-
velopment (R&D) that was seen as lacking in small business due to limited 
funding sources. Small businesses are encouraged to seek funding through 
the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Tech-
nology Transfer (STTR) programs managed by the U.S. Small Business 
Administration (SBA). These agencies develop technologies used by eleven 
federal departments (e.g., Department of Defense, Department of Energy, 
and National Science Foundation). Technology Corporation developed ex-
pertise in writing proposals for SBIR and STTR funding. For thirty-eight 
years, its primary revenue was generated by the SBIR/STTR funding, with 
limited success in the commercialization of new technology products. Its 
primary output was intellectual property intended for development into in-
novative technology products. The business model of the organization never 
fully realized the intended outcomes of the SBIR/STTR funding. Instead, 
the company used the writing of proposals and success in winning SBIR 
and STTR funding as its primary business model. The results were the 
development of numerous technology products that were never brought to 
market because they did not move beyond the testing phase.
In 2002, a new owner purchased the company. The new owner had a 
strong vision that included a more diverse set of funding sources and the 
ability to deliver new products to market. While the new owner acknowl-
edged the success of the organization’s ability to secure and process numer-
ous SBIR/STTR awards through Phase I (start-up) and Phase II (R&D), 
she felt the future of the organization would lie with the commercialization 
(Phase III) of the technology and diversiﬁcation into new markets through 
intercompany development, partnerships with larger corporations, or ven-
ture capital agreements. The owner and members of the leadership team are 


  
S C E N A R I O  C A S E  S T U D Y 
73
experienced technology, innovation, and design managers, having worked 
most of their careers in large international technology, computing, and data 
distribution organizations. Their business acumen in the technology indus-
try combined with the intellectual power of the scientists, designers, and 
R&D staff, affords the organization the ability to expand and explore its 
potential in new technologies that did not exist prior to the acquisition.
STRUCTURE
Figure 4.1 presents a simpliﬁed version of Technology Corporation’s organi-
zational chart to focus on the major functional areas.
ORGANIZATION PERFORMANCE RECORDS
The purchase of Technology Corporation was welcomed by employees, as 
was the focus on pushing products through to commercialization. However, 
little had changed in the ﬁrst two years of the new leadership. Technology 
Corporation was still having success with SBIR and STTR funding. As long 
as its success was bringing in dollars, there was little motivation to change. 
Company performance was consistently high, as long as the proposals for 
government funding continued to be successful. However, the ongoing reli-
ance on a single source of funding can be a worry to any organization. An 
upcoming presidential election had implications for dollars available in the 
SBIR and STTR programs, and some were speculating that these funding 
streams could be shut down completely.
Perhaps a more relevant aspect of organization performance centers 
on the number of proposals funded and the number of design projects 
in progress at a given time. Consider Figures 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 and their 
implications. 
Casual conversations with three senior-level decision makers suggested 
themes about the organization culture. Most employees were described as 
hardworking, creative, and intelligent people. However, leaders describe the 
culture as independent. That is, collaboration is not a priority; and once 
proposals are funded and projects are initiated, people work on their in-
dividual parts with little interaction and connection to the other product 
components (e.g., design, development, engineering, and marketing). Deci-
sion makers expressed a desire for more collaboration and cross-functional 


F I G U R E  4.1  Technology Corporation Organization Chart
Proposal
Witness
(29)
Marketing
Team
(15)
Sales
Team
(18)
Manager
Product
Development
(37)
Manager
Engineering
(43)
Manager
Design
(26)
Manager
Human Resources
(4)
VP
Finance
VP
Marketing
VP
Product
Engineering
VP
Product Design
VP
Human Resources
CEO


  
S C E N A R I O  C A S E  S T U D Y 
75
interaction. They believe this would lead to additional creative insights and 
would leverage more collective intellectual capital inside the organization. 
Decision makers also commented that the organization is a classic 
case in which the creative designers often clash with the logical engineers. 
These thinking processes are not always compatible, but both are neces-
sary for Technology Corporation to develop into the organization that the 
new owner has in mind. In the past, the most rewarded group has been 
the proposal writers because they are seen as the revenue generators. Deci-
sion makers recognize that reward systems may need to change to support 
F I G U R E  4.2  Technology Corporation’s Small Business Innovation Research/
Small Business Technology Transfer Proposals Submitted 
2007–2008
40
30
20
10
0
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
F I G U R E  4.3  Technology Corporation’s Small Business Innovation Research/ 
Small Business Technology Transfer Proposals Funded 1984–2008
150
100
50
0
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08


76 
F OUNDATIO NS O F SCENARIO  P LAN N I N G
collaboration and also to wean the organization from its dependence on a 
single source of revenue. The radical variance in salaries has also been a fac-
tor in that it has dictated the perceived value of each functional area. 
A FEW RELEVANT INDUSTRIAL DYNAMICS
One of Technology Corporation’s major current initiatives is a new mobile 
communications device. Currently, iPhone and BlackBerry dominate the 
market, and Samsung, LG, and Palm are also players. Displacing these pop-
ular brands is a tall order. Device interface and network capabilities (e.g., 
4G, 5G, and beyond) are obvious topics of interest for decision makers. 
Another major current initiative is the technology for an organ trans-
port system (to replace the low-tech Igloo cooler). The device would moni-
tor temperature, pressure, and other factors inﬂuencing the length of time 
an organ can remain viable for transport. Prototype designs have been 
shown to support organ life twelve hours beyond the Igloo cooler.
These are just two examples of product development underway at Tech-
nology Corporation. Considering the charts depicted in the ﬁgures, we see 
F I G U R E  4.4  Technology Corporation’s Active Projects 1984–2008
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08


  
S C E N A R I O  C A S E  S T U D Y 
77
that many other developments are in the pipeline, each carrying a different 
level of priority, resources, and commitment. Again, without a formal ap-
proach to strategy, no time is being dedicated to exploring the external en-
vironment relevant to any of these items. Past conversations about strategy 
have been ﬁnancially based annual events.
SCENARIO PROJECT INITIATION
Imagine you are approached by a member of the executive team to discuss 
the possibility of a scenario project at Technology Corporation. You were 
recommended by a previous scenario project participant. The major issue 
discussed was the lack of a structured approach to planning. Given the dy-
namics described in this case, decision makers have expressed a desire to use 
a systematic approach to strategy to understand the external environment. 
Simultaneously, they view a collaborative approach to strategy as an oppor-
tunity to get the functional areas more integrated. Another critical question 
increasingly troubling decision makers is how to prioritize projects to opti-
mize the ﬁt between resource investment and likelihood the product can be 
taken to market and sold. The organization has experienced high growth in 
terms of the number of projects it is working on at any given time. Decision 
makers realize this growth is not likely to continue; but if it does, they will 
become increasingly scattered across even more projects and industries.
CONCLUSION
Clearly, several strategic issues exist in Technology Corporation. The case 
incorporates some classic, common elements (e.g., lack of cross-functional 
communication, a history of ﬁnancial budgeting described as strategy, 
and internal conﬂict). Striking elements presented here are the continued 
growth and success with proposals and funding. It is easy to see why deci-
sion makers may be concerned. Yet, transitioning to other funding sources 
before reducing successful SBIR/STTR funding will be a tricky negotia-
tion. Fostering a more collaborative culture, overhauling reward systems, 
and managing a variety of projects in a variety of industries are complex 
activities that have important implications. While this case may seem sim-
ple at ﬁrst glance, complex issues will unfold in the following chapters as 
scenario planning tools are applied.


This page intentionally left blank 


 79
P
A
R
T
T
W
O
PHASES OF THE 
PERFORMANCE-BASED 
SCENARIO SYSTEM
C H A P TE RS
 
5  Phase 1—Project Preparation: Understanding Purpose 
and Building Support 
 
6  Phase 2—Scenario Exploration: Breathing In
 
7 Phase 3—Scenario Development: Digging Deeper 
 
8  Phase 4—Scenario Implementation: Putting Scenarios to Use
 
9 Phase 5—Project Assessment: Documenting Results
EFFORTS AT PLANNING without deﬁning objectives or expected outcomes 
are likely to fail. Furthermore, approaches to planning that focus on devel-
opment and leave off implementation will lose momentum once the plan is 
complete. Scenario planning has proven itself as an upgrade to traditional 
strategic planning, but scenario planning experts have not established a set 
of best practices, and every ﬁrm that offers scenario planning goes about 
it differently. Most approaches to scenario planning adhere to vague, ill- 
deﬁned outcomes, focus on scenario development, pay minimal attention to 
how to use the scenarios, and completely neglect the idea of project assessment. 
Part Two provides a comprehensive approach to scenario planning. 
These chapters show you how to work with your colleagues or other or-
ganizations to develop a proposal with deﬁned purposes and expectations 
