# PART TWO: PHASES OF THE PERFORMANCE-BASED SCENARIO SYSTEM

80 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
and to create a set of scenarios that are compelling, novel, and useful. These 
chapters show you how to use those scenarios in speciﬁc ways that increase 
the likelihood of generating strategic insights and how to assess whether the 
project has added value. 
Part Two consists of Chapters 5 through 9, and these chapters corre-
spond to the phases of the Scenario System:
• Phase 1—Project Preparation
• Phase 2—Scenario Exploration
• Phase 3—Scenario Development
• Phase 4—Scenario Implementation
• Phase 5—Project Assessment
Chapter 5, “Project Preparation,” is focused on how to develop the pur-
pose of the project, deﬁne the key issue or question that is the focus of the 
project, and build support. This phase also includes building the scenario 
team, the time line and scope of the project, and conversations about ex-
pected outcomes.
Chapter 6, “Scenario Exploration,” describes how to gather data rel-
evant to the purpose, issue, and question of the project. Various activities 
including SWOT analysis, forecasts, trend analysis, internal interviews, and 
others are described to help understand the dynamics of the internal and 
external environments. 
Chapter 7, “Scenario Development,” clearly shows how to use a variety 
of workshops and exercises to build a strategic conversation inside the orga-
nization and create scenarios. Methods for gauging the effectiveness of the 
scenarios are also provided with detailed application guidelines.
Chapter 8, “Scenario Implementation,” shows how to put the scenar-
ios to use. This chapter describes additional workshops designed to get the 
most of scenarios and increase the likelihood that they will shift the think-
ing inside the organization. 
Chapter 9, “Project Assessment,” outlines the necessary components of 
a comprehensive scenario project assessment. These activities include mea-
suring the outcomes relative to the expected outcomes deﬁned early on, 
looking at a cost/beneﬁt analysis of the project, and checking for knowledge 
and expertise increases among participants.
The activities described in Part Two come together to form the com-
plete scenario system, designed to be used in any organization. Using the 
phases described here will help you create a scenario project with impact.


 81
Phase 1— 
Project Preparation: 
Understanding Purpose  
and Building Support
This chapter presents the ﬁrst phase of the scenario system—project prepa-
ration. The goal of this chapter is to describe and explain the important ele-
ments that should be deﬁned in the project preparation phase of a scenario 
system and that culminate in a project proposal (Figure 5.1). 
Project preparation requires careful attention to decision makers, lead-
ers, and sponsors of the project. Listening to people express what they are 
frustrated with and excited about helps to develop an initial understanding 
of the situation. Follow-up questions to these key people can reveal addi-
tional important information, including constraints, biases, misperceptions, 
and glimpses of expected outcomes. 
Scenario projects are initiated with a meeting (or series of meetings) to 
discuss the organizational issue, problem, or need for scenarios. This initial 
meeting (or meetings) provides valuable insight for understanding the in-
puts to the scenario effort. Project inputs are clariﬁed as more information 
is shared among all participants through the activities of the early phases in 
the scenario system.
Whether the project is being led by internal or external professionals, 
there should be a formal proposal to the organizational decision makers and 
sponsors laying out the key elements of the project. The importance of es-
tablishing a clear purpose is critical. It will become the basis for everything 
else that follows, including, eventually, assessment of the project. The more 
clarity in the purpose at the onset, the more direct and elegant the ﬂow of 
the project and assessment can become. 
5
