# 5 Phase 1—Project Preparation: Understanding Purpose and Building Support

82 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
CONSTRUCTING A SCENARIO  
PROJECT PROPOSAL
The process of constructing a project proposal involves building agreement 
among the project leader and organizational decision makers on ﬁve critical 
items. These ﬁve items should be documented in the scenario project proposal:
• The purpose and question of the scenario project
• The estimated scope and time line of the scenario project
• The scenario team and deﬁned roles for each team member
• The general expected outcomes of the scenario project
• Measures to assess the achievement/success of the expected outcomes
F I G U R E  5.1  The Performance-Based Scenario System—Project Preparation 
Phase
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
83
ARTICULATING THE PURPOSE OF  
THE SCENARIO PROJECT
Most organizational interventions begin with the identiﬁcation of a prob-
lem. Effective interventions are based on plans for tackling these problems 
and gaining approval to work toward solutions. Problems are usually related 
to continuously trying to optimize ﬁt with the environment, or they can be 
classiﬁed into one of a few general categories. No matter what the problem 
is, the ﬁrst phase in the scenario system is focused on listening to key 
people talk about the situations they are facing. The project leader also 
becomes oriented to the problem and begins gathering general perceptions 
of the problem and the project that is designed to address it. Remember, 
the term problem in this context means to put forth for conversation, and 
the purpose of the project drives subsequent activities (Burt & van der Hei-
jden, 2003).
Increasingly, decision makers are overwhelmed by volatility, complex-
ity, and uncertainty. Many are frustrated with current planning processes, 
stating that the methods they are using don’t work. Many express a desire 
to make sense of a complex set of forces and variables in the external envi-
ronment that seem to have no structure or pattern of behavior that might 
suggest how things will play out in the future. A key overarching purpose 
of scenario planning is to develop a variety of alternatives so that decision 
makers will be more prepared for anything that might come to pass.
SCENARIO PLANNING CATEGORIES OF PURPOSE
Four distinct purposes for engaging in scenario planning logically ﬂow from 
the interactions between content and process on one continuum, and be-
tween thinking and action on another (van der Heijden, 2004). Content 
and process form the horizontal axis, while thinking and action form the 
vertical axis, creating four cells. These four cells delineating distinct pur-
poses of scenario planning are as follows:
• Making sense
• Optimal strategy
• Anticipation
• Adaptive learning
A scenario planning project can focus on one or more of these purposes. 


84 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
Making Sense
The content-thinking combination—or making sense—is aimed at un-
derstanding the external environment. Scenario projects framed from this 
purpose result in contextual scenarios, or what Wack called “learning sce-
narios.” Making-sense scenarios do not often provide major strategic in-
sights for practicing managers because they do not provide a framework for 
decision making. These projects are useful for deﬁning uncertain elements 
or exploring the external environment in general. Success in making-sense 
projects depends on deﬁning appropriate questions for analysis. However, 
the intent of this purpose is to gain a new understanding of things in the 
environment that are unclear and need deﬁnition, exploration, and analysis.
Optimal Strategy
Developing the content and action—or the purpose of optimal strategy—
is aimed at using scenarios speciﬁcally to test a strategy already in place. 
Projects based on this purpose often feature an organization “trying out” 
scenarios as a one-time effort. Few success stories are documented using the 
optimal strategy purpose in that stand-alone scenario efforts do not often 
lead to strategic learning or insights. Reasons for the lack of success include 
difﬁculties in shifting away from predictive thinking, inability to truly en-
tertain multiple possible futures, variations on proven scenario planning 
processes, and a lack of time and commitment to the project.
Anticipation
Thinking-process projects—those with the purpose of anticipation—are 
new projects initiated within in a continual, ongoing scenario planning 
cycle. Think of these scenario projects as continuous quality improvement 
for planning in organizations. Combining thinking and process into antici-
pation, these projects are focused on developing and continuing what van 
der Heijden (2004) calls “the strategic conversation” in organizations. Such 
an ongoing conversation builds shared mental models of the external en-
vironment and of the organization itself. Organizations that are successful 
with this purpose are able to prevent groupthink by continuously generating 
new ideas in the scenario planning project, and they also prevent fragmen-
tation by building an organizational community and generating collective 
understanding.


  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
85
Adaptive Learning
The action-process combination—adaptive learning—is the scenario pur-
pose in which an organization is continually using scenarios to understand 
the environment, holding internal strategic conversations, and taking action 
to leverage strategic opportunities. Adaptive organizational learning is the 
ultimate aim of scenario work because it signals an organization that learns 
and changes from its own experience to navigate the turbulent business en-
vironment. Furthermore, these organizations are simultaneously developing 
a better understanding and awareness of uncertain elements in the environ-
ment and improving the quality of the internal strategic conversation.
Learning-Decision Scenarios
Beyond these four purposes of scenario projects, scenario planning literature 
and many of the documented processes clearly state that scenarios are also 
effectively used to consider a speciﬁc decision, project, or issue. For example, 
leaders at Royal Dutch/Shell often faced key speciﬁc decisions that required 
the kind of analysis presented in scenario planning, such as the possibility 
of constructing a new oil-drilling rig in a new location. Scenarios were built 
around the possibilities of how such an investment might turn out. 
In the early years at Royal Dutch/Shell, Wack repeatedly had a response 
of “So what?” from managers after they would participate in his scenario 
presentations. The ﬁrst-generation scenarios were always learning scenarios; 
their purpose was not to impel action but to gain understanding and insight 
(Wack, 1985a). Wack therefore called the ﬁrst-generation scenarios “learn-
ing scenarios.” Initial scenarios rarely have an impact on managers’ mental 
models because they often do not provide a basis on which managers could 
exercise their judgment.
The World Economic Forum has developed and published scenarios for 
a variety of regions throughout the world. These scenarios are clearly learn-
ing scenarios, and they explore several different economic contexts, setting 
the stage to tell the stories that speculate on their implications. A variety of 
reports and scenario projects are free to download directly from the World 
Economic Forum at www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/Scenarios/index.htm.
Eventually, a high degree of utility was realized in a second round of 
scenario development. Second-generation scenarios became the “decision 
scenarios.” Wack’s insights developed when he realized that to affect the 


86 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
managers’ core thinking, he needed to target the scenarios to the deepest 
concerns of the decision maker; and to accomplish that, he needed to tailor-
ﬁt the scenarios to challenge the mental models of the managers who would 
use them. Moreover, the scenarios also had to be targeted at a key issue or 
decision the managers were facing.
“Decision scenarios explore for facts out there, but they aim at percep-
tions inside the head of critical decision makers. Their purpose is to gather 
and transform information of potential strategic signiﬁcance into fresh per-
ceptions that then lead to strategic insights that were previously beyond the 
mind’s reach—those that would not even have been considered” (Wack, 
1985a, p. 88).
The two-tiered approach to scenario planning was effective at Shell. 
To summarize, the ﬁrst round of scenarios were context-setting scenarios—
learning scenarios—that explored the external environment. The second 
round of scenarios were tailor-ﬁt to the mental models of the managers—
decision scenarios. This tiered approach is reﬂected in Wack’s (1985a) use of 
a cherry tree as a metaphor (see Figure 5.2):
Scenarios are like cherry trees: cherries grow neither on the trunk, nor 
on the large boughs; they grow on the small branches of the tree. None-
theless, a tree needs a trunk and large branches in order to grow small 
branches. The global, macro-scenarios are the trunk; the large branches 
are the country scenarios developed by Shell operating companies, in 
which factors individual to their own countries—predetermined and 
uncertain—are taken into account and added. But the real fruits of the 
scenarios are picked at the small branches, the focused scenarios which 
are custom tailored around a strategic issue or a speciﬁc market or in-
vestment project. (p. 83)
To apply scenarios in this tiered way, decision makers would have to 
entertain several rounds of scenario construction. This is why most single 
instances of scenario planning fail. For example, ﬁrst the global/macro sce-
narios should be constructed. These simply set the context for the appropri-
ate industry. These are likely to be scenarios that capture external factors 
only. Once complete, and depending on the size of the organization, deci-
sion makers can move into more speciﬁc scenarios focused on a region (in 
the case of a truly global organization with numerous regional ofﬁces) or 
a speciﬁc strategic issue. When scenario planning is adopted as a way of 


  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
87
thinking in organizations, the ways in which scenarios can be used expands 
drastically. 
To do speciﬁc analyses of parts of the business, one develops “focused 
scenarios” custom-tailored around a strategic issue, or a speciﬁc market 
or investment project. But you cannot start with such focused scenarios 
because you will almost certainly miss key things, or cast the focused 
scenarios in the wrong way. You must wide-angle ﬁrst, to get the big 
picture, and them zoom in on your business speciﬁcs. (Wack, 1985a, 
p. 92)
Some scenario planning experts favor a highly speciﬁc approach from 
the start. For example, Louis van der Merwe tells stories about scenario 
projects he has observed in which the facilitator spent two full days deﬁn-
ing the initial strategic question. Asking the right question is important; 
and the more speciﬁc the purpose, the easier it is to assess upon project 
completion. However, the context, situation, decision maker conversations, 
and other information will determine the level of focus required. There are 
no hard rules here, but the context will usually indicate when enough detail 
is reached. Gaining people’s understanding and readiness to move forward 
is both hard to miss and a key indicator to proceed.
F I G U R E  5.2  Scenarios Are Like Cherry Trees
Local “Learning” Scenarios
Global/Macro Scenarios
Focused/Tailored
“Decision” Scenarios


88 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
ASKING THE QUESTION
The question that is posed directs the purpose of the scenario project. The 
ﬁrst priority is to develop a clear question that will set the tone of the proj-
ect. Time should be spent reﬁning the question. The goal of the project is to 
examine the range of possible environments in which strategic choices can 
play out, and all of these have signiﬁcant implications for how the initial 
question can be answered. It is important to remember that when dealing 
with complex, strategic puzzles, there is no perfect answer. Therefore, ask-
ing the question is not meant to ﬁnd a single correct answer. Rather, it is to 
explore a variety of answers and the implications that each carries with it. 
Scenario thinking “isn’t a magic 8-ball, a process where all you need to ask 
is ‘should we do x?’ (and getting ‘ask again later’ as a result is neither use-
ful nor surprising)” (Cascio, 2009, p. 1). The original question of purpose 
should be revisited as the project progresses. Examining the question repeat-
edly suggests a willingness to continuously check progress and make sure 
the project is on track, which in turn may lead to a better question. The rest 
of this book is aimed at how to go about providing a variety of answers to 
the initial question, considering their implications, and assessing the range 
of answers that can be developed.
A few sample questions to consider are as follows:
• How can we retain our current value proposition in a high-change 
environment?
• Should we introduce a completely new product or service?
• How can we more effectively integrate our strengths to enhance the 
value we provide to our customers and increase our efﬁciency?
• What are the major technological advances on the horizon that we 
have not thought about?
Once the purpose of the project has been clariﬁed, it can be docu-
mented in the project proposal. The next step is to move on to estimating 
the scope of the project and a general time frame. 
TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION’S PURPOSE AND QUESTION
The case study of Technology Corporation started with an initial meeting and 
conversation with corporate leaders, including the CEO, the vice president 
of ﬁnance, the vice president of human resources, and the vice president of 


  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
89
product design. It was decided that the purpose for using scenarios was part 
anticipation and part organizational learning. The priority of the project 
was to anticipate major potential changes in Small Business Innovation 
Research (SBIR) funding policy, as well as major developments in the 
technology industry. In part, the project was also aimed at making sense 
of the external environment, and organization leaders were clear that 
they wanted to spend time exploring the things they didn’t know they 
didn’t know. While it would be the ﬁrst scenario project inside Technology 
Corporation, two of the leaders had prior exposure to scenario planning. 
Both expressed interest in the learning orientation that scenario planning 
demands, adding that learning something unexpected about their industry 
would be of high value. Leaders settled on the following question to frame 
the scenario project:
How can we balance the number of projects we initiate, with a ﬁrmer 
commitment to producing marketable products and generating rev-
enue, and wean ourselves from relying on a single source of funding?
DEFINING THE ESTIMATED  
SCOPE AND TIME FRAME
The next task is to develop a sense of the scope of the project. This is largely 
dependent on the deﬁned purpose of the project. Key items to consider are 
the amount of time and resources the organization is willing to invest in 
the project, deadlines that may be relevant, and how far into the future the 
scenarios will reach.
Before attempting to estimate details about the time frame, it is useful 
to know what is generally involved in scenario projects. Although each proj-
ect is different, most can be expected to involve interviews and initial data 
gathering, two to three full-day workshops (spaced out over a few weeks) 
to build the scenarios, and two to three full-day workshops (spaced out 
over a few weeks) to consider the implications of the scenarios. The space 
between workshops is important for allowing participants to reﬂect on and 
absorb ideas and information. Given these general guidelines, projects can 
be expected to require ﬁve to nine weeks of commitment at a minimum. 
Small projects with a clear focus may be able to move faster, and, of course, 
large projects involving multiple organizational units over varying locations 


90 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
can take longer. The purpose of this part of the scenario project proposal is 
simply to estimate how long the project will take, clarifying any deadlines 
or other critical dates that may pose barriers to the project.
The time line can be represented graphically, in a list, or in a particular 
software program. The point is to have a general estimation of the proj-
ect. Will it be ﬁve weeks or nine? Are there other critical deadlines that 
may draw attention and participation away from the project that must be 
considered?
The time line should also include general agreement on the estimated 
number of workshops that will be aimed at scenario development and the num-
ber that will be used for scenario consideration. In other words, the proposal 
should include a framework for the approximate time investment on the 
part of the decision makers and key stakeholders in the organization. 
HOW FAR INTO THE FUTURE?
This part of the scenario proposal must also consider how far into the future 
the scenarios will reach. Will they explore ﬁve years or twenty-ﬁve? This 
span is commonly referred to as the time horizon in scenario literature. “If it 
takes three years to set up the widget factory, a ﬁve year target for the future 
exercise would be useful to think through initial operating environment, 
while a 12 year exercise will help to think about what things will be like over 
time” (Cascio, 2009, p. 1). Cascio (2009) also recommends using political 
cycles for considering how far the scenarios should explore. For example, in 
the United States, scenarios that extend at least eight years into the future 
are assured a change in the presidency, which will have pros and cons associ-
ated with the party in power. Another strategy is to consider key forces that 
one is already familiar with and play them out beyond what is known (e.g., 
what does the 5G wireless network look like?) (Cascio, 2009). 
A recent project I facilitated involved cell-phone technology. Given the 
pace of current technological development, the scenarios we created reached 
just ﬁve years into the future. The organization was looking at a few speciﬁc 
decisions driven by competition and emerging, cutting-edge technology. As 
a team, we looked at forces in the more immediate future to inform the spe-
ciﬁc decisions in question. Certainly, it would have been a useful exercise to 
look further into the future beyond, say, the 5G cell-phone network. How-
ever, we chose a time frame that ﬁt the purpose of the project as the decision 
makers had deﬁned it.


  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
91
The time horizon should also be included in the project proposal, but it 
may be adjusted as the project progresses. Incoming information, reshaped 
perceptions, and new understandings of the internal and external environ-
ments can reshape how far the scenarios should explore. 
TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION’S SCOPE AND TIME FRAME 
Leaders in Technology Corporation were excited about using scenarios to 
explore the question they had deﬁned and were ready to commit substan-
tial time to the project. Leaders agreed to three half- to full-day workshops 
focused on developing scenarios, and three half- to full-day workshops fo-
cused on using scenarios, with additional time as needed by team members 
to prepare for the workshops and conduct further research. We expected 
the project to be completed in approximately three months (see Figure 5.3).
Leaders further agreed that scenarios reaching ﬁfteen years into the fu-
ture would be useful in provoking strategic insights about the organization, 
its market, and how it might evolve.
BUILDING THE SCENARIO TEAM  
AND DETERMINING ROLES
Getting the right people involved in the scenario project is absolutely criti-
cal. To be effective, projects must involve the people who will use the sce-
narios, as well as a representative from each level of the company. During 
the project preparation phase, important stakeholder groups should be iden-
tiﬁed, individuals with a high degree of organization knowledge should be 
recruited, internal leaders at all levels of the organization should be identi-
ﬁed, and the scenario team can be assembled. The scenario team manages 
the project. Some suggested roles are described next.
PROJECT LEADER
The project leader is obviously responsible for directing the scenario project. 
This person is often an external consultant with expertise in the scenario 
planning system, and he or she should have signiﬁcant experience in a va-
riety of business processes and change interventions. It is a good practice 
to partner an internal expert to colead the project if an external consultant 
is the main facilitator. Such a partnership allows the internal leader (and 


F I G U R E  5.3  Technology Corporation’s Time Line and Scope
Initial Meeting
and
Project Initiation
Interviews with
7–10 people (all
senior managers
and a cross section)
3 Workshops for
Scenario
Development
Scenario
Presentation
3 Workshops for
Scenario
Implementation
Follow-up
Evaluative
Interviews
Survey Research
Data Collection
(Pretest)
Survey Research
Data Collection
(Posttest)
2 hours
1 hour per interview
4 hours each = 12 hours
2 hours
4 hours each = 12 hours
1 hour per interview
September
September/October
October
End October
November
Late November/
December


  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
93
therefore the organization) to gain scenario planning expertise, and it can 
help navigate the project inside the organization.
TEAM MEMBERS
Team members will participate in all of the workshops, generally be respon-
sible for developing the detailed scenario story lines, and will accomplish 
much of their work through subteams. For example, a subteam is often as-
signed to work on each scenario, provide further details, and write the sce-
nario narrative. The team should include someone from each level of the 
organization, so that the team is ultimately cross-level and cross-functional.
COORDINATOR
One individual should be responsible for convening the group, managing 
schedules, reserving spaces and locations for scenario work, creating internal 
mechanisms for the scenario team to communicate, and performing other 
administrative functions. 
REMARKABLE PEOPLE
Because scenario planning is a system designed to stretch the thinking in-
side the organization, it should involve people with diverse backgrounds 
and expertise. Perhaps Pierre Wack’s greatest contribution to modern sce-
nario planning is the inclusion of what he called “remarkable people.” By 
this, he simply meant people with a completely different outlook or mental 
model than those inside the organization working on the issue and who 
were known for their ability to think unconventionally. Global Business 
Network has continued this tradition by frequently using musicians, art-
ists, bench scientists, and other people from a wide range of backgrounds to 
provide alternate perspectives in scenario projects. 
In one of my own early projects, I did not consider the importance of 
building a solid scenario planning team. I neglected spending time deﬁning 
roles and responsibilities, and with a team loosely formed within the orga-
nization, the project suffered because no one was responsible for basic func-
tions of the project. For example, workshops and meetings were ill attended 
because no one was coordinating the project activities. With few partici-
pants attending the workshops, one can imagine that there was little learn-
ing, ownership, buy-in, and implementation of the project outcomes. In the 
end, the scenarios were never communicated throughout the organization 


94 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
because they did not involve enough of the managers’ thinking. In this case, 
my own failure to see the importance of establishing clear roles and respon-
sibilities led to an ineffective project. However, it was a valuable learning 
experience that I will not forget. Once the scenario team members and roles 
have been identiﬁed, important conversations about outcomes can begin.
TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION’S SCENARIO TEAM AND ROLES
Technology Corporation’s scenario team and roles were deﬁned after some 
conversation and clariﬁcation. Names have been omitted, but the roles were 
as follows:
• Project leader
• Team members. The team was composed of the CEO, the vice 
president of ﬁnance, the vice president of human resources, the vice 
president of product design, three managers, and two line workers.
• Coordinators. Two coordinators were involved in this project, the 
CEO’s Executive assistant and another manager.
• Remarkable people. Three remarkable people participated in the 
project, at various times. One was invited by the CEO, and two were 
recruited by the project leader.
• Others. Other participants from Technology Corporation helped at 
speciﬁc times, but they were not attached to the project as intimately 
as team members. It is common for additional members to move in 
and out of the project, with a base of consistent team members.
ARTICULATING THE GENERAL  
EXPECTED OUTCOMES
It is important to know at the outset if a ﬁnancial analysis, a recommenda-
tion regarding a speciﬁc decision, ongoing organizational learning, or some-
thing else is sought as a result of the project. Time spent on clarifying the 
initial purpose of the project provides a general idea of what is expected, 
but additional conversations should consider any speciﬁc expectations. The 
bulk of the scenario literature has ignored any process for assessing scenario 
planning efforts. In contrast, this book assumes that scenario planning can 
and should be assessed. Speciﬁc strategies for assessing scenario projects are 
covered in Phase 5—Project Assessment, but it is wise to decide how the 
project will be assessed from the beginning. 


  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
95
Precisely how to measure the effects of scenario projects can be tricky. 
Assessing the costs associated with a major industry shift that did not hap-
pen because it was anticipated through the scenario planning system is a 
challenging activity. However, estimates can be made. Estimates of savings 
due to anticipating major business discontinuities, or proﬁts gained through 
strategic insights, or both, can and should be part of the scenario project. 
Chapter 10 provides further details and examples for estimating the 
ﬁnancial beneﬁts of a scenario planning project, but in the project prep-
aration phase, it is useful to consider a basic ﬁnancial assessment model. 
Swanson’s (2004) cost/beneﬁt model is a simple tool for thinking about the 
ﬁnancial beneﬁts of any scenario planning project:
Performance Value – Cost = Beneﬁt
In the context of scenario planning, the costs of a project are relatively easy 
to estimate. The performance value is the tricky part. It can be helpful to simply 
ask decision makers, “What is the value that you place on a single novel strate-
gic insight?” (van der Merwe, 2005), and the ensuing conversation will further 
clarify expected outcomes and intended goals of the project. An additional use-
ful question to pose is “If this project exceeded your expectations, what would 
be true?” It is not a requirement that scenario planning projects carry a ﬁnan-
cial assessment component, but if they do, they are more likely to garner 
support from executives and project stakeholders. It is also important for 
those interested in furthering the discipline of scenario planning to think 
about the value of the contributions that are made through the scenario 
planning system. The more evidence that is built in to show the beneﬁts of 
scenario planning, the more conﬁdently its beneﬁts can be promoted.
Outside of ﬁnancial data, many other tools can be used to assess in-
dividual learning, mental models, decision making, and other important 
outcomes of scenario planning. These tools tend to be more academic in 
nature and may not be appropriate in some situations. However, when used, 
they can make a very compelling case. These tools can provide valuable in-
formation about learning, perceptions, decision making, and other critical 
outcomes of scenario planning. Projects using these tools may look like re-
search projects—but why wouldn’t they? The purpose of these projects is to 
discover new knowledge about some organizational element as it may relate 
to the scenario project. For the purposes of project preparation, it is useful 
to know if decision makers are interested in assessing particular items. 


96 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
The literature suggests that scenario planning can beneﬁt organizations 
in several ways. Outcomes commonly associated with scenario planning in-
clude the following:
• Individual and organizational learning
• Improved decision making
• Stronger communication systems 
• Shared mental models of the internal and external environments
• Heightened organizational performance
• Greater organizational agility
• Stronger ability to ﬁt with the environment
• Deeper anticipatory capacity
• Increased strategic insights
These are all domains that have related measures that can be assessed at the 
start and again at the end of a scenario planning project. Measures that are 
important to stakeholders and that are related to the purpose of the proj-
ect should be agreed on as part of the purpose and documented in the 
project proposal.
TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION’S GENERAL EXPECTED OUTCOMES
Leaders in Technology Corporation expressed interest in knowing whether 
employees viewed the organization as a place that emphasized learning, 
whether decision making could become a more team-oriented activity, and 
whether better communication could be facilitated through the scenario 
project. Leaders also placed a high value on the potential to know what 
things to pay attention to. In other words, if certain events were indicators 
that other events were about to happen, there was great value in indentify-
ing these “indicators.” Finally, although leaders and executives in Technol-
ogy Corporation did not expect a tangible return on investment, they were 
interested in considering how the project could add ﬁnancial value.
TAKING MEASURES RELATIVE TO  
THE EXPECTED OUTCOMES
Once the expected outcomes of the scenario planning project have been 
decided, any measures relevant to those expected outcomes can be taken. 
Think of this as any measure that can be taken at the start of the project 


  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
97
and then compared to a second measure of the same item at the conclusion 
of the project—a simple pretest/posttest assessment strategy. The general 
plan for what will be measured, where, how, and for what purpose should be 
included in the scenario project proposal.
RELATED MEASURES AT TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION
The measures taken at Technology Corporation mapped directly to the ex-
pected outcomes that were identiﬁed. We chose instruments that had a his-
tory of validity and utility to measure the expected outcomes. The selection 
was a collaborative process based on conversations that clariﬁed what proj-
ect sponsors were hoping to achieve and other desirable changes that might 
logically ﬂow from a scenario planning project.
Learning Orientation —>  Watkins and Marsick’s Dimensions of 
Learning Organization Questionnaire 
(DLOQ)
Team Decision Making —>  Scott and Bruce’s General Decision-
Making Style Survey (GDMS)
Communication 
—>  Van der Merwe’s Conversation Quality 
and Engagement Checklist
Indicators 
—>  A list of indicators or “signposts”
Value-Added 
—>  Swanson’s Cost/Beneﬁt Analysis
CONCLUSION
The components presented in this chapter represent the critical ﬁrst steps of 
any scenario project. Deﬁning these components at the start of the project 
will create anchors for other parts of the project later on. The scenario proj-
ect proposal, the major output of the project preparation phase, is designed 
to clarify assumptions, expectations, and get the project moving. Done well, 
the project’s purpose, scenario team, time frame, estimated measures, out-
comes, and beneﬁts have been articulated and provide a starting point. In 
the event that disagreements ensue about the content of the improvement pro-
posal, expectations can be clariﬁed and changed before moving ahead. The 
scenario project proposal provides a general outline for the project and serves 
as a contract for moving forward with the scenario planning effort. What 
follows is a sample that illustrates the components discussed in this chapter.


98 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED S C E N AR I O S Y S T E M
SAMPLE SCENARIO PROJECT PROPOSAL
DATE: 
Month / Day / Year
TO: 
Organization Contact / CEO / Relevant Decision Maker [title]
FROM: 
T. Chermack
RE: 
Scenario Project Proposal
The purpose of this document is to establish the general, agreed-on objectives for a scenario 
project in Technology Corporation. This document describes the purpose of the project, the 
estimated scope and time frame, the composition of the scenario team, the general expected 
outcomes, and the measurements to be taken prior to the start of the project. Also included is a 
general ﬁnancial beneﬁt estimate.
Purpose
The purpose of a scenario project at Technology Corporation is to help make sense of a rapidly 
changing technology industry and environment, and to help Technology Corporation anticipate 
possible major shifts in the industry. More speciﬁcally, Technology Corporation is struggling 
with the ineffectiveness of outdated planning models and intends to develop a learning-focused 
approach to strategy. Rather than hike proﬁt expectations, Technology Corporation desires to 
shift its culture toward one that supports continuous learning and development, improved 
communication across silos, and shared, collaborative decision making. Speciﬁc issues include 
questions about the amount of resources invested in each R&D project. Based on learning 
scenarios generated for the technology/R&D industry, Technology Corporation also intends to 
understand how to better distribute its resources across more viable projects expected to 
eventually lead to marketable technology products. 
Estimated Scope and Time Frame
The project will begin with an initial organizing meeting starting on [mm/dd/yy]. Technology 
Corporation estimates that six subsequent full-day workshops will be used over approximately 
eight weeks to develop scenarios and use them in examining potential futures. Technology 
Corporation also agrees to allow [internal or external consultant name] access to interview 
participants from multiple levels of the organization, access to internal organizational records, 
and other items relevant to the project. The scenarios will have a horizon year of [ﬁfteen years 
out], which extends the scenarios into the creative future of the technology industry.
Scenario Team and Roles
The scenario team will include Pierre Wack as the project leader. Deepak Chopra, Katherine 
Eisenhardt, Sansai Hosokawa, Candace Pert, Joe Dispenza, Bikram Choudhury, and Sen no 
Rikyu will be team members. Pema Chodron will be the on-site project coordinator, and will 
serve as the general administrative contact for the project. Pierre Wack will recruit additional 
people with diverse backgrounds as he sees ﬁt throughout the project workshops and meetings  
to introduce alternative thinking.
General Expected Outcomes
Technology Corporation expects several outcomes from the scenario project. These are 
assessments of (1) perceptions of organizational learning characteristics, (2) team decision 


  
P H A S E 1—P R O J E C T  P R E P A R A T I O N  
99
making, (3) communication and conversation skills, (4) clear indicators or “signals” of events 
about to unfold, and (5) a cost/beneﬁt analysis. Additional outcomes that are standard in scenario 
planning are strategic insights about products and services in the technology industry, four unique 
and detailed scenarios of the industry, and time devoted to dialogue about strategic issues. 
Measurements
Given the expected outcomes of this project, measurements will include ﬁnancial beneﬁt 
estimates of the scenario projects and assessments of participant learning, decision making, and 
conversation quality. The following measurements will be taken from project participants before 
the project begins and at the end of the scenario project so as to determine changes:
 
1. Dimensions of Learning Organization Characteristics
 
2. General Decision-Making Style Survey
 
3. Conversation Quality and Engagement Checklist
 
4. Indicators or “signals”
 
5. Cost/Beneﬁt Analysis
The cost/beneﬁt estimate is provided here. We deﬁned the performance value as the value of the 
scenario project with the assumption that it will provoke a strategic insight. We then estimate 
the value of such an insight in the case that it provides a competitive edge or prepares us to react 
faster. From this value, we subtract the costs of the project to derive the beneﬁt:
 
Performance value 
$250,000  
(details of estimate below)
        –         Cost 
$100,000  
(total breakdown of costs below)
  
Beneﬁt 
$150,000
Performance Value Estimate
The performance value estimate follows. Assumption: The organization is able to generate a 
signiﬁcant, innovative idea as a result of the scenario project that leads to a new technology 
product/service. Let’s assume the product is a technology communication device. In 2009, RIM 
reported shipping ﬁfty million BlackBerry smart phones, generating $11 billion in revenue. 
Technology Corporation is much smaller, but based on a similarly priced device, assume that 
Technology Corporation is able to develop, patent, market, and sell ﬁve million devices, 
generating (conservatively) $8 million. Start-up, R&D, marketing, patenting, prototyping, and 
other development costs can be estimated at approximately $5 million, which leaves $3 million. 
Again, being highly conservative, we reduce the performance value to $250,000 based on other 
potential development costs.
Cost Estimate
Costs related to facilitating the scenario project are as follows:
 
Consulting Fees  =  $40,000   (6 days of facilitation at $5,000 per day = $30,000 + 
$10,000 for other meetings and time spent on the 
project)
 
Materials  
=  $5,000   (includes printing, transcription, software, participant 
materials, preparation of all reports and scenario 
packages, and all other project materials)


100 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
  
Travel  
=  $5,000   (6 air tickets from Denver, CO, to [location] at $300 
each = $1,800 + 15 nights’ lodging [location] at $150/
night = $2,250 + $950 miscellaneous or extra travel)
  
Meals  
=  $6,300   (6 workshop days × 3 meals per day × 7 participants 
[assume $50 per person, per meal] = $6,300)
 
Time away from
 
regular work  
=  $47,000   (This ﬁgure assumes approximately 27 participants at 
any given time and estimates that each participant may 
cost approximately $2,000 in time away from his or her 
normally assigned functions)
 
Total Project 
 
Cost Estimate  
=  $100,000


 101
Phase 2— 
Scenario Exploration: 
Breathing In
The scenario exploration phase of the scenario system focuses on analyzing 
the external and internal environments of the organization. During these 
analyses, the initial issue or purpose of the project from the project prepara-
tion phase must be kept in mind as information is gathered. This chapter 
describes a variety of methods and tools that can be used to assess the exter-
nal and internal situation, context, and problem (see Figure 6.1).
Scenario exploration is divided into two general parts, external analysis 
and internal analysis. These two parts establish the boundaries of the proj-
ect in preparation for the next phase, scenario development. Several tools for 
gathering information about the external environment and two workshops 
for the internal analysis are detailed. The workshops are intended to stimu-
late strategic thinking, familiarize participants with key issues, and prepare 
participants for constructing scenarios as described in Chapter 7.
EXTERNAL ANALYSIS
Information gathering is the foundation of the analysis of the external en-
vironment. The scenario exploration phase involves data gathering both on 
a general level and about the speciﬁc issue under consideration. The goal of 
information gathering is to learn and to expand the project team’s familiar-
ity with the industry and relevant economic and social factors. A secondary 
goal is to gather information relevant to the speciﬁc issue or decision articu-
lated in the project proposal. “Being a scenario planner, therefore, means 
6
