# 6 Phase 2—Scenario Exploration: Breathing In

102 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
becoming aware of one’s ﬁlter and continually readjusting it to let in more 
data about the world, but without becoming overwhelmed” (Schwartz, 
1991, p. 61). Everyone has biases, and they show up in scenario planning. 
A key skill is the ability to be aware of biases and head off conﬁnement in 
thinking. Thus, another purpose of the scenario exploration is to expand 
the assumptions, beliefs, and possibilities evident in the industry or environ-
ment being studied, thereby expanding one’s ﬁlter.
There are many ways to approach the data-gathering stage. Three tools 
for helping to structure information about the external environment include 
STEEP forces, De Bono’s (1990) thinking hats, and a SWOT analysis (fo-
cusing on the opportunities and the threats). 
F I G U R E  6.1  The Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Exploration 
Phase
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
103
While each of these approaches is reviewed in further detail, the best 
solution is to develop a method that works for a particular situation. In other 
words, there are many tools and processes for exploring the external environ-
ment, and good scenario planners use tools that ﬁt the organization and the 
purpose for engaging in a scenario project. The ultimate goal of this phase 
is to develop a rich understanding of the context in which the organiza-
tion is operating. Data gathering, analysis, and synthesis are a complicated 
function to perform in today’s complex organizations, and there are no hard 
and fast rules. “Don’t worry about your ﬁles; worry about your perceptions” 
(Schwartz, 1991, p. 62). Stated another way, in this phase, you have to de-
velop awareness of and expand your perceptions of the external environment.
The start of a scenario project requires getting up to speed with the 
general industry. It is helpful to visit and revisit several aspects of a given in-
dustry looking for trends, key factors, and other forces that have an obvious 
inﬂuence on the industry. At this point in a scenario project, it is important 
to create time for rigorous investigation of the industry and reﬂection on the 
dynamic and relevant forces at play. Pierre Wack referred to this as “breath-
ing in,” and he was known to go to great lengths to put himself into new 
unrelated physical environments to think about his projects. For example, 
he spent signiﬁcant amounts of time in Japan, India, and the Saudi desert 
thinking about scenario projects he was working on. The primary purpose 
is to learn as much as possible about the industry—its composition and 
complexity—and to see it all from a new perspective.
SOCIAL, TECHNOLOGICAL, ECONOMIC, ENVIRONMENTAL,  
AND POLITICAL (STEEP) FORCES 
A tool for structuring thinking and key categories to make sure you do not 
overlook any is the well-known STEEP analysis. The STEEP analysis is a 
logical and effective way to begin. In reality, these are simply general catego-
ries to include in any exploration of the external environment (Burt & van 
der Heijden, 2002). This section offers examples of each force that might be 
considered in the general and global context. 
Social Forces
Population trends are clear social forces. Usually, population is also clas-
siﬁed as a predetermined element—something that can be estimated with 
a high degree of certainty. This means that at any given point in time, we 


104 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
have access to data that will indicate population numbers. Estimates with 
high accuracy can be made of what the population growth will look like 
over any speciﬁed number of years. Cultural diversity is another social force 
that will be a signiﬁcant driver over the next half century. Literacy, popula-
tion migration, and emerging societies can also be considered social forces.
Technological Forces
It is difﬁcult to conceive of all the possible technological drivers of our time. 
Advances such as multimedia, the Internet, various mobile technologies, 
alternate fuel sources, and music format are just a few. Technology may be 
the greatest single category of change drivers that we will cope with over 
the next millennium. Web 2.0 technologies such as Second Life, Facebook, 
Twitter, and others are popular though their true contributions to organi-
zational efﬁciency are yet to be determined. Key questions about technol-
ogy continue to relate to how technology’s role in increasing efﬁciency and 
supporting collaboration over great distances can be leveraged, and whether 
they can increase ﬁrm performance or are simply social distractions.
Economic Forces
As I write this, the global economy is without doubt, the headlining issue. 
Fluctuating markets are the high-priority questions on everyone’s minds. 
The economies of China and India are likely to continue to inﬂuence other 
economies around the globe. The growth of these countries in terms of the 
economic development will affect the social forces not only in each of these 
countries, but throughout the rest of the world as well. Other economic 
forces include ﬂuctuating currency exchange rates, changing interest rates, 
taxes, fees, and costs of doing business, to name a few.
Environmental Forces
Limited oil reserves are driving nations to consider alternate fuel sources. Global 
climate change, storm activity in various parts of the world, and the limits of 
physical and geographic space in some countries are all examples of environ-
mental forces that will have an impact on business and society in the future.
Political Forces
In today’s global economy, political forces have the potential to shape in-
dustries like never before. Governmental transitions in countries like China 


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
105
and India have led to outsourcing trends that have altered and will continue to 
alter the global economy. Policies and plans of national leaders also shape global 
perceptions. There is no denying the power of political forces in our world.
These categories should be kept in mind when reading newspapers and 
magazines, watching the news, surﬁng the Web, and doing any other ac-
tivities. The best advice in exploring these forces is to read widely and fre-
quently. Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feeds can help to stay connected 
to a user-deﬁned set of news feeds from an endless variety of sources and 
are a very effective way to efﬁciently scan headlines from around the world. 
FORECASTS
Scenarios generally ask what happens if forecasts are wrong, and a STEEP 
analysis will undoubtedly turn up forecasts. During this phase, it is useful 
to understand what the forecasts are saying; and in the next phase, the proj-
ect turns toward asking what if they are wrong. These forces and forecasts 
should be treated with skepticism, but they clearly contain information 
about the industry. Forecasts are “someone else’s understanding and judg-
ment crystallized in a ﬁgure which then becomes a substitute for thinking 
for the person who uses it” (Wack, 1985b, p. 89). The forces and forecasts 
contained in a STEEP analysis may provide useful information. However, 
the goal of scenario planning is to think deeply about the future, to learn 
about it, and to develop one’s own understanding and judgment about how 
to navigate uncertainty. 
DE BONO’S THINKING HATS
Thinking hats (De Bono, 1990) are a technique for thinking about complex 
issues. The approach is based on an assumption that when people think 
about complex issues, they are overcrowded with emotions, logic, data, 
hopefulness, and creativity. These factors are simply too much to make 
sense of at once. People need help breaking apart their thinking by dealing 
with each of these particular factors independently before combining them. 
The thinking hats represent six critical views for thinking about any com-
plex issue. Each is represented by a different color:
• The White Hat—Neutral and objective, this hat is concerned with 
data and an analytical view. Most of us are stuck here.
• The Red Hat—This hat represents the emotional view.


106 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
• The Black Hat—The “devil’s advocate” hat, this is the cautious view.
• The Yellow Hat—This hat represents the completely positive, 
optimistic view.
• The Green Hat—The creative hat, this hat is for new ideas and 
perspectives.
• The Blue Hat—The blue hat is an organizing, synthesizing hat, 
representing overviews, summaries and conclusions.
The six thinking hats can be used in a variety of ways, and not only for 
external thinking. These hats can be used at any time during the scenario 
project, but they are sometimes most helpful when soliciting and capturing 
initial reactions and comments about the initial issue. Two different strate-
gies for using the hats are (1) single use and (2) sequential use (De Bono, 
1990).
In the course of a conversation, it may be useful to inject a different kind 
of thinking, in which case any of the hats can be called upon. The different 
hats can be used to explore a subject and introduce alternate perspectives.
Sequential use of the hats is also a ﬂexible approach and can be done in 
a variety of ways. A facilitator can choose one hat and ask the group to think 
from that perspective. Then another hat is chosen, and so on. Another ap-
proach is to assign a hat to each individual and ask that individual to think 
about the issue from that perspective. 
Two critical factors are important in using the thinking hats: discipline 
and timing. When individuals are asked to think according to a speciﬁc 
hat, they must stay with the hat’s perspective and represent that viewpoint 
for the sake of the group and the intent of the hats. If people are allowed to 
abandon their assigned hat, the danger is that they revert to their original, 
comfortable perspective, and the project gets more of the same. The other 
issue is timing. Because thinking in different ways can be uncomfortable 
for some people, using a short amount of deﬁned time for thinking in these 
alternate perspectives is effective because people will concentrate and focus 
on what they are being asked to do.
In Technology Corporation, we used the thinking hats with great ef-
fect. From the start, buy-in was high, thanks to an engaged CEO. This 
set the tone for experimenting with different modes of thinking, and par-
ticipants began to enjoy playing the various roles. The activity certainly got 
them consciously out of their default thinking patterns.


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
107
Again, the thinking hats can be used in a variety of ways. They can be 
used in a group workshop to stimulate diverse thinking on the initial sce-
nario project purpose, to frame obvious issues in the external environment, 
and as a consulting tool to see the project in different ways, among many 
others. They can also be aimed at the external or internal environments. 
SWOT ANALYSIS
SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) analysis is prob-
ably the most common tool used in strategic thinking and planning. Al-
though the O and T especially are externally focused, SWOT analysis is 
described in detail in the next main section on internal analysis. 
SUMMARY
News media can often be more of a representation of what people are think-
ing than a reﬂection of the facts, so perusing numerous samples from vary-
ing “ﬁlters” is important when conducting an external analysis. For example, 
“[r]outinely pick up a dozen magazines from a newsstand and scan them. 
Include magazines you would not otherwise read” (Schwartz, 1991, p. 81).
While each scenario project will have particular investigative require-
ments, the following are subjects worth paying continual attention to 
(Schwartz, 1991):
• Science and technology 
• Perception-shaping events
• Music
• Fringes
Online sources are also valuable in expanding your personal ﬁlter. Rec-
ommended newsfeeds include Strategy+Business, Fast Company, BBC News, 
the New York Times, Wired, the New York Times Editorials, the Wall Street 
Journal, the World Economic Forum, Earth Trends, and the United Nations 
Development Programme.
INTERNAL ANALYSIS
The internal analysis is focused on understanding forces within the organiza-
tion. The most important tool for accomplishing this is interviews with key 
stakeholders of the organization. Additional tools include questionnaires, 


108 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
observations, and existing organizational data. Other tools for internal anal-
ysis include the SWOT analysis, the theory of the business (Drucker, 1994), 
van der Heijden’s (1997, 2005a) business idea, Rummler and Brache’s (1991) 
levels of performance, and Swanson’s (1994, 2007) performance diagnosis 
matrix. Expert scenario planners use any tools that can help them understand 
an organization’s internal dynamics efﬁciently and effectively.
SWOT ANALYSIS
Readers may be surprised to see the recommended use of a SWOT analysis 
here because some people consider it an outdated strategic tool. A SWOT 
analysis is still a useful way to stimulate strategic thinking and get people 
into the mind-set to think about their organization. Odds are, most have 
used this approach before, and so it is a comfortable way to begin engaging. 
Using a tool that decision makers are familiar with is a helpful bridge into 
scenario planning.
Research warns that the biggest problem with SWOT analyses is 
that the outcomes are never used in any meaningful way (Chermack & 
Kasshanna, 2007). In a scenario project, the insights from a SWOT analysis 
are highly useful in understanding the organization and its internal poli-
tics, and they can increase the relevance of scenarios when inserted into the 
scenario stories developed later on. For example, if information from inter-
views with managers is used in the second round of scenario construction, it 
is likely that the scenarios will be more relevant and provide a better frame-
work for decision making. The key to a successful SWOT analysis is to 
use the information, even if it is as simple as feeding the results back to the 
participating group. Another common oversight with using SWOT is that 
the strengths and weaknesses relate to the internal environment, and the 
opportunities and threats relate to the external environment. The SWOT 
analysis is misused when the internal/external distinction is not made.
SWOT analysis is useful as long as it is not the sole means of internal 
environmental analysis. It contributes useful information and can be used 
in two distinct ways: (1) as a tool to structure data once collected and (2) 
as a tool to provoke further insights and areas in which to conduct further 
research. Figure 6.2 depicts the structure of a typical SWOT analysis.
At its essence, a SWOT analysis is a brainstorming exercise. Using a 
SWOT analysis at this stage of the planning system is beneﬁcial in that 
it explores the perceptions of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and 


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
109
threats. However, it is important to keep in mind that the analysis usually 
contains only the perceptions of managers and executives inside the organi-
zation. A useful SWOT analysis follows up with considerable investigation 
and conﬁrmation. 
It is also important to recognize that an item that falls under the 
strengths category can often be argued as a weakness as well. Thus, the 
danger of a SWOT analysis is in its forced dichotomies. Something is forced 
to be either a strength or a weakness when in reality it could be both, de-
pending on the contextual circumstances. This dilemma provides an ap-
propriate opportunity to use De Bono’s thinking hats to consider alternate 
perspectives.
SWOT Analysis Workshop
A SWOT analysis can be conducted in about a half day, with some prepa-
ration, depending on the number of people involved, and should be struc-
tured according to the model in Figure 6.2. Begin by communicating the 
objective to participants, explaining the process, and answering any ques-
tions. Next, simply ask individuals to list their perceptions of the organiza-
tion’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. These perceptions 
can be combined on a wall chart, computer-projected document, or other 
format. Dialogue is the natural outcome, as there will be varying perspec-
tives, ideas, and disagreement on the category to which a given force may 
belong. Keep in mind two critical points at this stage: (1) participants are 
F I G U R E  6.2  The Basic Process of a SWOT Analysis
1. Define the
 
objective of
the SWOT
analysis.
2. Explain the
 
SWOT
procedure.
6. Develop
actions for
 
moving
forward.
3. Individual
listing of
strengths,
weaknesses,
opportunities,
and threats.
4. Combine
individual
responses.
5. Engage group
in authentic
dialogue.


110 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
verbalizing their perceptions, and (2) the outcomes of the conversation must 
be fed back to the participants. The strategic conversation has begun.
Corporate leaders in Technology Corporation decided to begin with 
a SWOT analysis because most of them were familiar with the process. It 
would be a comfortable way to get started. A conversation with leaders sug-
gested a few important factors for the SWOT analysis, including speciﬁc 
objectives and actions. Figure 6.3 shows the basic process of a SWOT analy-
sis for Technology Corporation. 
Combined and Distilled SWOT Data. Figure 6.4 shows the com-
bined and synthesized SWOT analysis for Technology Corporation. With 
redundancies eliminated, and after clariﬁcation and dialogue, the strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats are relatively simpliﬁed. The real util-
ity was in the conversation about items that are perceived to be strengths, 
which can often be argued as weaknesses. The sharing of perspective is how 
participants learn and begin working toward a shared mental model.
Several individuals had noticeable insights that came simply from tak-
ing the time to talk about strategic issues. It was clear that little to no time 
had been previously dedicated to having conversations about important is-
sues, and having them now was like a breath of fresh air. Once these conver-
sations began, participants enjoyed the ability to reﬂect, and thinking out 
loud became contagious.
F I G U R E  6.3  Technology Corporation’s Basic Process for SWOT Analysis
1. Objective of
the SWOT:
Prepare for
Scenario
Planning—
Launch the
process,
get an
overview of
perceptions.
2. Procedure:
List response,
combine
response,
dialogue.
6. Actions:
Use relevant
information
in scenario
planning—
focus where
perceptions
are most
different.
3. Individual
listing of
strengths,
weaknesses,
opportunities,
and threats.
4. Combine
individual
responses.
5. Dialogue.


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
111
INTERVIEWS
Interviewing individuals or groups of people in an organization is a time-
consuming and detailed process that requires commitment and skill. Inter-
views can be considered as much an art as a science, and the only way to 
develop interviewing skills is through experience.
In scenario planning, the foundation of internal analysis is the content 
of interviews. They are a highly critical piece of the scenario planning sys-
tem as the interviews will reveal opinions, facts, experiences, beliefs, organi-
zational symbols, history, and more. Most important, interviews reveal what 
managers and executives are concerned about. Evoking, addressing, and 
highlighting these concerns is a requirement for scenarios to be effective. 
Interviews can be (1) structured, (2) unstructured, or (3) a combination 
of structured and unstructured. Structured interviews follow a predeter-
mined list of questions and can be scripted so that each interviewee is asked 
Strengths
Intellectual capital
Agile
Hardworking
Innovative
Proposal writing expertise
Ability to focus
Leaders at each level
Weaknesses
Reliant on funding strategy
Small—limited capacity
Tendency for ego-driven projects
Lack of teamwork/communication
Marketing strategy needs 
improvement
Internal functional silos
Opportunities
Leveraging skills to move projects 
to Phases II and III
Fewer projects and more focus
Collaborative effort
Leveraging 
brainpower—communication
Opportunities in manufacturing 
our own products (phase 
III–dependent)
Threats
Political removal/changes in SBIR  
funding
Inability to collaborate more 
effectively
Economic impact on funding 
sources
Competition—emerging 
companies doing what we  
do . . . better?
F I G U R E  6.4 Technology Corporation’s SWOT Analysis


112 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
exactly the same questions. This approach limits responses to the content 
covered by the questions. Unstructured interviews usually follow a much 
more casual track and take the shape of a conversation. In this type of inter-
viewing, the content can extend to cover a much wider range of subjects and 
questions, and each interviewee can be asked a completely different set of 
questions. Combination-type interviews contain structured questions and 
also allow for follow-up and spontaneous questions. 
Group and telephone interviews and focus groups are other types of 
interviews, but they are not necessarily recommended for use in scenario 
planning. People are less likely to share their true opinions if interviewed in 
a group setting. Workshops tend to take care of group conversation and in-
teraction, and they can even function as team-building exercises. Telephone 
interviews do not allow for the face-to-face interaction that is important in 
scenario planning. Body language, mannerisms and other nonverbal com-
munication are valuable, as is the establishment of rapport and a relation-
ship with project participants. In addition, it is unlikely that an individual 
would share his or her true concerns with a stranger over the phone. 
Interviews in scenario planning projects should follow the combina-
tion-type approach. That is, speciﬁc questions should be asked of each par-
ticipant, but room for other issues and conversation should be allowed. The 
“seven questions” have gained popularity in scenario planning because they 
can surface the strategic agenda of decision makers. While there are a few 
varying interpretations of these seven questions, they generally fall into the 
following categories:
1. Clairvoyant
2. Good Scenario
3. Bad Scenario
4. Inheritances from the Past
5. Important Decisions Ahead and Priorities
6. Constraints in the System and Changes That Need to Be Made
7. Epitaph
Speciﬁc sample questions that pertain to each of these seven categories are 
as follows:
1. If you could speak with an [industry] oracle from [year], what three 
things would you like to know about the [organization]?


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
113
2. If the [organization, industry] were to collapse by [year] (a “bad” 
scenario), what might have caused the collapse and why?
3. If the [organization, industry] were thriving, growing, and moving 
in a genuinely positive direction (a “good” scenario) by the year 
[year], what would be true of it?
4. (a) What has surprised you (pleasantly or unpleasantly, speciﬁcally 
or generally) about the [organization, industry] in recent years? 
(b) What have been the memorable “turns” and why?
5. (a) What are the major challenges to be faced by [organization, in-
dustry, etc.] professionals in the next ﬁve years? (b) What are the 
obstacles to be overcome that keep you awake at night?
6. (a) What would hinder the ﬁeld from moving past these obstacles? 
(b) What forces could constrain the [e.g., organization and industry]? 
7. Imagine that your program is in danger of being completely cut. 
What is your argument for keeping it? 
Two common additional questions:
1. What would be some signs that the [organization, industry] is mov-
ing in a positive direction?
2. Any other uncertainties in the environment that might impact the 
future [organization, industry]?
The purpose of the interview stage is to become familiar with the men-
tal models (values, beliefs, assumptions, experiences, hopes, and dreams) 
of a cross section of the organization. The seven questions are the standard 
tool for accomplishing this, but in order for these questions to be effective, 
the establishment of a good relationship with each interviewee is critical. 
Interviewees should be allowed to add anything else they feel is relevant to 
the project, and they may want to know more about the scenario planning 
project as well.
OTHER DATA COLLECTION METHODS
Three other data collection methods can be useful in understanding the 
internal dynamics of an organization: questionnaires, observations, and ex-
isting data. Though these are not often featured or highlighted in published 
scenario cases or in existing scenario planning texts, they deserve mention 
because there may be times when their use is appropriate.


114 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
Questionnaires
Questionnaires allow the collection of data from a large number of people, 
across locations, in a relatively efﬁcient manner. They are useful in getting 
a snapshot of current perceptions in the organization. For example, cul-
ture questionnaires might be used before starting the scenario construction 
workshops if culture comes up in several interviews as a barrier to engage-
ment in the scenario project. Change-readiness questionnaires can be use-
ful if there has been a lot of recent consulting activity in the organization, 
mergers, leadership changes, or reorganizations. Custom questionnaires 
can also be developed to access targeted information, but they can take 
some time.
Observations
Observations are useful in understanding abstract behaviors such as think-
ing, planning, and estimating (Swanson, 2007). Some think these behaviors 
are unaccountable, but observing people perform their work functions on 
the job can yield a great deal of qualitative and quantitative data. Observa-
tion requires a high level of skill, patience, and the ability to be unobtrusive 
and avoid changing how the individual being observed performs his or her 
work. However, if these assets are used expertly, great insights can be gener-
ated about the nature of knowledge-based work and how masters of speciﬁc 
content knowledge perform. 
Existing Data
Existing data should be used to the extent possible. Use of this data col-
lection method usually happens informally as one becomes oriented to the 
organization and its personalities, issues, industry, and culture. Particu-
larly relevant in scenario planning are previous uses of scenario planning 
and the outcomes, other planning tools that have been used, and other 
recent change initiatives. Financial and performance data, employee sur-
vey data, and customer data are all other useful data pools to examine. It 
is useful to know previous successes and failures with planning, and to 
know what was gained through such processes and where they may have 
collapsed. It is also useful to review reports from other external consul-
tants who may have been working with the organization to get a general 
feel for other recent change activity. 


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
115
THEORY OF THE BUSINESS/BUSINESS IDEA
In 1994, Drucker published “The Theory of the Business,” which was an 
attempt at understanding the primary growth loop of any organization. 
Drucker wrote:
These are the assumptions that shape any organization’s behavior, dic-
tate its decisions about what to do and what not to do, and deﬁne what 
the organization considers meaningful results. These assumptions are 
about markets. They are about identifying customers and competitors, 
their values and behavior. These are about technology and its dynamics, 
about a company’s strengths and weaknesses. These assumptions are 
about what a company gets paid for. They are what I call a company’s 
theory of the business. (p. 96)
Four critical aspects form the theory of the business:
• The assumptions about the environment, mission, and core 
competencies must ﬁt reality.
• The assumptions in these three areas must ﬁt each other.
• The theory of the business must be known and understood throughout 
the organization.
• The theory of the business must be tested constantly.
From a diagnostic perspective, it is helpful to know the status of each of 
these speciﬁcations. Scenario planning will address all of these points, but it 
is important to know at the start if, for example, the business idea is known, 
understood, and articulated throughout the organization. 
Related to the theory of the business is the business idea developed by 
van der Heijden (1997, 2005b). The business idea is based on system theory 
and system dynamics concepts. The business idea is simply a visual display 
of the primary growth loop—it is the business model. The business idea 
shows how the organization has understood a social need, created a novel 
idea about how to address that need, developed expertise in addressing that 
need, and created a viable business based on the perceived value of that need. 
THEORY OF THE BUSINESS WORKSHOP
It is very useful to conduct a workshop based on understanding the the-
ory of the business/business idea. This workshop can be completed in a 


116 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
few hours and can alone initiate strategic insights, but it also will generate 
thinking directly relevant to the work that takes place in the scenario con-
struction phase (see Chapter 7). Gather the relevant participants in a setting 
conducive to creative thinking (e.g., a meeting room with large whiteboards 
or newsprint on the walls so that participants can think and draw out loud). 
Ask each participant to use a single sheet of paper and brieﬂy describe
• whether the assumptions about the environment, mission, and core 
competencies ﬁt reality;
• whether the assumptions in these three areas ﬁt each other;
• the extent to which the theory of the business is known and 
understood throughout the organization; and
• the extent to which the theory of the business is tested.
Next, ask each participant to draw or write out the business idea on 
another sheet of paper. When all participants have completed the exercise, 
ask them to individually report their responses to the four speciﬁcations of 
the theory of the business, and then ask them to share their business ideas. 
The variety in responses to both of these activities indicates how uniﬁed 
or scattered the thinking is about the core purpose of the organization and 
how well it is understood. A useful goal is to create one unifying business 
idea. Participants can present their models and work together to build a 
business idea and set of assumptions that capture the essence of what the 
organization is trying to accomplish. This is a simple exercise in eliciting 
individual mental models and working toward a shared one. As the strategic 
conversation was started in the SWOT analysis workshop, it continues here 
as participants share ideas, perspectives, and insights.
In my own experiences, if I ask twelve participants to draw or write out 
the business idea, they will draw or write out twelve different things. I have 
found a tremendous amount of utility in then asking participants to create 
a single business idea out of what they have individually generated. This 
simple activity has frequently produced “aha” moments in participants I 
have worked with, and the resulting theory of the business is a critical item 
later on in the scenario project.
Technology Corporation’s Theory of the Business/Business Idea
Technology Corporation’s scenario team met for a half day with a general 
purpose of understanding and sharing perceptions of the organization’s 


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
117
business model. Before presenting the organization’s theory of the business 
and business idea, some background information on perceived core compe-
tencies, vision, and other internal thinking will be useful to set the context. 
Core competencies: Developing innovative products in the chemical, 
contracting, manufacturing industries, developing human capital (ex-
pertise and innovation), and listening to customer needs
Activities: Technology Corporation researches and develops intellectual 
property to license and sell technologies related to innovations in en-
ergy, chemicals, and technology.
Vision: Technology Corporation develops ideas and products that meet 
the energy, chemical, and technological challenges of the future.
Model: Three concentric circles for the business model illustrating 
short-term, midterm, and long-term strategies (Figure 6.5): 
1. Short-term: Current funding sources including Small Business In-
novation Research.
F I G U R E  6.5  Technology Corporation’s Innovation-Development of Intellectual 
Property
Short-Term Strategy
Brain Power and
Contract R&D
Long-Term Strategy
Solve Tomorrow’s Challenges
and Invest in the Most
Promising Technology
Midterm Strategy
Build Cross-Functional Teams
and Contract R&D
Structure


118 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
2. Midterm: Lessen dependence of SBIR.
Contract R&D. Delays in time horizons.
This midterm strategy is an opportunity to lay the foundation for fu-
ture success (develop cross-functional teams, build the infrastructure 
for R&D, and listen to customers to build trust). Midterm activities 
build Technology Corporation’s reputation.
Cross-functional teams allow everyone to be involved in the project 
at all times. If an issue comes up, decisions can be made quickly. 
Teams are involved early to understand the big picture and help re-
duce time to market.
3. Long-term: Innovation—development of intellectual property
Key questions for Technology Corporation: 
• When does Technology Corporation stop pouring resources into 
technologies that have achieved their purpose? In other words, 
what will Technology Corporation stop doing?
• Will Technology Corporation consider partnering with other 
companies to develop technologies?
• Will Technology Corporation offer incentives to cross-functional 
teams to innovate?
• Will Technology Corporation look to outside resources to ﬁll 
gaps in core competencies needed to execute the innovation?
Technology Corporation’s Theory of the Business 
1. Do the assumptions about the environment, mission, and core 
competencies ﬁt reality?
Yes. Decision makers in Technology Corporation realize it is risky 
to be committed to a single funding source, but the purpose of the 
organization meets a signiﬁcant need in society. The key will be in 
moving beyond simply idea-based projects and into design and man-
ufacturing processes to see their products built to suit speciﬁc actual 
needs. The mismatch is in any assumption that the current stream of 
SBIR funding will be consistent. Most members of the organization 
agree that this is the only assumption that may not ﬁt reality.
2. Do the assumptions in these three areas ﬁt each other?
Yes. Again, the only potential problem here is if change strategies fail 
and decision makers fall back into relying on the same sources they 
have relied on over the past several years.


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
119
3. Is the theory of the business known and understood throughout 
the organization?
It is unclear how well the theory of the business has been communi-
cated and understood. An additional purpose of the scenario project 
is to communicate the current theory of the business and create a 
shared understanding of how and why it needs to change.
4. Has the theory of the business been tested?
No. One other key purpose of the scenario project will be to docu-
ment the current theory of the business, show where it is weak, de-
velop an alternative, and test it in each scenario.
Technology Corporation Business Idea
The business idea in Figure 6.6 is a simple model that captures the essence 
of Technology Corporation’s current overall strategy. The organization has 
key expertise in writing proposals that garner funding. Funded proposals 
account for the majority of Technology Corporation’s operating budget, and 
currently, few if any products are produced. Under the current model, the 
corporation uses funding to work on good ideas and enhance its intellectual 
property. The result of this is increasing brainpower—Technology Corpora-
tion continues to provide intellectual challenges for its scientists and devel-
opers, but these ideas are never brought to fruition or taken to market.
F I G U R E  6.6  Technology Corporation’s Business Idea
SBIR Phase I
Intellectual Property
Brainpower
Useful Technologies
for Consumers and
Other Corporations


120 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
The workshop for creating the business idea involved thirteen people 
from Technology Corporation. Each participant drew a similar model, but 
signiﬁcant insights were not achieved until each one was able to see what 
his or her colleagues were drawing. Combining and simplifying these mod-
els was extremely useful, and all thirteen participants agreed that signiﬁ-
cant changes would need to be made. First, the reliance on a single funding 
source was clariﬁed to a couple of individuals who were not totally aware 
of it, and the implications discussed. Second, all thirteen people saw that 
signiﬁcant cultural changes would result from changing the business model 
to include additional funding sources, and moving into Phases II and III of 
existing funding protocols.
SYNTHESIS TOOLS
Two additional analysis/synthesis tools can be used to summarize the infor-
mation that is collected in the scenario exploration phase. These are Rumm - 
ler and Brache’s nine performance variables and Swanson’s performance di-
agnosis matrix. Not all scenario planning projects will use a depth of analy-
sis that makes these tools relevant, but where appropriate, these tools have 
the capability to structure and summarize a great deal of information in a 
relatively simple format. 
RUMMLER AND BRACHE’S NINE PERFORMANCE VARIABLES
The individual, process, and organizational levels are the critical divisions 
of the organization (Rummler & Brache, 1995). The greatest opportunity 
for performance improvement is in understanding and leveraging the pro-
cess level. The key strategic perspective is based on ﬁt among the levels of 
the organization (Rummler & Brache, 1995). The nine performance vari-
ables are shown in Figure 6.7.
Job/performer goals must support process goals, which must in turn 
support organization goals. If the organization goals change (as a result of a 
planning process), then logically, the process goals and job/performer goals 
should change. Likewise, job design must support process design, which 
must support organization design (Rummler & Brache, 1995). The utility 
of the nine performance variables are in achieving ﬁt or alignment among 
these nine key variables. For example, simply describing the cells of the 
matrix will yield useful insights. Asking questions about alignment is the 


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
121
logical next step and can reveal where there may be signiﬁcant breakdowns 
in alignment of goals, design, and management. The team/group level has 
become a common addition to the nine performance variables.
SWANSON’S PERFORMANCE DIAGNOSIS MATRIX
Swanson’s performance diagnosis matrix (2007; see Figure 6.8) is another 
high-utility synthesis tool. The matrix provides a means of synthesizing the 
vast amount of information that has been collected about the internal func-
tion of the organization. More speciﬁcally, the matrix includes a number of 
critical variables to consider in the context of performance problems. While 
some of these might not be immediately relevant to the scenario exercise, 
the overall utility of the matrix is in its use as a snapshot of organizational 
performance. The critical variables in Swanson’s matrix are mission/goal, 
system design, capacity, motivation, and expertise. These variables can be 
assessed at the levels of the organization proposed by Rummler and Brache 
(job/performer, process, and organization). Swanson’s matrix is also fre-
quently updated to include team/group levels just like the performance im-
provement matrix by Rummler and Brache.
A properly used matrix will reveal many issues inside any organization. 
It is not realistic to assume all of these issues can be solved. The critical is-
sues must be worked on, particularly those related to the strategic agenda of 
the organization, if scenario planning is to be used. 
These two synthesis tools were developed as tools for general organi-
zational analysis. Their use in scenario planning is not required and, in 
some cases, may not even be recommended. However, their utility is in 
F I G U R E  6.7  Rummler and Brache’s (1995) Nine Performance Variables 
The Three Performance Needs
Goals
Design
Management
The Three  
Levels of 
Performance
Organization 
Level
Organization 
Goals
Organization 
Design
Organization 
Management
Process 
Level
Process  
Goals
Process 
Design
Process 
Management
Job/Performer 
Level
Job  
Goals
Job  
Design
Job 
Management


122 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
synthesizing information about the internal state of the organization. These 
synthesis tools are particularly helpful in cases with a history of ongoing sce-
nario planning or other change initiatives. In these instances, problems may 
be hiding in places not often investigated in the commonly used scenario 
planning tools. Moreover, these tools are intended to assess overall organi-
zational viability, which ﬁts well with scenario projects aimed at organiza-
tional learning, or the continuous quality improvement of anticipatory and 
strategic thinking inside the organization.
Technology Corporation’s Performance Diagnosis Matrix
Figure 6.9 shows a snapshot of Swanson’s (2007) performance diagnosis 
matrix applied to Technology Corporation. The matrix shows where there 
are issues and indicates leverage points for starting to work on them. 
F I G U R E  6.8  Swanson’s (2007) Performance Diagnosis Matrix
Performance Levels
Performance 
Variables
Organizational Level
Process Level
Individual Level
Mission/Goal
Does the organiza- 
tional mission/goal fit 
the reality of the 
economic, political, 
and cultural forces?
Do the process goals 
enable the organiza- 
tion to meet organi- 
zational and individual 
missions/goals?
Are the professional 
and personal missions/ 
goals of individuals 
congruent with the 
organization’s?
Systems 
Design
Does the organiza- 
tional system provide 
structure and policies 
supporting the desired 
performance?
Are processes 
designed in such a 
way as to work as a 
system?
Does the individual 
design support 
performance?
Capacity
Does the organization 
have the leadership, 
capital, and infra- 
structure to achieve its 
missions/goals?
Does the process  
have the capacity to 
perform (quantity, 
quality, and 
timelines)?
Does the individual 
have the mental, 
physical, and emo- 
tional capacity to 
perform?
Motivation
Do the policies, 
culture, and reward 
systems support the 
desired performance?
Does the process 
provide the informa- 
tion and human 
factors required to 
maintain it?
Does the individual 
want to perform no 
matter what?
Expertise
Does the organization 
establish and maintain 
selection and training 
policies and 
resources?
Does the process of 
developing expertise 
meet the changing 
demands of changing 
processes?
Does the individual 
have the knowledge, 
skills, and experience 
to perform?


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
123
F I G U R E  6.9 Technology Corporation’s Performance Diagnosis Matrix
Performance  
Variables
Performance Levels
Organizational  
Level
Process Level
Team Level
Individual Level
Mission/ 
goal
Does the organi- 
zation mission/
goal fit the reality 
of the economic, 
political, and 
cultural forces?
No, problems 
here—changing 
environment, 
need to reeval- 
uate goals.
Do the process 
goals enable the 
organization-, 
team-, and 
individual-level 
goals to be met?
Not sure—if 
organization 
goals change, 
these will 
change, too.
Do the team goals 
enable the organi- 
zation-, process-, 
and individual-
level goals to be 
met?
If organization 
goals change, 
these will change, 
too,
Are individual goals 
(job descriptions) 
supporting team, 
process, and 
organizational 
goals?
If organization 
goals change, 
these will change, 
too,
Systems  
design
Does the organi- 
zation system 
provide structure 
and policies sup- 
porting the desired 
performance?
Yes—but could 
be altered to 
reward team 
performance 
more completely.
Are the processes 
designed in a 
logical, efficient, 
and systematic 
way?
Yes—but they 
may need to 
change.
Are the teams 
assembled in a 
logical, efficient 
way that also takes 
advantage of indi- 
vidual strengths?
No—collabora- 
tion is a problem. 
Possible leverage 
here to get people 
working together 
more.
Does the job design 
enable the individ- 
ual to perform in 
the team as required 
by the process?
Yes
Capacity
Does the organi- 
zation have the 
leadership, capital, 
and infrastructure 
to achieve its 
mission/goals?
Yes
Does the process 
have the capacity 
to meet the 
quantity, quality, 
and time line 
requirements?
Yes
Do teams demon- 
strate the capacity 
to meet the 
quantity, quality, 
and time line 
requirements?
No—more 
collaboration and 
teamwork  
is needed.
Do individuals 
have the mental, 
physical, and emo- 
tional capacity to 
perform as required 
by the team and 
the process?
Yes—absolutely
(continued)


124 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
CONCLUSION
This chapter has described the scenario exploration phase, covering 
general tools in assessing the external and internal environments. The pur-
pose of this phase is to learn about the industry and external environment, 
as well as the internal dynamics of the organization. Simultaneously, partic-
ipant viewpoints, ideas, and perspectives can be gathered. Two workshops 
were recommended (on SWOT analysis and theory of the business/business 
idea) to stimulate strategic thinking and prepare participants for the sce-
nario construction that is to follow.
F I G U R E  6.9  Technology Corporation’s Performance Diagnosis Matrix (continued)
Performance  
Variables
Performance Levels
Organizational  
Level
Process Level
Team Level
Individual Level
Motivation
Do the policies, 
culture, and 
reward systems 
support the desired 
performance?
Generally, yes, 
but not in the 
case of team 
performance
Does the process 
provide the required 
information? Is 
the process moti- 
vating for the 
workforce?
Yes
Is the reward sys- 
tem structured to 
enable maximum 
performance from 
each team 
member?
Yes, but needs 
adjustment to 
reward 
collaboration
Are individuals mo- 
tivated to perform 
as required by team 
and process goals?
Possibly inter- 
nally, but they are 
not formally 
rewarded for 
doing so.
Expertise
Do the selection 
and training 
policies and 
resources enable 
the desired 
performance?
Yes
Is the expertise 
required by the 
process contin- 
uously determined 
and developed?
Yes
Are teams devel- 
oping collective 
expertise, or are 
teams continually 
reconfigured to 
share expertise?
Opportunity 
here—teams  
are not perform- 
ing well, but 
individuals are.
Do individuals 
have the knowl- 
edge, skills, and 
expertise required 
by the team and 
process?
Yes


  
P H A S E 2—S C E N A R I O  E X P L O R A T I O N  
125
The core outcomes of this phase are summaries of the state of the in-
ternal and external environments. Items that should be included are the 
following:
• A listing of STEEP forces, with major issues in each category 
• A report of the SWOT analysis
• An executive summary of the internal interviews
• A summary of information gained through use of other data collection 
methods
• A summary report of the theory of the business/business idea 
workshop
Optional but useful synthesis tools include these:
• A completed table summarizing Rummler and Brache’s nine 
performance variables
• A completed version of Swanson’s performance diagnosis matrix
This chapter includes examples of these elements as applied in the scenario 
case. These reports do not need to be lengthy. In fact, they should be short, 
providing the core, relevant information for the project. The goal is to pres-
ent an understanding of the basic internal and external dynamics, recogniz-
ing that the next phase, scenario construction, delves more deeply into the 
external environment.


This page intentionally left blank 


 127
Phase 3—Scenario 
Development:  
Digging Deeper
The scenario development phase consists of workshops used to build sce-
narios. Most scenario planning books cover the materials presented in this 
chapter. These activities are the signature of scenario planning. The prior 
phase on scenario exploration included several tools for assessing the exter-
nal and internal environments. This follow-up phase digs deeper into both of 
these environments. The key outcome of scenario development is two to four 
scenarios that are relevant, plausible, and challenging. During the creation 
of scenarios, participants challenge each other’s viewpoints and set the foun-
dation for a shared mental model of the organization and its environment.
KEY TERMS AND APPROACHES
Before getting into the details of scenario development, it is important to 
review some key scenario terms and cover some philosophical approaches 
to scenario development. 
PREDETERMINED ELEMENTS
Predetermined elements are predictable elements that do not depend on a 
particular chain of events (Schwartz, 1991). Predictable elements are divided 
into four categories: slow-changing phenomena, constrained situations, in 
the pipeline, and inevitable conclusions. The most obvious example of a pre-
determined element is demographics. Populations are predictable. Popula-
tions are also an example of elements in the pipeline. Much has been written 
7
