# 8 Phase 4—Scenario Implementation: Putting Scenarios to Use

170 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
• Lewin’s force ﬁeld analysis
• Nominal group technique
• Team building
• Value voting
• Simulations
• Visioning
All of these approaches to change management can be useful in consider-
ing the implications of scenarios, and all of them can be incorporated into 
workshops using scenarios to leverage change in organizations. The critical 
tip for focusing scenario use, however, is that the initial issue must drive any 
method. This approach will keep the project from slipping onto other issues.
F I G U R E  8.1  Performance-Based Scenario System—Scenario Implementation 
Phase
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
171
Each scenario planning project is a customized learning project. There-
fore, there are few speciﬁc outcomes that will be common to all scenario 
projects. Returning to the original purpose, issue, or question, and looking 
at the business model in each scenario are critical requirements of nearly all 
scenario projects. The suggestions in this chapter are a framework aimed 
at getting the most out of scenarios. Experienced change consultants may 
want to add to and modify the workshops listed here and create other ways 
of using scenarios. The goal is to make sure the scenarios are used to think 
critically about various aspects of the organization. Scenario use is intended 
to shift the thinking inside the organization, so the fun and creativity that 
emerge in developing scenarios should be carried through into the scenario 
implementation phase. 
Scenarios must be presented to participants in ways that provoke learn-
ing that leads to strategic insight. Many participants will have insights and 
communication breakthroughs during some of the scenario construction 
workshops described in the previous chapter. Research shows that a great 
deal of learning happens throughout the scenario construction and imple-
mentation phases (Chermack, Lynham, & van der Merwe, 2006; Cher-
mack & van der Merwe, 2003). Thus, the likelihood of provoking strategic 
insights increases by involving people in the whole scenario planning sys-
tem. This is another argument for deductive scenario building.
USING SCENARIOS PURPOSEFULLY
Roger Penrose (2004), a professor of mathematics at Oxford, wrote that 
when two people successfully communicate, the words most often used are 
“Oh, I see!” A logical question is “What is it that is seen?” What is the 
substance of a strategic insight (frequently called an “aha” moment)? This 
ability to see anew or to develop joint understanding via conversation and 
dialogue is a key intention of most scenario projects.
The speciﬁc activities using scenarios to build toward achieving this 
sense of sight are the focus of this chapter. Revisiting the initial prob-
lem and question begins the process of developing insights and creates a 
basis for the strategic conversation described by van der Heijden (1997, 
2005a). The most critical strategic learning happens from the synthesis 
of using scenarios to examine strategic issues and various aspects of the 
organization. 


172 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
WIND TUNNELING
The basic idea behind scenario implementation is the concept of wind tun-
neling. Wind tunneling ﬁrst appeared in aerodynamics research to test air-
planes and simulate the environment of free ﬂight. Eventually, wind tunnels 
were used to test buildings and automobiles and examine a variety of struc-
tural properties. The concept is the same with scenarios. Scenarios function 
as conceptual wind tunnels in which to measure a variety of organizational 
characteristics.
This book—and many others—have highlighted the high degree of 
change in the external environment, describing things as turbulent. Tur-
bulence occurs when there are sudden changes in the environment and the 
structural properties of objects begin to show their inadequacies. The ob-
jects can be airplane wings in aerodynamic wind tunnels, or organizations 
in conceptual wind tunnels. Either way, turbulence is an environmental 
characteristic that puts stress on the object in question, be it an airplane or 
an organization. Usually, pilots change altitude—they seek a different envi-
ronment. Because such an option is not readily available for organizational 
decision makers, they are forced to think about how to build an organiza-
tion that can withstand the stresses imposed on it. Scenarios are tools for 
building such a resilient organization.
Scenarios create a way to analyze the organization in a variety of con-
ditions. Remember that a basic premise of scenario planning is that the 
environment changes too rapidly for most strategic planning models to be 
useful. Scenario planning is built on the assumption that the environment 
changes constantly. By building uncertainty into the environment as a basic 
structural feature, scenarios vary the environment in which the organiza-
tion is operating. Learning scenarios are speciﬁcally used to present a range 
of possible external contextual conditions (Wack, 1984). With scenarios 
serving as varying contextual conditions, critical aspects of the organization 
are examined carefully. 
Scenarios represent the different future conditions within which the 
strategy, business model or other decisions must ﬁt. Wind tunneling 
is used to test decisions for robustness and for exposing opportunities 
and risks. An important additional beneﬁt of wind tunneling is that the 
leadership engaged in wind tunneling are continually adjusting their as-
sumptions as they enter the different worlds described in each scenario. 


  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
173
As leaders check their decisions or business models in the various sce-
narios they are often required to adjust their thinking based on evidence 
of ﬂawed assumptions. This process is ﬁlled with critical learning op-
portunities in the scenario-based strategy framework, and draws highly 
on constructivist learning principles (for a detailed description of the 
cognitive processes at work in scenario planning and wind-tunneling, 
see Chermack & van der Merwe, 2003). (van der Merwe, 2008, p. 233)
Each of the suggested workshops in this chapter are variations on the 
wind tunneling implementation strategy. To clarify, the workshops de-
scribed here are all based on throwing ideas, strategies, plans, questions, and 
projects into the scenarios, asking questions, and ﬁnding out what more can 
be learned.
OVERVIEW OF THE SCENARIO 
IMPLEMENTATION WORKSHOPS
Like the scenario development phase, a series of workshops must be designed 
to use the scenarios and maximize their beneﬁt. This chapter presents ﬁve 
recommended workshops for using scenarios, with the following focuses:
• Examining the initial question
• Testing the theory of the business/business idea
• Analyzing current strategies
• Developing “signals” 
• Creating an experiential learning exercise
The ﬁrst two workshops should be required; the others are optional. Again, 
experienced consultants may want to integrate scenarios into other processes 
with which they are familiar. 
EXAMINING THE INITIAL QUESTION—WORKSHOP 1
The ﬁrst step in putting the scenarios to use is to return to the initial pur-
pose, problem, and question. After all, the priority of the project is to de-
velop a variety of different ways to explore the problem and answer the 
question. This workshop can be informal and needs only to bring the team 
and decision makers back together in a room suitable for brainstorming. 
Again, whiteboards or newsprint on the walls, room to move around, com-
fortable chairs, and plenty of paper, pencils, and markers will work nicely. 


174 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
The scenario project leader can present all of the scenarios, or, if appro-
priate, individuals who wrote the speciﬁc scenarios can present them. The 
presentations should be short, involve the essence of the stories, and use 
colorful pictures or slides to describe each scenario. The project leader then 
facilitates a dialogue relating back to the initial question. The following 
questions may be useful in starting the conversation:
• What have we learned throughout the scenario development process 
that relates to our initial question?
• How would we answer the initial question in each scenario? Are the 
answers different in each scenario?
• What additional information would we want to know?
• What different ways of solving our strategic dilemma are suggested by 
entertaining these scenarios?
• What are the clear strategic opportunities that can be seen in each scenario?
• What general actions would we recommend around the initial 
problem, question, or issue, having considered each of these scenarios 
and their implications?
The goal of this workshop is to begin a genuine conversation about the 
potential issues decision makers may face and to provide a mechanism to 
wonder about the future. Research indicates that executives spend less than 
10 percent of their time on strategic issues (Nash, 2007). Providing a space 
to think and reﬂect on strategic issues on its own is a valuable contribution. 
Depending on the size of the organization and the reaction to once again 
thinking strategically, more than one scenario presentation around the ini-
tial issue may be necessary. 
Often, additional workshops to simply reﬂect on the project and explore 
insights that have come up are requested. I have found that almost anyone 
who participates in a scenario project develops a clear desire to reﬂect; and 
once given the time and space to think in this way, they seem to want more 
of it. This was certainly the case with Technology Corporation. Corporate 
leaders initially agreed to three half-day workshops to implement scenarios. 
Based on the participant interactions, and insightful dialogue that was com-
ing out of the ﬁrst two workshops, leaders asked to extend the conversation 
with two additional workshops beyond the initial three. They speciﬁcally 
asked that the additional time not be structured but, rather, left open to 
continue dialogue on deep issues that had arisen. 


  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
175
Tips for Presentations
Presentations are an effective way to communicate scenarios. Wack’s pre-
sentations at Shell are legendary, and he traveled throughout the world 
delivering compelling sets of scenarios. By all accounts, he was a gifted com-
municator. Honing communications skills is an evolutionary process, and a 
few basic understandings will increase the effectiveness of any presentation. 
The surest way to void a presentation of meaning and put the audience 
to sleep is to read the presentation slides. This is an unacceptable practice, 
yet many presenters fall into this habit. A few tips to consider in sharing a 
presentation are as follows:
• Rehearse. Great presenters rehearse for each slide of their presentations. 
They plan the core message that goes along with each of the slides and 
create innovative ways to deliver that message.
• Use visuals. Slides should offer minimal text. Instead, incorporate 
images that are aesthetically pleasing. These make it impossible to read 
the slides, and they provide the viewer with something more interest- 
ing to look at than bulleted text.
• Be enthusiastic. If you don’t have passion for your topic, neither will 
your audience. Great speakers get excited about what they are talking 
about because they have to. Presentations given by Pierre Wack and 
Peter Schwartz are legendary for their passion and enthusiasm.
For more useful information about delivering effective presentations, con-
sider Garr Reynolds’s (2010) book Presentation Zen, or visit his website at 
www.garrreynolds.com. 
SCENARIO IMMERSION: A VARIATION ON EXAMINING THE 
INITIAL QUESTION—WORKSHOP 2
A similar approach to considering the scenarios is called “scenario immer-
sion” (Wilson & Ralston, 2006). Participants develop their thoughts about 
the opportunities and threats as well as possible actions and strategies for 
each scenario. The facilitator explains that the goal of the workshop is to 
develop as many ideas as possible about how the organization should pro-
ceed, and participants are encouraged to think broadly to capture a wide 
range of possible actions for decision makers to take. The process unfolds as 
each scenario is presented, and participants are asked to assume the role of 


176 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
a decision maker. Each participant is asked to identify three to ﬁve oppor-
tunities and three to ﬁve threats. Each of these is recorded on a single note 
card. Participants are then asked to develop a strategy they believe could be 
effective in that scenario. 
Once these exercises are complete, the process moves into a voting 
round. Each participant is asked to nominate one threat and one opportu-
nity he or she believes to be critical in that scenario. The idea is to leverage 
the collective capital of the participants in the room to distill a core set of 
opportunities and threats. This part of the process is completed for each 
scenario.
When critical opportunities and threats have been identiﬁed, the pro-
cess turns to strategies. The group is asked to consider all of the strategies 
that have been brainstormed, and to look for the strategies that appear in 
more than one scenario. The goal is to identify two or three strategies that 
can be viable across all or multiple scenarios. This is perhaps the most useful 
outcome of any scenario project.
TESTING THE THEORY OF THE BUSINESS/BUSINESS IDEA—
WORKSHOP 3
Another effective exercise is to examine the theory of the business/business 
idea in each scenario. Using the same brainstorming space set up described 
in earlier chapters, the team can take the theory of the business and business 
idea developed in the scenario exploration phase (see Chapter 6) and wind-
tunnel them through each of the scenarios. 
The process of testing the theory of the business in the context provided 
by each scenario should take about a half day. The scenario team presents a 
scenario to decision makers, and a dialogue is initiated about how the the-
ory of the business may need to change in order to be viable in a given sce-
nario. Key questions for exploring the theory of the business include these:
• Do our assumptions about the environment, mission, and core com- 
petencies ﬁt or enable us to take action within the futures presented in 
each of the scenarios?
• Do our assumptions about the environment, mission, and core com- 
petencies ﬁt each other in each of the scenarios?
• Is our theory of the business known and understood throughout the 
organization?
• How can we continuously test our theory of the business?


  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
177
These questions should be posed for each scenario. These conversations can 
become quite diverse and reach into unexpected areas. It is OK to continue 
to explore ideas during these conversations, but keep in mind the goal is to 
work toward how the theory of the business may need to change to suit a 
variety of potential futures.
A similar process can be used to explore the business idea. One work-
shop described in the scenario exploration phase is to ask decision makers 
to draw or write out a model of how they interpret the business idea. Then, 
facilitators attempt to synthesize the various models, capturing the variety 
in interpretation. The synthesized model can then be considered in each 
scenario. Here are key questions for the business idea:
• Are we continuing to serve a business need with our products/services 
in each scenario?
• Would our distinctive competencies still be distinctive in each of the 
scenarios?
• Would we lose our competitive advantage in any of the scenarios? 
How would it change?
Revised Theory of the Business/Business Idea for  
Technology Corporation
As a result of a workshop to test the theory of the business/business idea in 
Technology Corporation, the team decided their business idea needed to 
change if they were to move beyond their current single source of funding. 
The resulting revised business idea is captured in Figure 8.2.
Technology Corporation’s revised business idea clearly includes moving 
beyond the production of intellectual property and into the production of 
new, useful technology products. The new business idea includes increased 
contracting with R&D partners, the licensing and selling of new technol-
ogy, and cross-functional collaboration. These additions will be critical in 
moving Technology Corporation forward, beyond its current situation. 
The response to the revised business idea in Technology Corporation 
was overwhelming. Many expressed surprise that such a simple exercise 
could have such profound results. Managers expressed a greater under-
standing of what was going on in the minds of decision makers and leaders 
after conversations about the core purpose of the organization. Executives 
expressed a sense of unity in knowing and understanding what their col-
leagues thought and their rationale for taking certain stances.


178 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
ANALYZING CURRENT STRATEGIES—WORKSHOP 4
Most decision makers operate under a set of strategic goals whether they 
have used scenario planning or not. These goals and strategies can be viewed 
through the “lens” of each scenario to see where they may or may not make 
sense. In this optional workshop, participants come together to consider the 
organization’s strategy, current strategic initiatives, risky potential projects, 
and other organizational goals in the context of each scenario. The purpose 
of this workshop is to assess current organizational goals and their viability 
in each scenario. Ultimately, a manageable set of strategies that contribute 
to the advancement of the organization is sought. Goals and strategies that 
are found to distract from the core purpose of the organization (the theory 
of the business/business idea) can be considered further and potentially re-
moved from the strategic agenda.
For example, a major corporation I worked with had a set of eleven 
strategic goals. We designed a workshop in which we asked participants to 
rank their eleven strategic goals in each of the scenarios. Participants saw 
that their priorities shifted in each scenario. After working through the ex-
ercise, decision makers saw that four of their strategic goals were generally 
irrelevant in all four scenarios. They saw that elements of the four strategic 
goals that were low in utility could be absorbed as components of other 
F I G U R E  8.2 Technology Corporation’s Revised Business Idea
Brainpower
SBIR
Phases
I & II
Intellectual
Property
New
Technology
Pure Science
Science + Business Development
Cross-
functional
Collaboration
Innovation
(Science
Manufacturing
Brainpower)
License and
sell new
technologies
External Forces
Contract
R&D
Services
with
Partners


  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
179
goals. With some modiﬁcation, shifting, and rewriting, decision makers 
collectively decided to collapse their goals into a more efﬁcient list of seven 
strategic goals.
The point is not necessarily to have fewer strategies or goals. Instead, 
the goal is to learn to see redundancies or initiatives that are not useful in 
moving the organization forward, or to discover activities that do not con-
tribute to the long-term sustainability of the company. Activities that are 
not seen to contribute should be examined closely and abandoned if they 
don’t offer at least potential utility in sustaining the organization and con-
tributing to growth over the long term.
DEVELOPING “SIGNALS”—WORKSHOP 5
Signals are sometimes referred to as “leading indicators” or “signposts.” Sig-
nals are the events in a given scenario that may indicate its story is begin-
ning to unfold. In other words, they are things to pay attention to that 
could indicate the future is beginning to happen as it is described in one of 
the scenarios. Developing signals is a highly undervalued part of the sce-
nario planning system. It is worth spending time thinking about the things 
that will indicate major shifts in the external environment. Using the same 
workshop format as described earlier, the team should spend a few hours 
going over each scenario and identifying the events that can be viewed as 
triggers of larger change tendencies. 
In another recent scenario project I facilitated, these signals were 
the primary output sought by the CEO. She was very interested in these 
events that signaled major changes on the horizon. Therefore, we spent 
extra time on these elements and found it to be highly worthwhile. We 
designed a presentation that focused solely on the signals. The conversa-
tion that formed around the signals led to several other insights, and those 
insights served to bolster the decision makers’ “anticipatory capacity” in 
that they left that presentation knowing what to look for in the following 
eighteen months.
“Signals” for Technology Corporation
Figure 8.3 presents the signals for Technology Corporation’s scenarios. 
These signals are general indicators that a given scenario may be starting 
to unfold. As such, these are the items that should be on decision makers’ 
“radar screens.” 


180 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
F I G U R E  8.3  Signals for Technology Corporation Scenarios
Primarily R&D Contract Based
Primarily SBIR Based
Cohesive, Cross-functional, Collaboratively Innovative
Neglected, Siloed, Individually Innovative
Talent Management
Concorde
Airbus
Titanic
Horse and Buggy
Funding Sources
• Technology Corporation successfully recruits 
world-renowned energy research scientists
• Technology Corporation’s reputation in energy 
research grows as its world-renowned energy 
research scientists enable research 
partnerships with national laboratories and 
major research universities
• Lucrative energy research partnerships create  
pressure to sustain that portion of the enter- 
prise to the detriment of development activities
• Lack of collaboration from the scientists create 
a dysfunctional siloed organization with each division 
operating as functionally separate enterprises
• A funnelling effect over the years transforms 
Technology Corporation into a contract, 
narrowly focused, energy research laboratory
• “Brain-Drain” as scientists and engineers leave 
or are recruited to more stable environments
• Unable to turn Technology Corporation into 
the entrepreneurial enterprise originally 
envisioned, its owner decides to sell
• Decrease in SBIR funding
• Siloed mind-set
• Increase in activities with cross-functional 
teams
• Growth in alternative energy government 
funding
• Stronger global protections on IP
• Long-term R&D partnerships
• Decrease in collaboration with outside partners
• Increased interest in water technologies
• Technologies do not advance beyond phase 2
• Inability to identify investors for technologies
• Technology development expenses outweigh 
the revenues generated from the technology 
over time
• Significant, sharp decline in R&D services and 
customer base
• Existing employees transition from old framework to new 
innovated/market-driven consciousness
• 2012 Obama reelected and funding increased for 
energy immovation—vision, goals aligned
• Proprietary Foundation interested in partnering with Tech- 
nology Corporation because of new success with partners
• 10-year turn-around for innovations from conception to market
• With a new election approaching in 2016, Technology 
Corporation has protected itself against threat of SBIR 
funding cut by securing primarily R&D contracts
• Two key innovations take off
• Demand for clean coal and other green technology 
increases—gain more R&D contracts
• Diversification in new market pays off
• Propietary Foundation provides continued funding for 
Technology Corporation—sparks interest from other 
organization for R&D contracts
• Top industry competitors were not prepared for the cut  
of SBIR funding and fold or merge
• Significant increase in employees
• 2-year turn-around for innovations from conception to 
market
• Congress will vote to reauthorize the SBIR program prior 
to March 20, 2009
• Monitor http://www.zyn.com/ for increased chatter 
regarding SBIR funding. Monitor number of SBIR training 
seminars for increased attendance. Monitor statistics 
regarding application and awards of SBIR projects
• Technology Corporation is successful at retrieving, 
retaining, and disseminating knowledge from not only its 
workforce, but the industry as well. Technology Corpora- 
tion Knows (TC-Knows) is an example of a “system” that 
conceptually explores the possibilities of harnessing the 
power of knowledge
• The request for “bailouts” and “loans” continue to cause friction
• Monitor national debt annual increases. Current estimates 
are $2–3 trillion per year
• Monitor national savings rate in U.S. provided by the 
Bureau of Economic Analyst (http://www.bea.gov/
briefrm/saving.htm)
• Monitor AARP research for indicators of current issues 
affecting the older generation. Monitor GDP for China and 
U.S.: IMF (http://www.imf.org/external/index.htm); 
World Bank (http://www.worldbank.org); CIA World 
Factbook (https://www.cia.gov/publications/the-
world-factbook/index.htm)
• Monitor congressional hearings  
related to SBIR funding


  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
181
CREATING AN EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING EXERCISE— 
WORKSHOP 6
One of the most profound scenario planning experiences I have had was 
at a large international organization. Members of the scenario planning 
team suggested we build four rooms, each reﬂecting one of the scenarios. 
The rooms had walls that were plastered with artifacts, posters, banners, 
and newspaper articles that characterized the scenarios. To the extent pos-
sible, material artifacts (in this case, it was a computer company, so the 
team brought in early computer logic boards) for participants to “play” 
with will immediately capture participant attention. Executives were put 
into cross-organizational teams, and each team was assigned to a room. 
One of the members of the scenario planning team presented the sce-
nario and explained that the task for the group was to tell the story of 
how the scenario came to unfold. The “aha” moments and critical learn-
ing points were observable in participant behavior. For some, it was a 
highly emotional experience because the scenarios came alive in such 
profound ways.
Activities that attempt to bring the imagination into reality, like those 
in this suggested workshop, have been shown to increase learning (Man-
ning, 2002). The military has used simulations and virtual reality tech-
nologies for decades because of their learning beneﬁts. The idea is similar 
with experiential learning workshops. Anything that can be done to get the 
scenarios “off the page” and into the microcosms of the decision makers 
will increase their potential effects. Writers and ﬁlmmakers talk about the 
“suspension of disbelief,” and this is a central concept in scenario planning 
as well. Sometimes, scenarios will no doubt be met with disbelief, and it 
is in the presentation, communication, and consideration of scenarios that 
disbelief can be handled. Of course, scenarios must be well researched, so 
that their potentially unbelievable stories can be told with data establishing 
their legitimacy.
Experiential learning workshops require a great deal of time and effort 
to design, but their payoff can be high. Keep in mind, too, that some orga-
nizational cultures will be less open to this kind of exercise than others. For 
example, engineers are not likely to go for creative exercises like this one, 
but designers, sociologists, and industries or organizations with close work-
ing teams are likely to beneﬁt.


182 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
OTHER WIND-TUNNELING STRATEGIES
Decision makers can use the scenarios to examine their strategy, goals, hu-
man resource capacity, speciﬁc decisions and outcomes, business model, and 
a variety of other items (see Figure 8.4).
Figure 8.4 is a basic structure for wind-tunneling various organizational 
elements through each scenario. At its most simple, this framework suggests 
some very basic questions that get to the heart of scenario planning. For ex-
ample, logical questions that fall out of this framework include the following:
• Do we have a viable strategy in each of the scenarios? In which 
scenarios does our strategy fall apart?
• Does our organization structure support the kind of organization we 
might be in each of the scenarios?
• Is our organizational culture an asset or liability in each scenario? 
Why? What implications does our current organizational culture carry 
for our strategic options in each scenario?
• Do we have the necessary human resource capabilities to maintain our 
business idea in each scenario? Do we have the leadership capacity to 
manage the challenges evident in each scenario?
WIND TUNNELING FOR TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION
A wind-tunneling workshop was done with Technology Corporation, and 
various organization elements were explored in each scenario. The results 
F I G U R E  8.4  Using Scenarios to Examine Organizational Elements (based on 
van der Merwe)
Scenarios
A
B
C
D
Organizational Elements
The Business 
Idea
Strategy
Structure
Culture
Capabilities


  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
183
revealed a need for several critical internal changes so that the organiza-
tion could be better positioned to handle a variety of potential futures. The 
workshop results are summarized in Figure 8.5.
RESILIENCE AND ROBUSTNESS
Additional or substitute workshops can be designed around any one, all, 
or other organizational elements. The workshops need only to inform the 
initial purpose of the project. Beyond that, the scenarios should be used to 
explore. The more creatively they are used, the further the thinking inside 
the organization can potentially be shifted. 
Scenarios
Concorde
Airbus
Horse and 
Buggy
Titanic
Organization Elements
Theory  
of the 
business/
business idea
Requires 
changes
Requires  
changes
Requires  
changes
OK (this is  
what happens  
if we continue  
on as we are)
Strategy
(No clearly 
articulated 
strategy or 
speciﬁc  
goals)
(No clearly 
articulated 
strategy or  
speciﬁc  
goals)
(No clearly 
articulated 
strategy or  
speciﬁc  
goals)
(No clearly 
articulated 
strategy or  
speciﬁc  
goals)
Structure
No impli- 
cations for 
structure
No impli- 
cations for 
structure
No impli- 
cations for 
structure
No 
implications 
for structure
Culture
No impli- 
cations for 
culture
Requires a 
signiﬁcant 
shift toward 
team/col- 
laboration
Requires a 
signiﬁcant 
shift toward 
team/col- 
laboration
No 
implications 
for culture
Capabilities
Requires  
some 
growth—
hiring of 
designers 
and 
scientists
Requires 
some 
growth—
hiring of 
designers 
and 
scientists
Reduction  
of workforce 
(can’t support 
it)
F I G U R E  8.5 Wind-Tunneling Summary for Technology Corporation


184 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
The collective use of workshops designed in the scenario implementa-
tion phase is generally thought to build organizational resilience and ro-
bustness. For example, the scenario immersion activity described in this 
chapter asked participants to identify strategies that work in all scenarios. 
The purpose of this is to build a strategy that can handle the stresses of all 
of the scenarios—a robust strategy. Scenario planning is not a magic bullet 
and is not intended to gather up all of the potential futures. Rather, the pur-
pose is to pose a variety of alternatives to decision makers such that they will 
be more prepared for anything that might come to pass. Resilient organiza-
tions are those that ﬁnd ways to survive in rapidly changing environmental 
conditions. The activities suggested in this chapter are all aimed at develop-
ing the ability to respond quickly to major shifts in the environment.
Resilience can be deﬁned as “the ability to recover readily from illness, 
depression, adversity, or the like” (Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary and The-
saurus, 2006, p. 677). Some of the purposes of scenario planning are to 
learn about the possible futures, prepare for them, and avoid catastrophe, 
but equally important is the ability to recover quickly from challenging situ-
ations. Thus, for many organization leaders, simply thinking through the 
options can decrease the response time to challenging events. A reduced 
response time can give some companies an edge over their competition.
THE STRATEGIC CONVERSATION
The other general outcome of the scenario implementation phase is to be-
gin or sustain an ongoing conversation about strategy and alternatives—the 
strategic conversation. If the organization is not currently using any struc-
tured approach to strategy, this will be revolutionary. The simple idea is 
that strategy must be more than an annual retreat-style event. Strategy must 
become a part of the daily conversation that takes place within the organiza-
tion. Scenarios are tools for having this conversation, but it is the informal 
parts of the conversation—in the hallways, when colleagues just “stop by” 
each other’s ofﬁces, or conversations that happen over lunch—that use the 
scenario planning process as a foundation from which to leap forward to 
other insight and creativity.
The crux of the institutional aspects of the processual paradigm is 
conversation. The learning loop model shows the interwovenness of 


  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
185
thinking and action. If action is based on planning on the basis of a 
mental model, then institutional action must be based on a shared men-
tal model. Only through a process of conversation can elements of ob-
servation and thought be structured and embedded in the accepted and 
shared organizational theories-in-use. (van der Heijden, 1997, p. 41)
An effective strategic conversation requires (1) a common language, (2) 
alignment of ideas, (3) willingness to engage in rational argumentation, and 
(4) the evolution of ideas inside the organization (van der Heijden 1997).
COMMON LANGUAGE
The requirement for common language is logical and not complex. Stated 
simply, organization members participating in any process need a common 
understanding of the process to be used and some way to deﬁne and sort 
through the jargon that has invaded today’s business world.
ALIGNMENT OF IDEAS
Strategy literature increasingly includes reference to the notion of alignment 
(Manning, 2002; Mintzberg, Ahlstrand, & Lampel, 1999). While most 
of the strategy literature refers to alignment among organization, process, 
and individual goals, the strategic conversation aims to produce alignment 
among ideas. The strategic conversation stresses the importance of revealing 
and analyzing mental models in scenario planning and in this context, the 
notion of idea alignment can be considered as an output of building a col-
lective mental model (Wack, 1985b). Sharing assumptions, values, and the 
basic scaffolding of a uniﬁed purpose are critical to establishing this kind of 
alignment (Manning, 2002).
WILLINGNESS TO ENGAGE IN RATIONAL ARGUMENTATION
The scenario planning process is one of dialogue, challenge, and willing-
ness to critique ideas. Thus, participants must be comfortable engaging in 
conversation and must be open to having their ideas challenged by other 
participants. By deﬁnition, learning happens when people begin to see 
things in a new way. Without this critical piece, the strategic conversation 
becomes lip service, and none of its implications are taken seriously as 
nothing is learned.


186 
PH A S E S  OF P ERFO RM ANCE -B ASED SC EN AR I O S Y S T E M
EVOLUTION OF IDEAS INSIDE THE ORGANIZATION
This ﬁnal requirement can be thought of as the result of the previous three. 
Evolution of ideas in the organization is the goal of the strategic conver-
sation. The stage for the evolution of ideas within an organization is set 
through a common language, working toward aligning ideas, and through 
a willingness to critique and be critiqued by the majority of people in an or-
ganization. Often, scenarios are just a starting point for ideas to be sparked, 
which leads to revision of the scenarios and further debate and dialogue 
until assumptions are shattered.
DIALOGUE
Although not one of van der Heijden’s initial components of the strategic 
conversation, the notion of dialogue as developed by Bohm (1989, 2002, 
2004) is an additional critical component that cannot be ignored in consid-
ering the strategic conversation. Given the positioning of communication 
in this article and in the larger context of scenario planning, it is useful to 
consider the nature of communication.
The requirements of strategic conversation are intended to clarify the 
essence of strategic conversation itself. All of these elements are integrated in 
the scenario planning system. Thus, it is a means by which to have strategic 
conversations. The distinction is that the scenario planning system features 
the formal part of the conversation. Decision makers would be wise to ﬁnd 
ways to support the informal part of the conversation as well.
CONCLUSION
To reiterate, there is a lot of freedom in ﬁnding the most useful ways to im-
plement and apply scenarios. The goal of this chapter has been to provide a 
framework for using scenarios. Consultants should feel free to be creative in 
designing a set of workshops for scenario implementation. However, keep-
ing in line with the project proposal is critical, and therefore, returning to 
the initial purpose, question, or issue is required for each project. In addi-
tion, the business model should be tested in each scenario. These two work-
shops are a minimum, in my view, and they will provoke strategic thinking 
in virtually any circumstances. 


  
P H A S E 4—S C E N A R I O  I M P L E M E N TA T I O N  
187
This chapter has presented and described additional workshops that 
focus on analyzing current strategies, developing signals, and facilitating 
experiential exercises. These are all useful approaches to applying scenarios 
and should also be considered. These workshops demonstrate the use of 
wind-tunneling various organizational elements to ensure the development 
of resilient and robust strategies.


This page intentionally left blank 


 189
Phase 5— 
Project Assessment: 
Documenting Results
Assessing scenario projects is critical. Most texts on scenario planning do 
not include methods for documenting or assessing the outcomes of scenario 
planning. Pick up any of the popular scenario planning books, and check 
the index for assessment, evaluation, or results. I predict that you will not 
ﬁnd these entries. The lack of effort invested to understand the outcomes of 
scenario projects is a serious shortcoming. The dearth of evidence demon-
strating that scenario planning is an effective investment makes it difﬁcult 
to argue for the proposed beneﬁts. Most seasoned practitioners and users of 
scenario planning know through their own experience that scenarios cre-
ate value in numerous ways. However, scenario planning should be more 
than a strategic management tool falling in and out of favor depending on 
the stability of the global business environment. To establish the true con-
tribution of scenario planning, projects must be assessed to build a suite of 
evidence supporting scenario planning and its utility. Minimally, “if the 
scenario process does not bring out strategic options previously unconsid-
ered by managers, then it has been sterile” (Wack, 1985c, p. 10). 
The efforts described in this project assessment chapter are aimed at 
understanding and documenting the strategic options that can be attrib-
uted to scenario projects (Figure 9.1). Sadly, in my own experiences (includ-
ing research projects with senior executives and several prominent scenario 
planning professionals), I have heard numerous times that there is simply 
no way to measure the success of scenario projects. One premise of this 
9
