# 11 Human Perceptions in the Scenario System

234 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
innovative and creative human activity, and help people overcome problems 
of perception, fear, and social intelligence. 
Additional research studies based on the thinking underlying quantum 
physics reveal the untapped potential of the human brain. These studies 
suggest a new take on the relationship between thought and action. Sample 
research studies that relate to the power of scenarios are presented and the 
implications considered.
THE NEUROLOGY OF LEARNING
Brain research suggests that by the time we are in our mid-thirties, we have 
literally “memorized” the majority of repeated activities in our lives (Dis-
penza, 2007). For example, the process of waking up, putting on clothing, 
brushing teeth, preparing the kids for school, and driving to work require 
minimal focused thought because we have literally memorized the neces-
sary routines required to accomplish these activities. The brain is a relatively 
small organ given what it is responsible for, and one of its key features is 
efﬁciency (Berns, 2008). The brain must be efﬁcient because it is trying to 
reduce the amount of energy it uses to accomplish its tasks (Berns, 2008). 
The way the brain accomplishes efﬁciency is by creating neural networks. 
These networks can consist of billions of neurons that learn to “ﬁre” to-
gether when activities are repeated over and over again. There is a network 
of related neurons that ﬁre together for each repeated activity in your life. 
For example, one group of neurons is responsible for brushing your teeth, 
and one for driving your car. 
Learning can be described as the process developing neural networks that 
ﬁre together and become habitual. When we ﬁrst learn to drive a car, it seems 
exceedingly complex. But, in a relatively short period of time, driving seems to 
require little concentrated thought at all. Learning can also be described as 
the process of “unwiring” existing neural networks, and “rewiring” neurons 
in different ways (Dispenza, 2007). The accompanying “aha” experience is a 
result of neurons in the brain making new connections as new concepts are 
absorbed and linked to other concepts (Berns, 2008). The brain is far more 
complex than we have understood, and the potential for new discoveries is vast.
PERCEPTION
The problem of perception is not new, but the impact of problems of per-
ception is often greater than we realize. According to the neuroscience view, 


  
H U M A N  P E R C E P T I O N S  I N  T H E  S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
235
imagination uses the same neurons as natural sight but works in reverse 
(Berns, 2008). As a result, imagination is an extension of past experience—
what you are able to imagine is based on what you have experienced in the 
past. Again according to the neuroscience view, the way to increase your 
capacity to imagine is to continuously bombard your brain with new experi-
ences (Dispenza, 2007). 
Recurring experiences build neural networks, which eventually lead 
to the ability to perform a task expertly without directing much conscious 
thought toward that activity. In strategic and organizational contexts, neu-
ral networks can be equated with mental models—the buildup of past ex-
periences, beliefs, assumptions, and expertise that tell us what to do. When 
these networks or mental models lead to successful results, there is little 
incentive to question them. 
The description of the scenario system presented in this book makes a 
clear case for how perceptions can be shifted. However, the social approach 
to strategy required by scenario planning is not automatic. A secondary bar-
rier to adjusting perceptions is simply arrogance. Participants must engage 
in the project with a willingness to question their knowledge and be faced 
with the possibility they might be wrong. People who are unwilling to con-
sider that their knowledge or expertise may be wrong will get little out of 
scenario planning.
FEAR
Fear is usually what prevents participants from opening up enough to ex-
amine their assumptions and perceptions. Fear can be viewed as a driver of 
perceptions. There is risk associated with questioning the popular view—
asking, “What if the experts are wrong?”—but there is also risk in ignoring the 
volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity in the external environment. 
Which is a greater risk? Executives eventually ﬁnd that ego does not have a use-
ful place in solving difﬁcult strategic dilemmas, and scenario planning does not 
require a “bet the farm” strategy as one of its outcomes. As a result, scenario 
planning seems a much less risky way of questioning conventional wisdom 
because it does not require commitment to a single strategy for moving 
ahead. It is actually a more natural approach to decision making. 
Berns’s (2008) research has shown that the most effective strategy for 
mitigating fear in group situations is to “recruit one like-minded individual” 
(p. 103). This makes it highly unlikely that any single individual will be up 


236 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
against the collective view of the group. Scenario planning has a built-in 
mechanism in using outside experts speciﬁcally designed to prevent group-
think. However, many scenario projects do not make use of this critical 
resource, and the results show it. The barrier of fear is overcome in scenario 
planning by using its time-tested methods, including alternative voices, 
and making sure that views are diverse enough to prevent one-against-all 
situations. 
SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE
Familiarity and reputation are two key aspects of social intelligence, and 
they go hand in hand (Berns, 2008). These aspects are important when 
attempting to communicate ideas. Though less relevant in scenario plan-
ning in terms of a barrier, these aspects become factors in considering who 
should be involved in the scenario project (team members and other outside 
experts) and in presenting ideas to decision makers. In scenario planning, 
the goal is less to convince others that your idea is correct or right, and more 
to convince people to entertain ideas contrary to their own. 
However, there is a role for convincing other people in the organization 
that scenario planning is a useful, appropriate approach to strategy. This is 
why internal leaders should be recruited as participants and team members. 
Every organization has leaders who are not leaders in formal title. Participa-
tion of these informal leaders sends a signal to the rest of the organization 
that the project is useful and likely to produce results. Louis van der Merwe 
called these individuals “linking pins” throughout the organization because 
they connect people across the organization regardless of functional silos.
THREE STUDIES ON THE BRAIN  
AND PERCEPTIONS
The visual and creative nature of scenario planning carries additional im-
plications. Recent neurology research suggests that the more deeply partici-
pants can be pushed into visualizing the scenarios, the more effective they 
will be. A review of these research studies provokes some exciting specula-
tions about the potential results of participants who focus and concentrate 
deeply on the content and possible outcomes presented in each scenario. 
The next section reviews several research studies and speculates what these 
research studies could mean in the context of scenario planning.


  
H U M A N  P E R C E P T I O N S  I N  T H E  S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
237
The brain’s capacity to imagine is particularly unique. Emerging re-
search in this area is producing some startling discoveries with important 
implications. Research studies of note include work on visualized weight-
lifting versus actual weightlifting (Yue, 2001), work on visualized piano 
playing versus actual piano playing (Pascual-Leone, Dang, Cohen, Brasil-
Neto, Cammorata, & Hallett, 1995), and work on comparing the effects of 
maximal voluntary and imagined muscle contractions (Yue & Cole, 1992). 
Each of these studies is summarized brieﬂy.
VISUALIZED WEIGHTLIFTING VERSUS ACTUAL WEIGHTLIFTING 
Research participants were asked to “imagine ﬂexing one of their biceps as hard 
as possible in training sessions ﬁve times a week” (Yue, 2001, p. 1717). Research-
ers recorded brain activity and electrical impulses at the motor neurons of the 
biceps muscles. “The volunteers who thought about ﬂexing their biceps showed 
a 13.5 per cent increase in strength after three weeks, and maintained that 
gain for three months after training stopped” (Yue, 2001, p. 1717).
VISUALIZED PIANO PLAYING VERSUS ACTUAL PIANO PLAYING 
Researchers used cortical motor mapping on subjects learning a one-handed 
exercise on the piano (Pascual-Leone, Dang, Cohen, Brasil-Neto, Cammo-
rata, & Hallett, 1995). Subjects were assigned to a physical practice group, 
a mental practice group, or a control group. Subjects in the physical practice 
group practiced the exercise for two hours daily, subjects in the mental prac-
tice group visualized the exercise for two hours daily, and the control group 
did not practice the exercise. 
Over the course of ﬁve days, mental practice alone led to signiﬁcant 
improvement in the performance of the ﬁve-ﬁnger exercise, but the im-
provement was signiﬁcantly less than that produced by physical practice 
alone. However, mental practice alone led to the same plastic changes 
in the motor system as those occurring in the acquisition of the skill by 
repeated physical exercise. (Pascual-Leone et al., 1995, p. 1037) 
MAXIMAL VOLUNTARY AND IMAGINED MUSCLE CONTRACTIONS
Researchers compared the results between groups with maximal voluntary 
muscle contractions and imagined muscle contractions in the left ﬁfth ﬁn-
ger (Yue & Cole, 1992). A third group served as the control group. “Av-
erage abduction force of the left ﬁfth digit increased 22 per cent for the 


238 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
imagining group, and 30 per cent for the actual contraction group” (Yue & 
Cole, 1992, p. 1114). 
BRAIN STATES
These research studies show that imagined activities can cause similar re-
sults to actual activities. What is important about these ﬁndings is that they 
suggest we take the power of the brain and its capabilities for granted. Fur-
thermore, the measurement of brain waves in all of these studies showed 
that participants in the visualization/imagination groups all had signiﬁcant 
changes in the nature of their brain waves during the imagination exercises. 
Participants in these groups all transitioned from beta brain waves to alpha 
brain waves, indicating a mental state of relaxed focus and concentration.
These research studies suggest that profound changes can be realized 
when the brain transitions from beta waves to alpha waves (i.e., from the 
hurried, hectic pace of everyday life to relaxation and calm). Some have 
called this state meditation, and Csikszentmihalyi (1998) would call it 
“ﬂow.” There need be nothing mysterious about achieving a state of total 
concentration and focus. Most people have experienced a time of such ab-
sorption in an activity that they lost a sense of time and space. This state 
is measurable in functional MRI brain scans. Participants in these research 
studies achieve such a mental state according to their brain wave scans. 
THE BRAIN IN SCENARIOS
Whereas traditional approaches to strategy and strategic planning focus on 
trend reports and updates of budget projections, scenario projects are de-
signed to help decision makers understand the dynamics at play in uncer-
tain environments. Scenarios helps decision makers uncover blind spots, the 
things they don’t know they don’t know, and reframe the strategy process as 
a learning activity. 
VISUALIZATION IN SCENARIOS
The experience of visualization and “being in” a speciﬁc scenario and then 
being asked to explain how it came to be has been a profound tool, but 
brain activity during scenario immersion has not yet been studied. An early 
hypothesis based on neurology research would be that participants who 
achieve beta brain waves and get “lost” in the scenarios are more likely to 


  
H U M A N  P E R C E P T I O N S  I N  T H E  S C E N A R I O  S Y S T E M  
239
have strategic insights. If conﬁrmed, there would be implications for facili-
tating scenario projects. How can scenarios be presented such that the like-
lihood of provoking focused concentration is maximized? What is the best 
format for presenting scenarios with a goal of capturing the full attention 
of participants? I would love to see functional MRI scans of various partici-
pants in scenario projects. Of course, it is not quite that simple!
SEEING
Scenario planning literature frequently uses a metaphor of seeing, as in the 
sense that scenarios allow the participant to “see” the same situation in a 
different way. Every way of seeing is based on a certain set of assumptions, 
and if those assumptions or mental models can be changed, there is the 
potential for new learning, cognitive shift, new understanding, and, con-
comitantly, new and most desirable outcomes. 
Additional neurological research suggests that the human brain can-
not tell the difference between what it experiences through the known ﬁve 
senses and what it imagines (Le Doux, 2000; Schwartz, Stapp, & Beau-
regard, 2005). In a recent research, scientists monitored neurological ac-
tivity in subjects and found the same activities in exactly the same areas 
of the brain when subjects were seeing and when they were remembering 
(Schwartz et al., 2005).
MEMORIES OF THE FUTURE
This ﬁnding is signiﬁcant in the context of scenario planning because it 
blurs the lines between reﬂection and action—between thinking and doing. 
More speciﬁcally, this research suggests that scenario planning is a means 
for creating a memory that can serve as actual experience. 
High-utility scenario planning creates memories of the future (Ingvar, 
1985). However, by deﬁnition, these are memories of things that have not 
actually occurred. Scenario planning helps participants to make sense of 
their experience, linking the past to the present and future, and creating 
alternative future end states (Burt, 2006). The extent to which these future 
states create memories could be largely dependent on the extent to which 
each participant is engaged in the project—often a function of facilitation, 
relevance, and learning. 


240 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
MAXIMIZING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF 
SCENARIOS
Other chapters in this book have presented criteria for assessing the qual-
ity of scenarios. This chapter has brieﬂy described some provocative ideas 
that speculate on human perceptions and brain activity during the scenario 
project. Neurology research conﬁrms that people learn more when they 
concentrate and focus on the task at hand. This book has argued that in 
many organizations, strategy has become an automated activity consisting 
of updating budget projections and injecting popular trends as priority ac-
tivities. Largely, thinking and learning have become lost as important parts 
of the planning process. Scenario planning puts thinking and learning at 
the forefront of strategy, which has implications for, yet is inﬂuenced by, 
human perceptions and brain activity. 
Emerging research on human perceptions provokes questions about 
how to most effectively engage participants. Choosing participants who are 
motivated to learn is always helpful. However, the mode in which scenarios 
are presented can make or break the deal for participants as well. Scenario 
planning, therefore, becomes a delicate balance between the learning orien-
tation of participants and the skills of facilitators. Both work together to cre-
ate a focused, deliberate effort at studying and understanding the dynamics 
at play in a speciﬁc situation.
CONCLUSION
The goal of this chapter has been to consider some stimulating ideas on the 
horizon for facilitators and participants in scenario projects. Three barriers 
to optimal human perception and innovation have been presented. It has 
been suggested that scenario planning is a natural system for dealing with 
these barriers. Related neurology research was brieﬂy discussed to show that 
the human brain functions differently when its attention is directed and 
focused. These research studies are intended to provoke new ideas regard-
ing the format, presentation, and engagement of participants in scenario 
projects.


 241
Initiating Your First  
Scenario Project
Many scenario projects are gloriﬁed brainstorming sessions with little 
connection to critical organization inputs and outputs. The most difﬁcult 
yet most compelling use of scenarios will connect innovative thinking to ev-
eryday work. Participants should approach their work differently as a result 
of working on scenario projects. Sustaining these changes requires attention 
to detail, accountability, and general management skills—and, leadership is 
really management done well (Mintzberg, 2009).
Stressing the importance of up-front analysis and project assessment 
adds considerably to the robustness of a scenario project. Most currently 
available methods do not require these analysis and assessment compo-
nents, and as a result, using the system presented in this book may seem 
daunting. The added activities are designed to feed directly into, and out 
of, the scenario construction phase. The nuts and bolts of scenario projects 
as presented in this book require time spent understanding the issue, ap-
proximately six days of workshops over two to three months, and assessment 
activities. These bookend activities will be the biggest shift for users of other sce-
nario methods. However, these components are critical and require statements 
of expectations up-front and evidence of value at the project’s conclusion. To 
help get a handle on the ﬂow of a scenario project, the scenario project man-
agement worksheet was presented in Chapter 10. The worksheet is intended 
to be used as a guide for structuring and managing a scenario project in any 
organization, and to make the concepts described in this book immediately 
useful. 
12
