# 12 Initiating Your First Scenario Project

242 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
Essentially, the activities in the preparation and assessment phases are 
aimed at connecting the scenario project to performance improvement. 
Given a tendency to dismiss strategic initiatives as “too difﬁcult” or “impos-
sible” to evaluate, responsible facilitators of scenario projects will ﬁnd a way 
to show the value of what they do. The phases in this book provide a clear 
approach to all the elements required for successful scenario planning.
Frustration with planning methods that simply do not work are what 
usually initiates a ﬁrst scenario project. Perhaps your organization is stuck 
in the once-a-year planning retreat, or maybe your current approach to 
planning takes last year’s ﬁnancial data, adds a percentage, and rolls out 
new goals and growth targets, and that’s called strategy. Whatever the case, 
the premise of this book is that the majority of planning methods cannot 
account for uncertainty, and they are generally unsuitable for dealing with 
the nature of today’s strategic dilemmas. So, if you have read this book, you 
are probably ready to try something else.
HOW TO GET STARTED
Users of this book are likely to fall into one of two categories: (1) those 
wanting to carry out a scenario project for the ﬁrst time or (2) those who 
have tried scenarios before but were disappointed with the outcome. No 
matter which category you are in, initiating your scenario project rests on 
two key items: (1) ﬁnding out whether decision makers understand what 
scenario planning is really about and (2) developing commitment and sup-
port for the project. These two items lay the foundation for beginning the 
scenario project proposal. 
If decision makers are not familiar with scenario planning, there is 
some educating to do. A short presentation can easily cover the beneﬁts of 
scenario planning and what differentiates it from other approaches to plan-
ning. The ﬁrst two chapters of this book provide the relevant material and 
explain the beneﬁts and general process of scenario planning. Part of any 
brieﬁng on scenario planning should emphasize involvement as critical to 
the success of the project and that support on its own is not enough. 
The second task is to develop support and commitment. It should be 
clear that scenario projects are not individual-driven projects. They require 
support and involvement from senior decision makers, colleagues, manag-
ers, line workers, and outside experts. They require a substantial amount 


  
I N I T I A T I N G  Y O U R F I R S T S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T  
243
of coordination and resources—the most important of which are people 
who are ready to think deeply and critically about the organization and its 
environment. 
Sometimes the excitement about scenario projects can catch on like 
wildﬁre. The prospect of time to reﬂect and think is appealing to many de-
cision makers, and some will jump at the chance. Scenario projects are also 
appealing because they blend creativity, analysis, thinking, and action. The 
biggest struggle can involve economic conditions and time commitments. 
These challenges can be overcome by presenting the potential beneﬁts of a 
single strategic insight. Scenario projects may appear expensive when costs 
are viewed alone, but once the ﬁnancial implications of ideas that lead to in-
novative products or save the organization from a serious shift are realized, 
these costs seem to shrink in the larger perspective. 
Once you have developed an understanding of the scenario planning 
system and support for the project has been cultivated, you can consider the 
logistics of the project preparation phase. Starting with the steps described 
in the project preparation phase will lead you through the critical elements 
that go into the project proposal. The following phases (and their corre-
sponding chapters in this book) lead you through the rest. 
Again, the scenario project management worksheet (Figure 10.1) should 
not be missed by anyone planning to take this book and its concepts into 
action. The worksheet synthesizes the phases of the performance-based sce-
nario system and translates the content of this book into clear activities.
THE PERFORMANCE-BASED SCENARIO  
SYSTEM IN REVIEW
The performance-based scenario system is presented again in Figure 12.1, 
complete with each of its phases and their major components.
Following the systematic framework provided here will lead to successful 
and innovative scenario project results. The scenario system was designed to 
avoid the major pitfalls in the scenario literature and is a practical system. 
Experts in planning will tell you that using a systematic approach will 
relieve some of the headaches associated with vague, uncertain, complex 
and ambiguous problems. Working through the preparation, exploration, 
construction, implementation, and assessment phases connects the sce-
nario project to organizational inputs and outputs. In particular, the project 


244 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
preparation and project assessment phases work directly with measures of 
performance. 
The preparation and exploration phases form the foundation of the 
problem and its nuances. As a result, these phases provide the outputs on 
which the rest of the scenario project is based. Therefore, shortcut or sloppy 
work in the preparation and exploration phases can easily lead to scenarios 
that have no utility. Examples of such projects are those that simply quan-
tify different outcomes of obvious variables. For example, scenarios inside 
Shell that simply showed oil prices going up, down, or remaining the same 
were hardly insightful or innovative. That is because they are based on such 
F I G U R E  12.1  The Performance-Based Scenario System
Scenario Exploration
• External analysis
• Analyze STEEP forces
• De Bono’s thinking hats
• Internal analysis
• SWOT analysis
• Interviews
• Analyze the business idea
• Other synthesis tools
Scenario Development
• Brainstorm the major forces
• Rank forces by impact
• Rank forces by uncertainty
• Develop scenario logics
• Construct the research agenda
• Define the plots and titles
• Write the scenario stories
• Create the scenario communication 
strategy
Project Preparation
• Articulate the purpose
• Define the estimated scope and time frame
• Build the scenario team and determine roles
• Articulate the general expected outcomes
• Take measures relative to the expected outcomes
• Construct the project proposal
Scenario Implementation
• Wind tunneling
• Examine the initial question
• Scenario immersion
• Test the theory of the business/ 
business idea
• Analyze current strategies
• Develop signals
• Experiential exercise
• Build resilience and robustness
• Other
Inputs
• Stakeholder need
• Problem or issue
• Organization history and culture
• Others
Project Assessment
• Revisit purpose
• Take satisfaction measures
• Take knowledge measures
• Take expertise measures
• Take system measures
• Take financial measures
Outputs
• Increased understanding of environmental dynamics
• Ability to see problems or issues in a new way
• Shared understanding of the organization and issues
• Aligned organizational systems
• Robust strategy
• Others


  
I N I T I A T I N G  Y O U R F I R S T S C E N A R I O  P R O J E C T  
245
obvious information. Deep analysis reveals critical variables hiding under-
neath the system, and it takes hard thinking and a lot of time to ﬁnd them. But 
the rewards are seen in compelling scenarios that provoke strategic insights. 
The scenario development phase presents materials found in other sce-
nario publications. However, this book presents a case to illustrate each 
phase and each step of the scenario system. Thus, examples and relevant 
materials are provided along the way. The result is a clearer explanation 
of the workshops and suggested activities that can be abstract and hard to 
grasp otherwise. 
The scenario implementation and project assessment phases are two 
of the book’s unique contributions. Few sources on scenario planning sug-
gest methods for using the scenarios to provoke strategic insights, and even 
fewer provide examples. Scenarios fail to live up to expectations unless they 
are used to examine and further analyze parts of the organization and, ul-
timately, to take action. This book shows a clear path for putting scenarios 
to use. In addition, it provides an assessment strategy that, when used, will 
produce a complete picture of the scenario project’s impact. While not easy 
work, these phases bring the scenario project out of the abstract and concep-
tual realm, and put them into practice.
CONCLUSION
The goal of scenario planning in organizations is to avoid the crises asso-
ciated with fundamental shifts in the organizational environment and to 
take advantage of opportunities that may not be obvious. It means being 
prepared for an uncertain future. Therefore, scenario planning is a system 
designed to heighten the overall awareness of decision makers. The pro-
cesses within the scenario system are designed to put decision makers in 
touch with the realities of their industries and organizations. Following the 
scenario system in this book gives them the “pulse” of the organization. In 
the end, the purpose of scenarios is to help individuals and teams contribute 
to the organization’s ability to outperform a volatile, uncertain, complex, 
and ambiguous environment. This book demonstrates the utility of using 
scenarios in organizations.
Scenario work is challenging and should be very stimulating. Strate-
gic problems or dilemmas are complex and ambiguous, with unknown 


246 
LEADING SCENARIO  P RO JEC T S
solutions. These issues can become frustrating to work on without a sound 
set of tools for analyzing and understanding them. This book provides a 
system for tackling these difﬁcult issues and working through the phases in 
an orderly manner so as to produce results.


 247
References
Ackoff, R. L. (1970). A concept of corporate planning. New York: Wiley.
Ackoff, R. L. (1978). Creating the corporate future. New York: Wiley.
Ackoff, R. L. (1981). The art of problem solving. New York: Wiley.
Alexander, W., & Serfass, R. (1998). Creating and analyzing your organization’s 
quality future. Quality Progress, 31(7), 31–36.
Allee, V. (1997). The knowledge evolution: Expanding organizational intelligence. 
Newton, MA: Focal Press.
Amara, R., & Lipinski, A. J. (1983). Business planning for an uncertain future: Sce-
narios and strategies. New York: Pergamon. 
Argyris, C., & Schon, D. A. (1996). Organizational learning II. Theory, method, 
and practice. 
Bauden, R. (1998, March). The Leadership Revolution. Keynote address to AUSTAFE 
Regional Conference, Ballarat, Victoria. 
Bechtel, W. (1998). Representations and cognitive explanations: Assessing the dy-
namicist’s challenge in cognitive science. Cognitive Science, 22(3), pp. 295–318.
Berger, P. L., & Luckmann T. (1966). The social construction of reality: A treatise in 
the sociology of knowledge. New York: Doubleday.
Berns, G. (2008). Iconoclast: A neuroscientist reveals how to think differently. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 
Bloom, M., & Menefee M. L. (1994). Scenario Planning and Contingency Plan-
ning. Public Productivity & Management Review, 17(3), 223–230.
Bohm, D. (1989). Quantum theory. London: Dover.
Bohm, D. (2002). Wholeness and the implicate order. London: Routledge.
Bohm, D. (2004). On dialogue. London: Routledge.
Brauers, J. L., & Weber, M. (1988). A new method of scenario analysis for strategic 
planning. Journal of Forecasting, 7(1), 31–47.
Brehmer, B. (1990). Strategies in real-time, dynamic decision making. In R. Hog-
arth (Ed.), Insights in decision making (pp. 262–291). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Brehmer, B. (1992). Dynamic decision making: Human control of complex sys-
tems. Acta Psychological, 81, 211–241.
Burt, G. (2006). Pre-determined elements in the business environment: Reﬂecting 
on the legacy of Pierre Wack. Futures, 38(7), 830–840. 
