# About the Author

272 
A BOU T THE A UTHO R
University to organizations and members of the community, both locally 
and internationally.
Applied disciplines like scenario planning require both reﬂection and 
action—reﬂection, for understanding how scenario planning works and 
how it can be improved, and action, for putting new knowledge to use. Tom 
has made it a point of his career to study and apply scenario planning. An 
emphasis on both inquiry and application has provided a unique perspec-
tive, and a wealth of experiences that come together in this book.
Tom’s experiences with the research and practice of scenario planning 
have yielded invitations to speak at organizations around the world, as well 
as present seminars, workshops, and keynote addresses.
Tom lives in Fort Collins, Colorado.


Berrett-Koehler is an independent publisher dedicated to an ambitious 
 mission: Creating a World That Works for All.
We believe that to truly create a better world, action is needed at all  levels— 
individual, organizational, and societal. At the individual level, our publications 
help people align their lives with their values and with their aspi ra tions for a 
better world. At the organizational level, our publications promote progres-
sive leadership and management practices, socially responsible approaches 
to business, and humane and effective organizations. At the societal level, our 
publications advance social and economic justice, shared prosperity, sustain-
ability, and new solutions to national and global issues.
A major theme of our publications is “Opening Up New Space.” Berrett- 
Koehler titles challenge conventional thinking, introduce new ideas, and foster 
positive change. Their common quest is changing the underlying beliefs, 
mindsets, institutions, and structures that keep generating the same cycles of 
problems, no matter who our leaders are or what improvement programs we 
adopt.
We strive to practice what we preach—to operate our publishing company in 
line with the ideas in our books. At the core of our approach is stewardship, 
which we deﬁ ne as a deep sense of responsibility to administer the company 
for the beneﬁ t of all of our “stakeholder” groups: authors, customers, em-
ployees, investors, service providers, and the communities and environment 
around us. 
We are grateful to the thousands of readers, authors, and other friends of the 
company who consider themselves to be part of the “BK Community.” We 
hope that you, too, will join us in our mission.
A BK Business Book
This book is part of our BK Business series. BK Business titles pioneer new 
and progressive leadership and management practices in all types of public, 
private, and nonproﬁ t organizations. They promote socially responsible ap-
proaches to business, innovative organizational change methods, and more 
humane and effective organizations.


Visit Our Website: www.bkconnection.com 
Read book excerpts, see author videos and Internet movies, read our authors’ 
blogs, join discussion groups, download book apps, ﬁ nd out about the BK 
 Afﬁ liate Network, browse subject-area libraries of books, get special dis-
counts, and more!
Subscribe to Our Free E-Newsletter, the BK Communiqué
Be the ﬁ rst to hear about new publications, special discount offers, exclu-
sive articles, news about bestsellers, and more! Get on the list for our free 
e-newsletter by going to www.bkconnection.com.
Get Quantity Discounts
Berrett-Koehler books are available at quantity discounts for orders of ten or 
more copies. Please call us toll-free at (800) 929-2929 or email us at bkp 
.orders@aidcvt.com.
Join the BK Community
BKcommunity.com is a virtual meeting place where people from around the 
world can engage with kindred spirits to create a world that works for all. 
BKcommunity.com members may create their own proﬁ les, blog, start and 
participate in forums and discussion groups, post photos and videos, answer 
surveys, announce and register for upcoming events, and chat with others 
online in real time. Please join the conversation!
