

---PAGE BREAK---



---PAGE BREAK---

Copyright
Copyright © 2017 by W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne
Jacket design by Amanda Kain
Jacket photograph © Marta Nardini / Getty Images
Cover copyright © 2017 by Hachette Book Group, Inc.
Hachette Book Group supports the right to free expression and the value
of copyright. The purpose of copyright is to encourage writers and artists
to produce the creative works that enrich our culture.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book without
permission is a theft of the author’s intellectual property. If you would
like permission to use material from the book (other than for review
purposes), please contact permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank you for your
support of the author’s rights.
Hachette Books
Hachette Book Group
1290 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10104
hachettebookgroup.com
twitter.com/hachettebooks
First Edition: September 2017
Hachette Books is a division of Hachette Book Group, Inc.
The Hachette Books name and logo are trademarks of Hachette Book
Group, Inc.
The publisher is not responsible for websites (or their content) that are
not owned by the publisher.


---PAGE BREAK---

The Hachette Speakers Bureau provides a wide range of authors for
speaking events. To find out more, go to
www.hachettespeakersbureau.com or call (866) 376-6591.
ISBNs: 978-0-316-31404-6 (hardcover), 978-0-316-31405-3 (ebook),
978-0- 316-39679-0 (large print)
E3-20170919-JV-PC


---PAGE BREAK---

Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Epigraph
Preface
PART ONE 
Blue Ocean Shift
1.   Reach Beyond the Best
2.   The Fundamentals of Market-Creating Strategy
3.   The Mind of a Blue Ocean Strategist
4.   Humanness, Confidence, and Creative Competence
PART TWO 
The Five Steps to Making a Blue Ocean Shift
Step One: Get Started
5.   Choosing the Right Place to Start
6.   Constructing the Right Blue Ocean Team
Step Two: Understand Where You Are Now
7.   Getting Clear About the Current State of Play
Step Three: Imagine Where You Could Be
8.   Uncovering the Hidden Pain Points That Limit the Size of Your
Industry
9.   Discovering an Ocean of Noncustomers


---PAGE BREAK---

Step Four: Find How You Get There
10. Reconstructing Market Boundaries—Systematically
11. Developing Alternative Blue Ocean Opportunities
Step Five: Make Your Move
12. Selecting Your Blue Ocean Move and Conducting Rapid Market
Tests
13. Finalizing and Launching Your Blue Ocean Move
Epilogue: A National Blue Ocean Shift in Action
Acknowledgments
About the Authors
Bibliography
Notes
Newsletters


---PAGE BREAK---

To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.
–Alfred Lord Tennyson


---PAGE BREAK---

Preface
In the poem “O Me! O Life!” Walt Whitman, the American poet and
essayist, reflects on the trials and tribulations that define the human
experience. “What good amid these, O me! O life?” he asks. His answer
—that all of us, individually and collectively, may contribute a verse to
the powerful play that is life—has never left us.
Life has its challenges and tribulations, no doubt. But it is not beyond
our ability to shape. By our very existence, we all are able to contribute a
verse and, in doing so, influence life’s course, and maybe even its beauty,
if only by an inch.
What will your verse be? What will ours? We have never stopped
asking ourselves this question. What do we want to stand for? What
narrative arc do we want to focus our efforts on in the hopes of adding a
small verse to the powerful play that is life that can help our world to
advance?
For us, as business scholars, the world we aspired to help advance
wasn’t one defined by competing and dividing up markets or the globe,
where one’s gain comes at the expense of others. Competition exists, and
win-lose scenarios abound, but they weren’t what captured our
imaginations, nor what we believed our world needed more of. What we
admired, what inspired us, were the organizations and individuals that
went beyond competing to create new frontiers of opportunity, growth,
and jobs, where success was not about dividing up an existing, often
shrinking pie, but about creating a larger economic pie for all—what we
refer to as blue oceans. Blue oceans are less about disruption and more
about nondisruptive creation, where one’s gain doesn’t have to come at
the expense of others.
But how do you translate aspiration into action, intention into reality?
We need a road map that can shift our perspective and free our
imaginations, allowing us to suspend belief in the limits of today so we
can see and create the possibilities of tomorrow. And for that we need to


---PAGE BREAK---

inspire confidence in ourselves and in our people because, although we
all are replete with creative energy and resilience, at our core, most of us
are also incredibly tender and vulnerable. Without the confidence to act,
few will venture down a new path, no matter how clear the road map. We
aspire to make a difference, yet at the same time fear we cannot.
Confidence is that magical quality that allows us to transcend the quiet
self-doubts that tug at us. It shows us the emotional way forward by
allowing us to believe in ourselves and trust the process.
The book you are holding in your hands is our answer to this
challenge. It is based on our nearly 30-year research journey to the blue
ocean in which we studied organizations large and small, for-profit,
nonprofit, and governments that moved beyond competing in existing
crowded markets—what we think of as red oceans—to new heights of
confidence, market creation, and growth. What we learned in studying
those who succeeded in making this shift as well as those who failed is
that for any process to work, it must acknowledge our doubts and build
our confidence as much as unlock people’s requisite creativity with
proven steps.
In Blue Ocean Shift, people and our human spirit are put on an equal
plane with a tested process and market-creating tools to move you, your
team, and your organization from red to blue oceans in a way that people
own and drive the process to succeed. It provides a step-by-step guide
anyone can follow with battle-tested lessons learned from the field on
what works, what doesn’t, and how to avoid potential pitfalls along the
way.
We made our choice of what verse we want to bring to the world. We
firmly believe that we all are capable of creating new frontiers and verses
of our own. As Nelson Mandela once noted, “It always seems impossible
until it’s done.” We hope that this book can help you make yours.


---PAGE BREAK---

PART ONE
Blue Ocean Shift


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 1
Reach Beyond the Best
“WHEN I PLAY MUSIC, I feel like I’m in a beautiful world that is
endless.”
In 2008, amid the devastation that is Iraq—a country of religious and
ethnic divisions, hardship, and war—Zuhal Sultan had a dream. The 17-
year-old Iraqi pianist wanted to create her country’s first national youth
orchestra and travel with it abroad. Iraq, however, had few formally
trained musicians or music teachers, and few quality instruments to
speak of, not to mention cultural chasms dating back centuries that
divided Iraqi youth.
Where to begin? Using the Internet, Zuhal reached out to find a
conductor. Paul MacAlindin, a Scottish conductor and classically trained
musician, responded and signed on to lead the National Youth Orchestra
of Iraq (NYOI).
It didn’t take Paul long to see that he would need to be a strategist as
well as a musician, since the orchestra would have no chance if it
competed on the same terms as other national youth orchestras. The
industry was intensely competitive, dominated by venerable European
youth orchestras from countries such as France, Italy, Spain, and the UK.
Comprised of highly trained young musicians with great technical skills,
these orchestras engaged world-class guest soloists and conductors, and
featured polished performances of classical masterpieces by composers
such as Brahms, Beethoven, and Mahler. To stand apart, while keeping
costs low, Paul realized that NYOI would have to break with industry
tradition and redefine what it meant to be a national youth orchestra.
Rather than focus on technical excellence and musical sophistication,
NYOI would focus on the power of music to heal, bridge the deepest


---PAGE BREAK---

divides, and showcase the hidden glory of Iraq’s rich heritage. To this
end, Paul reduced the orchestra’s reliance on musical excellence and a
sophisticated European repertoire, and eliminated renowned guest
soloists and guest conductors, which dramatically dropped its cost
structure.
In its place, Paul and Zuhal assembled a group of youthful musicians
who would play original Iraqi music of both Kurdish and Arab origin
and put it on an equal footing with the likes of Haydn, Beethoven, and
Schubert, which they also played. Much to the disbelief of many, NYOI
brought together young men and women musicians who were Sunni and
Shia, Arab and Kurdish. In this way, Paul and Zuhal built an orchestra
that demonstrated the young Iraqis’ hope and commitment to building a
brighter future together out of the destruction of war. As NYOI member
Mohammed Adnan Abdallah put it, “Music is the language of peace, and
it makes people love each other. When musicians sit and play together,
they communicate that.”1
The result: NYOI became known as the “Bravest Orchestra in the
World,” a title first bestowed on it by the British broadcaster Sky News.
It might not be the most technically accomplished group of young
musicians. But it was, perhaps, the most inspired. It broke away from
other national youth orchestras, winning accolades, standing ovations,
and attention across the globe. It attracted new audiences who had never
gone to classical music concerts before and enjoyed one of the largest
social media followings of any youth orchestra. More than that, it
showed young Iraqi people they could create a different narrative for
their country other than one of destruction, hate, and war—one of peace,
hope, and solidarity.2
Paul MacAlindin is smart and a fine conductor. He is hardworking,
strives to do his best, and has a passion for making a difference. He will
be the first to admit, though, that he is not a genius or your typical
entrepreneur. In many ways, Paul is just like most of us. Yet, despite
organizational constraints, ranging from scant resources to limited top
talent, Paul and his young orchestra members developed a strategy that
was both creative and low cost, allowing the orchestra to stand apart
from fierce, entrenched competition.
Paul and NYOI’s youthful musicians are not alone.


---PAGE BREAK---

From Orchestras to French Fry Makers
Take Groupe SEB, the French multinational founded in 1857. Like most
large, well-established multinationals, Groupe SEB is run by
professional managers, many of whom have been with the company for
years, with an established culture and its share of bureaucracy and
internal politics. Like most small appliance makers at the time, its
businesses were facing increasingly intense competition and margin
pressure. In particular, its electric French fry makers, struggling to stand
apart in a market that was shrinking 10 percent a year in value, were a
case in point.
Recognizing the need to break out of this intense competition,
Christian Grob, the head of electric cooking at the time, and his team set
out to turn the situation around. The professional managers of Groupe
SEB were somewhat skeptical. After all, what could you do with a
French fry maker when price was the only thing that seemed to drive
sales?
Christian and his team reasoned differently. What if all the players in
the industry were operating under the same set of assumptions, but those
assumptions limited the attractiveness of and the demand for their
products? What would happen if those assumptions were rethought?
Christian and his team set about to do just that—to identify and
challenge the industry’s most basic assumptions. When they did, they
had a revelation.
Christian’s team discovered that there were two facts that everyone
accepted without question—two facts that in essence defined the
industry. The first was that making fresh French fries required frying.
The second was that frying required a lot of oil.
Obvious? Yes. However, these unexamined assumptions drove the
industry to overlook a host of problems. The 2.5 liters of cooking oil that
were required were expensive. Once hot, the oil makes fryers dangerous.
When the fries are done, it’s hard to dispose of the cooking oil, making
cleanup difficult. To top it off, all that oil makes fries both unhealthy and
incredibly fattening.
Challenging this accepted wisdom led the team to redefine the
problem from the one the industry focused on—how to make a best-in-
class fryer—to how to make mouthwatering, healthy, fresh fries without
frying. The result was ActiFry—a whole new type of French fry maker,


---PAGE BREAK---

first launched in France in 2006 and since rolled out globally. ActiFry
requires no frying, and uses only one tablespoon of oil to make two
pounds of fries, with roughly 40 percent fewer calories and 80 percent
less fat than the same size serving of traditional fries. What’s more, the
appliance is easy to clean and has no safety or oil disposal issues. The
fries are great, too—crunchy on the outside and soft on the inside. The
winning combination of healthy, lower-calorie, yet yummy fries inspired
Oprah Winfrey to tweet about how much she loves her ActiFry. “This
machine… actifry has changed my life,” she tweeted, “And they’re not
paying me to say it.”3 Not only did demand outstrip supply across
Europe, but after Oprah’s comments, Groupe SEB’s stock price jumped 5
percent based on this one product. It took competitors five years to dive
into the market, and even so they didn’t succeed in capturing a
significant share, since they couldn’t match what ActiFry offered, thanks
to the patents Groupe SEB secured. To this day, more than ten years out,
ActiFry remains the global market leader. With the launch of ActiFry, the
industry also grew by nearly 40 percent in value, pulling into the market
brand-new customers who had never bought an electric fry maker before.
The industries of national youth orchestras and French fry makers are
clearly worlds apart. They deliver different offerings, compete in
different ways, and have completely different sets of players. The two
organizations are also different. The National Youth Orchestra of Iraq is
a new nonprofit, essentially a start-up. Groupe SEB is a for-profit
multinational with over 150 years of history behind it.
As different as these two organizations and their industry settings are,
however, they succeeded in the same way. Both shifted from competing
in crowded existing markets to creating new market space. And while
both faced organizational hurdles—as all organizations do—they
overcame them by winning people’s confidence and cooperation. This is
what we call blue ocean shift. Blue ocean shift is a systematic process to
move your organization from cutthroat markets with bloody competition
—what we think of as red oceans full of sharks—to wide-open blue
oceans, or new markets devoid of competition, in a way that brings your
people along.
To deepen our understanding of blue ocean shift, let’s look at another
example, this one launched by government, arguably one of the most
bureaucratic, resistant-to-change entities, and one that few would
describe as creative or innovative.


---PAGE BREAK---

The Gift of a Second Chance
Many countries today face rising crime, overcrowded prisons, and high
recidivism rates. The implications of this situation are huge. It is costly
to taxpayers. It threatens the security of citizens. It is debilitating to
people who have turned to crime and can’t break out of its vicious cycle.
It is also heartbreaking for their families.
Most governments deal with overcrowded prisons in conventional
ways: by building more of them, or maximizing utilization by mixing
petty criminals in with harder-core inmates. Neither option works very
well. Building more prisons is expensive and time-consuming, and
mixing petty and harder-core criminals turns prisons into crime schools.
Either way, the focus is mainly on incarceration and providing a strict
security environment, not on rehabilitation. California, for instance, has
built 22 prisons since 1980. Its annual prison budget is now some US$9
billion. Yet its prisons remain massively overcrowded, and its recidivism
rate hovers at a whopping 65 percent. In short, the existing strategies for
managing prisons may succeed at punishment, but they fail at what
society needs most—rehabilitating inmates to become productive
members of the community.
When the government of Malaysia faced this precise challenge in
2010, it recognized that only a shift in strategy and organizational focus
could break the vicious cycle of incarceration and reduce crime. To that
end, the government turned to the National Blue Ocean Strategy (NBOS)
Summit. The government had created the NBOS Summit in 2009 to
pioneer innovative strategies and new practices that could achieve high
social impact at low cost. Each month the NBOS Summit brings together
national leaders like the prime minister, the deputy prime minister, and
other top ministers, as well as the highest-level civil servants, including
those from the nation’s security forces. Depending on the issue, Summit
participants vary and relevant private sector leaders are also involved.
In seeking a creative solution to the prison problem, the Summit
stopped using global best practices as the benchmark. Instead, as Paul
MacAlindin did at NYOI and Christian Grob did at Groupe SEB, it
sought to identify and challenge the industry’s fundamental assumptions.
Chief among these was the long-held assumption that all criminals need
to be put in prisons. Was there an alternative to very costly, high-security
prisons, which could have high impact at far lower cost?


---PAGE BREAK---

As the Summit explored these questions, it saw an opportunity that
the ministers and security professionals had never previously recognized.
Many military bases around the country had idle land. These bases had a
robust security infrastructure, meant to keep trespassers out. But it was
equally well suited to keeping prisoners in. For petty criminals, who
were the largest inmate population, this idle land could be converted into
an effective, low-cost security environment.
Summit participants also surfaced a second long-held practice that
was 
keeping 
the 
government 
from 
recognizing 
rehabilitation
opportunities; that is, the key expertise to rehabilitate prisoners lay
outside the domain of the ministry in charge of prisons. Traditionally,
prison officials were put in charge of rehabilitation, but their expertise
was in confinement and high security—not in education, training,
employment, and family needs. These were the keys to rehabilitation,
and they could be much better provided by other ministries.
As the Summit challenged and overturned these long-held
assumptions, it made a blue ocean shift, and the Community
Rehabilitation Program (CRP) was born. Instead of building more
expensive prisons, the Summit created CRP centers for petty criminals
on the military bases’ idle land, a first in the world. CRP offered a
solution to overcrowding that could be delivered quickly and cheaply,
and it ensured that petty criminals would be separated from, and not
influenced by, hardened criminals. That was just the start.
At the CRP centers, the Ministries of Agriculture and Higher
Education were brought in to provide high-value vocational training in
cultivating fish and growing high-yield crops, which are then sold in
open markets. The inmates earn and save money through the sale of the
products they produce. Such training not only teaches valuable skills, but
also shows these minor offenders a financial alternative to crime. CRP
also reaches out, via the human rights commissioner, to inmates’ family
members, encouraging more regular contact and even providing housing
facilities nearby to allow visiting families to stay longer.
Visitation at conventional prisons normally occurs behind a glass
window for 30 minutes. By contrast, at the CRP centers, inmates and
their spouses and children are allowed to not only hug and hold each
other but also play together. This heals wounds and reminds inmates how
much they are loved and how important their rehabilitation is. Upon
release, the Ministry of Human Resources provides departing prisoners


---PAGE BREAK---

with job-matching services, and loans are available from the Ministry of
Women, Family and Community Development, should they wish to start
their own business.
The result: CRP delivered a leap in value to prisoners, their families,
and society while keeping costs to the government low. Here are the
facts: Since the CRP centers started in 2011, the recidivism rate for petty
criminals has dropped around 90 percent and stands at some 0.6 percent
of California prisons. Their families are thrilled. Society is safer. As for
cost, compared with a conventional prison, a CRP center is 85 percent
cheaper to build and 58 percent cheaper to run. Based on the current
rehabilitation level, CRP is expected to deliver over US$1 billion in
reduced costs and benefits to society in its first decade.
Perhaps the greatest gift, however, is how CRP transforms the lives of
former inmates, giving them hope, dignity, and the tools to restart their
lives and become productive members of society. As one former CRP
inmate put it, “I really feel like I’ve been given a second chance. I’ve
learned new skills and have been able to set up my own motorcycle
repair business with the funds I made at CRP. I now see a new future for
myself.”
From Market Competing to Market Creating
Organizational leaders often accept and act on two fundamental
assumptions. One is that market boundaries and industry conditions are
given. You cannot change them. You have to build your strategy based
on them.4 The other is that, to succeed within these environmental
constraints, an organization must make a strategic choice between
differentiation and low cost. Either it can deliver greater value to
customers at a greater cost and hence a higher price, or it can deliver
reasonable value at a lower cost. But it can’t do both. Hence, the essence
of strategy is seen as making a value-cost trade-off.5
Is it, though? Can’t organizations shape the market boundaries and
industry conditions they face? Can’t organizations create strategies that
break the value-cost trade-off in pursuit of differentiation and low cost?6
Think about CRP. Did the NBOS Summit accept the industry or
environmental conditions of escalating prison costs, high recidivism
rates, and rising crime as givens? No. It redefined the boundaries of what


---PAGE BREAK---

it means to incarcerate and rehabilitate criminals. It looked across
prisons, police, military, and other ministries, and made a strategic and
organizational shift that changed and reshaped these environmental
conditions.
As for differentiation and low cost, CRP didn’t make the value-cost
trade-off. It broke it. It created a leap in value for petty criminals,
families, and society at low cost to the government. By not
benchmarking and following the existing global best practices, CRP
made a blue ocean shift beyond what the prison industry had ever known
while winning the confidence and support of all members of the relevant
ministries.
Figure 1-1 captures this dynamic visually. The solid curve shows the
productivity frontier depicted by Michael Porter, which defines the
existing boundary of an industry, the sum total of all its best practices.7
The curve represents the highest levels of value and the corresponding
costs an organization can achieve, given currently available technology
and business best practices. As such, the frontier is the edge at which
strategy in an existing market space, or red ocean, takes place. On this
edge, all industry players have equal productivity—the ratio of value to
cost. Hence changes in buyer value and cost are positively related: More
of one necessarily means more of the other. What this means is that for a
market-competing or red ocean strategy to succeed, an organization has
to make a value-cost trade-off: It can stand out either in value, which is
called differentiation (position 1), or in low cost (position 2). But it
cannot stand out in both.8 If an organization’s offering is positioned
behind its industry’s productivity frontier it will inevitably be
outperformed by its competitors positioned on the frontier. Hence, the
strategic focus is on how to compete and win in existing market space.
Figure 1-1
From Market Competing to Market Creating


---PAGE BREAK---

This strategic logic doesn’t stand, however, when we consider CRP.
In business terms, CRP did not take the existing industry boundary as a
given and stake a claim on the productivity frontier of existing prison
best practices. Instead, it made a blue ocean shift that broke the value-
cost trade-off. It pioneered a new strategy that opened up a new value-
cost frontier through a step change in the kind and degree of value
offered. This is how new market space is created. The dashed curve in
figure 1-1 captures this alternate dynamic. Here strategy is in pursuit of
both differentiation and low cost. By opening up a new value-cost
frontier that is a leap beyond the existing industry productivity curve, a
blue ocean is created and competition on the existing frontier is made
irrelevant.9
While achieving a blue ocean shift may seem like magic, it is not.


---PAGE BREAK---

There is actually a systematic process that is accessible to everyone,
whether you see yourself as particularly creative or not. The process not
only maps out the path from red to blue oceans, but does so in a way that
inspires people’s confidence and brings them along from the beginning,
so that they understand it and feel invested in the shift. Groupe SEB’s
ActiFry, the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq, and the Malaysian
government’s Community Rehabilitation Program are just a few of the
blue ocean shifts made by organizations across the globe that have been
applying this process, either in whole or in part.
Our Journey to the Blue Ocean
Our understanding of blue ocean shift and the process to achieve it did
not come overnight. It is the result of a nearly 30-year research journey
that we ventured together, often against all odds. Three decades ago we
witnessed a disconcerting phenomenon that captured our minds and
hearts and set us on this path. Back in the mid-1980s, global competition
was heating up as never before, and, for the first time in history,
American companies were fast losing ground in industry after industry.
From motorcycles to cars, from earthmoving equipment to consumer
electronics, they were being overtaken by a new set of competitors—
Japanese corporations.
As researchers based in Ann Arbor, Michigan, at the time, we not
only read about this, we witnessed it firsthand. The auto capital of
America, just next door in Detroit, was devastated. The Big Three—
General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler—were hemorrhaging jobs.
Businesses were shutting down. People were scared. In Michigan, some
had even taken to vandalizing Japanese cars on the street out of fear and
anxiety over the onslaught of the new, strong competitors. Never was
this more apparent to us than when we drove into Detroit. Street after
street felt like a ghost town, slowly falling to ruin. We were both broke at
the time, driving beat-up old cars. The city felt beat up, too—both its
spirit and its economy.
Essentially, the economy of the developed world was easing into a
new phase that posed a new challenge. It was shifting from a situation of
demand outstripping supply following World War II to a tougher game of
supply outstripping demand, which meant ever-greater competition.
American companies may have been the first to feel the brunt of this


---PAGE BREAK---

emerging challenge, but we were convinced it was only a matter of time
before companies throughout the developed world would face it too—
including the Japanese. Unless prepared, they would fall like once-
powerful Detroit.
With this perspective, and disheartened by what we saw, we set out to
understand not how to cope with or slow this emerging reality, but what
it would take to thrive, not merely survive, as competition heated up
across the globe. With growing clarity and focus, our research questions
emerged. Specifically, how can a company break out of this red ocean of
bloody competition and generate strong, profitable growth? What does it
take to reach beyond the best, to create new market space and make the
competition irrelevant?
The initial results of our research were a series of articles on strategy
and management published in Harvard Business Review as well as
academic journals.10 They culminated in our first book, Blue Ocean
Strategy. Originally published in 2005, and updated and expanded in
2015, Blue Ocean Strategy was translated into 44 languages and became
a bestseller across five continents. Long years of dogged focus, struggle,
and persistence are the true story behind this “overnight” global
bestseller.
In a nutshell, Blue Ocean Strategy articulated a view of the market
universe as composed of two types of oceans—red oceans and blue
oceans. Red oceans are all the industries in existence today that most
organizations fight over. Blue oceans are all the industries yet to be
created, where profit and growth increasingly come from. Based on our
study of 150 strategic moves, spanning more than 100 years and 30
industries, the book laid out the conceptual differences and underlying
patterns that separate market-competing moves—what we call red ocean
strategy—from market-creating moves—what we call blue ocean
strategy. It provided analytic tools to create blue oceans and highlighted
why red ocean strategy is a theory of market competition and blue ocean
strategy is a theory of market creation that makes competition irrelevant.
The terms red oceans, blue oceans, and blue ocean strategy soon entered
the business vernacular.
With a speed we hadn’t expected, a tidal wave of interest grew as
individuals, governments, companies, and nonprofits around the globe
started to look at their world through the lens of red and blue oceans.
Established organizations saw themselves as in a red ocean, with a call to


---PAGE BREAK---

action to get out and create blue oceans. Entrepreneurs argued for the
need to seek blue ocean opportunities and avoid red oceans altogether.
The focus of interest and discussion moved to a whole new level: from
“What is blue ocean strategy?” to “How do we actually apply its theory
and tools to shift from red to blue oceans?”
Entrepreneurs and start-ups were looking for concrete steps and a
systematic process they could follow to create and capture blue oceans at
minimal risk. Established companies stuck in the red ocean sought to
understand how to move to open water. Their reasoning went like this:
Our culture is bureaucratic and resistant to change. Where do we start
this process? And how do we get people to buy into the idea and bring
them along, when all they know and are comfortable with is how to
compete within established industry rules? Past experience had taught
them that however creative their ideas and change efforts, no shift would
happen unless the human element was addressed. To ensure a successful
shift, they wanted to know how to win their people’s confidence and
cooperation, despite facing organizational hurdles.
To meet this new research challenge, we set out to study those who
had applied our theory and methodology to their organizations to create
and capture blue oceans. They included individuals and organizations
like Paul MacAlindin and the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq, Christian
Grob and his team at Groupe SEB, and the Malaysian government’s
NBOS Summit, which has created and implemented more than 100 blue
ocean national projects since its commencement in 2009.11 We analyzed
the patterns of their successes and failures and drew lessons from their
experiences to understand what worked, what didn’t work, and how to
avoid potential pitfalls.
Many of these individuals and organizations came to us or to
members of our blue ocean global network for guidance. They wanted to
know how and where to start the journey, how to apply the tools to new
opportunities, how to scope a meaningful blue ocean initiative, and how
to put the right team together to make it happen. They also wanted to
know how to build people’s trust and confidence in the process, because
only with these could they create the will and commitment to make the
needed shift. As you will see later, one of them is Kimberly-Clark Brazil,
a consumer-goods company that swam out of the bloody red ocean of the
hypercompetitive US$1.5 billion–plus Brazilian toilet tissue industry and
set the new industry standard with its blue ocean “Compacto” format.


---PAGE BREAK---

Others applied our blue ocean theory and methodology on their own.
We came to know them through word of mouth, correspondence, or
reading about their experiences in the press, and reached out to them.
CitizenM Hotels, the affordable luxury chain, is one of these. It is
currently expanding globally from its home base in Amsterdam and
enjoys among the highest guest satisfaction ratings in the field of
hospitality while having the lowest costs. HealthMedia, is another—a
struggling company in 2006, with a mere US$6 million in sales—which,
under Ted Dacko’s leadership, created the new market space of digital
health coaching and in two short years was sold to Johnson & Johnson
for US$185 million. And then there’s Wawa, the American
convenience/food/gas chain, the 36th largest private company in
America, which achieved explosive growth under its former CEO and
current vice chairman Howard Stoeckel using the tools and ideas of a
blue ocean approach. With its blue ocean offering, Wawa continues to
grow under the leadership of its current CEO Chris Gheysens.
Overall, our analysis encompassed cases from Business to Customer
(B2C) and Business to Business (B2B) as well as the public and
nonprofit sectors. Through these field applications and our follow-up
studies, we learned not only the common factors leading to a successful
blue ocean shift but also the pitfalls and hurdles that got in the way.
To assess the validity and general applicability of our findings on a
larger scale, we also analyzed and compared the patterns behind the
strategic moves of other organizations that made the shift from red to
blue oceans, based on their own processes. The aim here was to continue
to broaden and deepen our understanding of how to escape cutthroat
competition and create new markets. Studying both organizations that
made the shift explicitly using our tools and ideas and those that did not
is key to grasping a more complete picture of the pattern and dynamic
process of market creation.
So, after over a decade of new study and analysis, we have arrived at
a deeper understanding of what it takes to succeed in the blue ocean shift
process. It comes down to three key components.
The Three Key Components of a Successful Blue Ocean Shift
The first component is adopting a blue ocean perspective, so that you
expand your horizons and shift your understanding of where


---PAGE BREAK---

opportunity resides.
Organizations that open up new value-cost frontiers think differently.
That is, they think about different things than those that are focused only
on competing in their current markets. They raise fundamentally
different sets of questions that enable them to see and understand
opportunities and risk in fresh and innovative ways. This allows them to
conceive of different kinds and degrees of value to offer customers that
others either can’t see at all or dismiss as impossible or irrelevant. With
an expanded field of vision, they can, for instance, imagine creating a
national youth orchestra worthy of global praise, even though it lacks
highly trained musicians or quality instruments, by reconceiving it as a
showcase for bridging cultural divides and promoting peace. They can
imagine building rehabilitation centers on military bases for petty
criminals, even though that defies the historical separation of the
military, police, and prison administrations. They can imagine creating a
new kind of home French fry maker that produces fresh, tasty, and
healthier fries without frying.
Too many organizations are wedded to industry best practices even as
they strive to break away from them. Adopting the perspective of a blue
ocean strategist opens your mind to what could be, instead of limiting it
to what is. It expands your horizons and ensures that you are looking in
the right direction. Without expanding and reorienting your perspective,
striving to open up a new value-cost frontier is like running west looking
for the sunrise. No matter how fast you run, you’re not going to find it.
While the right perspective is critical, for most of us it is not
sufficient to actually conceive of and open up a new value-cost frontier.
This is one of the greatest challenges organizations face. They want to
get out of the red ocean. They want to make a blue ocean shift. They
may even have a blue ocean perspective. However, they lack market-
creating tools and guidance to turn their blue ocean perspective into
reality.
The second component, therefore, is having practical tools for market
creation with proper guidance on how to apply them to translate a blue
ocean perspective into a commercially compelling new offering that
creates new market space.
If the right perspective is a matter of shifting one’s strategic thinking
by asking different questions, market-creating tools and guidance enable


---PAGE BREAK---

you to ask the right questions at the right point in the process and to see
the significance of the answers. Taken together, they build people’s
creative competence and provide the structure and parameters within
which to organize your thinking so you can conceive and discover what
others don’t see, and avoid the potential pitfalls that trip up most
organizations. Step-by-step, they guide you through the central questions
for opening up a breakthrough value-cost frontier: How do you challenge
the explicit and implicit assumptions you hold regarding your business
and your marketplace? How do you go about identifying the ocean of
noncustomers to create new demand? How can you systematically
redefine market boundaries to open up a new value-cost frontier that
makes the competition irrelevant? How can you create offerings that
stand apart while simultaneously achieving lower costs? And how do
you go about building a supporting business model that your
organization will follow to profitably bring your strategic vision to
market?
What makes these tools and frameworks so powerful is that they are
visual, which renders them easy to understand and apply, no matter what
an individual’s level of education or creativity. By showing in a single-
page graphic or diagram how the critical factors relate to one another,
each tool enables everyone to see the answer to each question emerge,
thus keeping everyone, well, on the same page.
Our book Blue Ocean Strategy introduced these tools, but the devil,
as they say, is in the operational details. Here we delve deeply into those
details: We show you how to put the right team together, set up the
process, and systematically apply each tool, in what sequence, to
produce results and avoid and overcome potential stumbling blocks
along the way. We are not talking about offering lessons from a 30,000-
foot perch. Instead, what we do here is empower managers with
practical, hands-on guidance at every step of the journey from the red
ocean to the blue.
Making a blue ocean shift is a transformational journey. It requires
more than a clear idea and strategy to open up a new value-cost frontier.
To move toward the new frontier, you have to bring people along.
Without people’s voluntary cooperation, you will be stopped dead in
your tracks, as every professional of a certain age knows. While most
strategy work does not delve into the human side of organizations, yours
should.


---PAGE BREAK---

Accordingly, the third component is having a humanistic process,
something we have come to call “humanness” in the process, which
inspires and builds people’s confidence to own and drive the process
for effective execution.
Most organizations face internal hurdles to change. This might be a
cognitive hurdle, because people are wedded to the status quo. Or a
political hurdle created by deep divisions or structural silos that breed
internal tensions and infighting. Or a motivational hurdle, because
people focus on doing what it takes to get by, but lack the energy,
passion, and drive to make a real difference. Paul MacAlindin and the
National Youth Orchestra of Iraq, for example, faced the daunting hurdle
of bringing people who had been divided by years of fratricidal war
together as a team. In Groupe SEB, ingrained ways of doing things and
skepticism presented tough organizational hurdles to get over. The
Malaysian government faced the classic hurdles stifling most
governments today—ministerial silos and cross-ministerial tensions, not
to mention the motivational hurdle of a bureaucratic, civil servant
mentality.
Ironically, our research shows that the two most common practices
organizations rely on for execution are also the reason most
transformative efforts fail. First, most organizations treat strategy
creation and execution as separate and sequential activities. One group of
people devises a strategy and then hands it off to another to execute. For
the most part, academic research on strategy and innovation reinforces
this bifurcation and sequence. Second, when it comes to execution, most
of the time and attention get focused on making structural changes and
using carrot and stick approaches, such as changing spans of control,
aligning incentives, setting up key performance indicators, and the like.
While carrots, sticks, and structural shifts have their roles to play,
they do little to inspire and build people’s confidence, which is critical to
creating transformative change. To do that, organizations should
essentially do the opposite of what they commonly do.
Instead of treating execution as something that happens after the
strategy has been set, it needs to be built into the strategy from the start
or people won’t own it. Also, you need to focus on the emotions and
psychology of your people, instead of putting most of your energy into
manipulating the mechanistic levers of structure, punishments, and
rewards. If you can move people by inspiring and building their


---PAGE BREAK---

confidence to own and drive your new strategy, they will be committed
to seeing change through and overcoming the organizational constraints
you confront.
How can you capture people’s hearts and minds and align them with
your new strategy? Change, after all, is threatening, and asking people to
make a blue ocean shift does just that by asking them to move away from
what they know to a new frontier. Yet surprisingly, as we studied
organizations that had made successful blue ocean shifts, we saw that
people became more creative and more energized, and that execution
wasn’t questioned—precisely what you want to achieve, but what’s
typically so elusive. Why would that be? The longer we thought, the
more clearly we could see that there was something about the process
that recognized people, acknowledging their fears, their insecurities,
their need to be treated with dignity, their desire to matter. We struggled
to figure out what word could capture this something and best describe
it. The closest we could get was what we came to term humanness.
What we came to understand is this: At its core, a successful blue
ocean shift is fundamentally a humanistic process. It does not deny but
instead embraces our humanness in such a way that it makes us more
competent and confident than we ever imagined. Humanness inspires us
to inch along. It recognizes our skepticism and vulnerabilities, our fear
that we can’t do it, our doubts over whether there even are blue oceans,
our need for intellectual and emotional recognition to make us feel
valued. By building humanness into the process, an organization can
shift its team’s psychology and create an emotional landscape for
change, whether you have 5 people or 10,000.
The blue ocean shift process accomplishes this not by demanding that
anyone change but by easing people’s fears and building their confidence
at every step of the way. It does this by weaving atomization, firsthand
discovery, and fair process into the entire journey. These elements are
key to humanness, our research found, because they touch people at a
fundamental level. The good news, as you will learn later, is that they are
reproducible in any organization.
Figure 1-2 captures the essence of making a successful blue ocean
shift in one picture. The three components shown in the figure are
complementary and work together to produce a shift. Make no mistake,
however. We were able to identify the three key components of a
successful blue ocean shift—a blue ocean perspective, practical tools for


---PAGE BREAK---

market creation with proper guidance on how to apply them, and
humanness in the process—not because we got the components right
every time. In fact, organizations often faced frustrations and troubles as
we got them wrong. We learned from lots of mistakes, most of which
caused us to place even greater emphasis on the need to reinforce all
three key components throughout the process.
Figure 1-2
The Three Key Components of a Successful Blue Ocean Shift
Shifting an organization from a red to a blue ocean does not happen
in one day or after one off-site. But it also doesn’t take years. While the
final market launch of Groupe SEB’s ActiFry took over two years,
because of the time required to secure complex patents, the blue ocean
shifts of the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq and even the Malaysian
government’s large-scale Community Rehabilitation Program were made
in a year or so. As organizations start to see tangible evidence of
opportunities to open up breakthrough value-cost frontiers, energy
climbs and momentum to move from the red to the blue ocean is
unlocked in a powerful way.
Why Blue Ocean Shift Should Matter to You
There is no doubt that many, many industries are in need of new value-
cost frontiers. The health-care industry, for one. Energy, for another.
Public education in the United States, although not traditionally viewed
as an industry per se, needs to be rethought. Its performance is


---PAGE BREAK---

unacceptably low, while costs have risen steeply. The auto industry,
while currently not in free fall, clearly needs new ways to tackle
environmental concerns that are not cost-prohibitive. Banking and other
financial institutions beg for new strategies to achieve sustainable high
performance.
UN scenarios suggest that, if current population and consumption
trends continue, we will need the equivalent of two earths by the 2030s
to generate sufficient resources and fresh air for all of us.12 We need to
open up new value-cost frontiers in areas as basic and diverse as the
production and supply of municipal water, electricity access and use, and
the way our cities are designed and run to avert what many see as
otherwise unavoidable crises.
Pick any existing industry you can think of and ask if it isn’t in need
of a blue ocean shift. How does its demand pair against its supply?
Today tighter profit margins, rising costs, stagnant or declining sales, and
market share battles are hitting industries across the board, from
construction to hair salons, advertising to law firms, paper mills to
publishing. Even in public and nonprofit sector industries, like post
offices, museums, libraries, charities, and classical orchestras, demand is
down, costs and competition are up, and organizations are struggling
financially.
In short, we are all paying for the red oceans around us. To turn
things around, we need to produce more creative strategies that can
unlock new value-cost frontiers and with them profitable new growth
horizons. We need blue ocean shifts.
How about you?
Perhaps you are like Paul MacAlindin and the National Youth
Orchestra of Iraq. You run or are part of a young organization, essentially
a start-up, or a small Main Street business. You know you need to break
out of the red ocean of head-to-head competition to grow profitably, but
you don’t know how. Or maybe you are part of a large, established
organization with ingrained routines, culture, and its share of typical
bureaucracy, as Christian Grob and his team had faced at Groupe SEB.
Your organization is stuck in a red ocean of bloody competition but you
doubt how, or if, it can shift away from the commoditization and price
competition that is haunting it. People’s mindsets seem locked in old
ways of thinking, yet you know that to seize the future a strategic shift is
necessary. Or you may be part of a government department, or ministry,


---PAGE BREAK---

or other public sector organization whose policies and practices are no
longer cutting it. You know fundamental shifts are needed to deliver a
leap in value at lower costs, but you can’t even begin to imagine pulling
that off.
If you can relate to any one of these situations, blue ocean shift is
right for you.
What to Expect
Before diving into how to make a blue ocean shift happen, chapter 2
spells out the core concepts and mechanisms you need to know about
market creation. It clarifies the existing confusion over what market-
creating strategy really is and how it works. Here we address key issues,
such as why focusing on creative destruction and disruptive innovation is
limiting and captures only a partial picture of how new markets are
created. How there’s a whole other universe of market-creating
opportunities that are often overlooked, but shouldn’t be, based on
nondisruptive creation. And why the innovations that economists
applaud and promote are not always synonymous with what it takes to
create commercially compelling new markets that open up new value-
cost frontiers, and why you need to understand what differentiates the
two.
Chapters 3 and 4 then lay the foundations of blue ocean shift. Chapter
3 delineates the mindset of blue ocean strategists and their distinctive
ways of thinking, so you can embrace the mental framing required to
make a blue ocean shift. Chapter 4 outlines how the blue ocean shift
process works. It expounds on the important concept of humanness and
how it inspires and builds people’s confidence in the process so that they
own and drive the process and results. It also shows how the process
builds people’s creative competence along the journey.
Subsequent chapters then discuss the five steps involved in making a
blue ocean shift. In each step, we introduce a new tool or tools that will
provide structure and analytic guidance as your organization moves step-
by-step to the blue ocean. We walk you through how to apply the tool to
your situation, explain how to interpret the results, highlight the potential
pitfalls in working with it, and discuss how to overcome those pitfalls to
ensure your success. At the same time, you will learn how to build
humanness naturally into each step, so your team will have the


---PAGE BREAK---

confidence to explore new possibilities and own the process and its
results as it unfolds. In this way, execution is built into the process, so
people are willing to drive the blue ocean shift as it is set in motion.
Specifically, the first step shows you how to get started by setting the
right scope for your blue ocean initiative and constructing the right team.
The second step addresses how to get a clear picture of the current state
of play in your industry and align everyone around the need to make the
shift. Here people learn how to get out of their functional and
hierarchical silos and see the big picture. In the third step, the process
pivots from what is to what could be, so a compelling future can be built.
Here you learn how to uncover the hidden pain points buyers suffer and
the points of intimidation limiting the size of your industry—both of
which you can overturn. You also learn how to identify the landscape of
noncustomers waiting to be unlocked. At this step, a blue ocean becomes
more than a metaphor or an abstract concept. It becomes something you
can see and feel—something whose potential you can define.
This brings us to the fourth step, where you learn how to go into the
field and apply six systematic paths to create new market space. This
step shows you how to reconstruct market boundaries and create new
demand. In this step the process also drills down into how to convert the
field insights you’ve gained into concrete blue ocean opportunities that
both stand apart and deliver low cost. This brings us to the fifth and final
step of the process. Here, we show you how to select your blue ocean
move, conduct rapid market tests, and finalize, launch, and roll out your
move to ensure that your value proposition and business model are
delivering both differentiation and low cost. Here you learn how to
choose and make your move in a way that creates a win for buyers and
for yourself.
In the epilogue we pull everything together. We take you on a deep
dive into a bureaucratic, conventional, and change-resistant organization
—a national government—on its blue ocean shift journey. We show you
how even in such an organization, characterized by formidable silos, a
blue ocean shift is possible, transforming the way work is done and
resulting in billions saved. In fact, today a common verb applied to
emerging challenges is to blue-ocean it. Through the shift process, the
government has augmented its ability not only to achieve high impact at
low cost, but also to bring out the creativity and energy of the people
who execute it. Through it, they are discovering the thrill of creating and


---PAGE BREAK---

capturing blue oceans of economic and social opportunity as they open
up new value-cost frontiers. And if they can do it, we assure you, so can
you.
Now, join us to learn step-by-step how to break away from the tired
red ocean and seize your own blue ocean of new growth opportunities.


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 2
The Fundamentals of Market-Creating
Strategy
BEFORE SHOWING YOU HOW to make a blue ocean shift—how to
move your organization from market competing to market creating—we
first need to clarify what market-creating strategy really is and how it
works.
We’ve seen a lot of confusion on this through the years, as some
people have difficulty understanding how various perspectives on market
creation fit together. Some equate market creation with creative
destruction or disruption. They think you need to destroy or disrupt an
existing market in order to create a new one. Others regard market
creation as a matter of innovation, and often see technology as the key to
unlocking new markets. Still others view market creation as synonymous
with entrepreneurship and believe it to be the domain of entrepreneurs.
All these views are partly right. But they are also partly wrong,
because each offers an incomplete picture of how markets are created.
Without having a complete picture, efforts to make a blue ocean shift
will miss many opportunities and may even be misdirected. So here we
build a holistic model of market-creating strategy that shows not only the
available strategic options and how they produce blue ocean shifts, but
also their corresponding growth consequences. Using this model, we can
understand how these existing partial views fit together in the big
picture.


---PAGE BREAK---

Creative Destruction and Disruptive Innovation Are Only Part of
the Picture
In speaking with executives, entrepreneurs, and government leaders, one
consistent pattern we’ve observed is how often they associate market
creation with the concepts of creative destruction or disruption. Creative
destruction is the iconic term coined by the Austrian economist Joseph
Schumpeter, who observed that although competition in existing markets
is good, diminishing returns eventually set in as buyers’ needs are
satisfied and profits are competed away.1 The real engine of economic
growth, he argued, is therefore the creation of new markets. But, in his
view, this creation is dependent on destruction.2
Destruction occurs when an innovation displaces an earlier
technology or an existing product or service. The word displacement is
important here because without displacement, creative destruction does
not occur. For example, the innovation of digital photography creatively
destroyed the photographic film industry by effectively displacing it. So
today digital photography is the norm, and photographic film is seldom
used.
The concept of disruption echoes Schumpeter’s insight.3 The most
well-known study on disruption directly relevant to market creation is
the influential idea of disruptive innovation.4 Whereas creative
destruction occurs when a superior technology, product, or service comes
along and destroys the old with the new, disruptive innovation begins
with the arrival of an inferior technology, which then crosses the line
from inferior to superior and, in doing so, displaces market leaders. The
classic example here is the disruption and eventual displacement of
leading disk drive players, which were caught off guard by bottom-up
disruptors that initially entered the scene with simpler technology and
inferior performance.5
The distinguishing insight here is that the technology waltzing into an
industry need not be superior, as Schumpeter suggests, but instead can
come in as a Trojan horse whose initial inferiority does not appear to
threaten the mainstream market. As a result, established players ignore
the newcomer until it’s too late. What these ideas have in common,
however, is their shared focus on the displacement of existing players


---PAGE BREAK---

and markets.
As business history shows that there are ample cases of both forms of
displacement, focusing singly on either creative destruction or disruptive
innovation in discussions of market creation would be partial and
misleading. Hence, to describe the act of market creation that embraces
both forms of displacement, we coined the term disruptive creation.6
This broader term captures the full, not partial, opportunity space of
market creation driven by displacement.
Important as disruptive creation driven by either creative destruction
or disruptive innovation is, however, it still misses another universe of
market-creating opportunities. As our research shows, many new
markets have also been created without disrupting existing ones.7
Nondisruptive Creation Also Generates New Markets and Growth
If you have children and live in any one of 147 countries around the
world, from the United States, to Afghanistan, to Germany, Japan, or
Yemen, you have heard of Sesame Street. Big Bird, Elmo, Ernie, and
Bert are just a few of the lovable Muppets that teach preschool children
how to count, name their colors and shapes, and recognize the letters of
the alphabet. And the best part is that children have so much fun
watching the program they don’t even realize how much they’re
learning. But parents do, which is why they love it too. It’s the antithesis
of what many people associate with education. It seduces and amuses as
it educates the very young.
Sesame Street didn’t disrupt any prior market for early childhood
education. It didn’t destroy and replace preschools, or libraries, or
parents reading bedtime stories to their children. Rather, Sesame Street
opened up a new value-cost frontier that unlocked the new market of
preschool edutainment that, for the most part, had never existed before.
In contrast to “disruptive creation,” Sesame Street is the result of what
we call “nondisruptive creation,” as it created new market space without
disrupting an existing market.
Now put children aside and turn to men. Many men’s lives were
revolutionized through Pfizer’s market-creating move of Viagra. But did
Viagra disrupt another market? Again, the answer is no. It was
nondisruptive creation. By alleviating erectile dysfunction, Viagra solved


---PAGE BREAK---

a prevalent and previously unaddressed problem and took the world by
storm. Demand for it rapidly grew into a multibillion-dollar business,
creating a new market space of lifestyle drugs.
Now think of the more than 3 billion people who live on only a few
dollars a day. Here, too, nondisruptive creation stepped in to solve an
unaddressed problem: the lack of access to capital that was driving the
poverty cycle. In 1983, Grameen Bank began offering microloans
without requiring collateral, enabling people to start businesses or
engage in agriculture and climb up the income ladder while paying off a
small debt. This strategic move created the new market of microfinance
without replacing any other market. Until then, conventional banks had
simply ignored the poor, whom they deemed unsuitable as borrowers.
Microfinance has since ballooned into a multibillion-dollar industry with
plenty of room for future growth. While climbing, it still reaches less
than 20 percent of the potential new market, which today is served by
both nonprofit and for-profit organizations around the world.
Online dating, health clubs, crowdfunding, ringtones, and routers,
switches, and network devices are just some of the myriad multibillion-
dollar industries that have been created in the last few decades through
nondisruptive creation. Today, in fact, the fastest-growing profession in
the United States, second only to information technology, is based on
nondisruptive creation. It’s life coaching. Just 25 years ago, the industry
did not exist. Now it boasts annual revenues north of US$2 billion. The
advent and growth of the life-coaching industry have not come at the
expense of any existing industry. Tens of thousands of new coaching jobs
have been created without destroying any other jobs. Rather, the industry
has created new demand, as people flock to life coaches to become more
effective in both their personal and professional lives.
As these examples illustrate, our research indeed demonstrates that
growth has always been generated by market-creating moves based on
both disruptive and nondisruptive creations.8 To illustrate, consider the
evolution of industrial classification standards in the United States. In
1997, the North American Industry Classification Standard (NAICS)
replaced 
the 
more 
than 
half-century-old 
Standard 
Industrial
Classification (SIC) system published by the US Census. In the new
system, industries were not only merged or replaced but also created,
with the number of sectors doubling from 10 to 20. The services sector
under the old system, for example, was expanded into 7 industry sectors,


---PAGE BREAK---

ranging from information to health care and social assistance.
Since 1997, the NAICS system has been revised several times to keep
up with the pace of industry creation, re-creation, and growth. For
example, while the information sector was expanded significantly in the
2002 version, the 2017 version included changes to 6 out of the 20
NAICS sectors to reflect new market creation. In both these new
versions, some existing industry classifications were replaced, while
entirely new categories were also created to recognize the emergence of
brand-new industries. Given that these systems are designed for
standardization and continuity, such changes underscore the impact that
both disruptive and nondisruptive creations have in shaping existing
industry boundaries and creating new ones.
Getting the Full Picture
Try this short exercise. Ask a group of people to look around a room for
30 seconds and make a mental note of every red item they see. As soon
as the time is up, ask them to close their eyes and recall every blue item
they saw. That’s right blue. People will have trouble recalling many
items at all. What we look for determines what we see. When we assume
that the only way we can create a new market is by disrupting an old one,
opportunities for nondisruptive creation can be easily missed. People
tend to focus their attention on the core of existing markets and what it
would take to disrupt the existing order. This narrows their vision and
blinds them to the wealth of nondisruptive market-creating moves they
could make.
Consider 
the 
potential 
advantages 
of 
expressly 
including
nondisruptive creation in your strategic thinking. First, take start-ups.
When entrepreneurs set out to disrupt an existing market, they often face
established players with many, many times the financial and marketing
resources the start-ups have. While it’s true that David sometimes beats
Goliath, and the emotional pull of the story looms large, more often than
not it’s the other way around. As a new start-up, do you really want to be
up against well-entrenched leaders? Maybe. And that’s certainly one way
to go. But you don’t have to—that’s the important point. The
opportunities for nondisruptive creation loom just as large, and
entrepreneurs would be unwise not to take them into account as well.
Second, consider established players. In established organizations,


---PAGE BREAK---

fear of losing one’s job or current status through creative destruction or
disruptive innovation can prompt managers to undermine their
organization’s market-creating efforts. They may starve such projects of
resources. Or allocate undue overhead costs to them. Or relegate the
employees working on them to corporate Siberia, which inevitably
makes them want out. Microsoft and many other established
organizations struggle with issues like these. Growth through
nondisruptive creation is less threatening, because it doesn’t directly
challenge the existing order and the people who make their livelihoods
through it. So, by framing their market-creating strategy in a broader
context that embraces both disruptive and nondisruptive creations—as
blue ocean shift does—established organizations can better manage their
organizational politics and the anxieties of their key people.
Finally, consider new jobs. When disruptive creation occurs, new jobs
are created. Often, a lot of jobs. But old jobs are lost. So, when the
cassette tape replaced the 8-track, which was replaced by the CD, which
was later challenged by the MP3 player, each successive new market
created new growth and employment. But they came, in part, at the
expense of jobs from, and sometimes the very existence of, the preceding
businesses. By contrast, nondisruptive creation produces both growth
and employment without necessarily displacing existing businesses or
industries.
We do not raise these points to stress the advantages of nondisruptive
over disruptive creation. Rather, we wish to show you why nondisruptive
creation should also be incorporated into your strategic thinking. We
need a holistic model of market-creating strategy that embraces both
disruptive and nondisruptive creations, since they are complementary.9
They separately and together open up new value-cost frontiers that are
key to growth. Focusing on only one will lead to an incomplete and
biased assessment of potential market-creating opportunities and limit
your efforts to make a blue ocean shift.
A Holistic Model of Market-Creating Strategy
By now you may be asking yourself, “Which market-creating strategies
result in disruptive creation and which result in nondisruptive creation?”
In our research over the last 10 years, we found that the answer to this
question comes down to the type of issue an organization sets out to


---PAGE BREAK---

address in making a market-creating strategic move.
Our research revealed three basic ways in which market-creating
strategies—and hence blue ocean shifts—are made. You can:
• Offer a breakthrough solution for an industry’s existing problem.
• Redefine an industry’s existing problem and solve it.
• Identify and solve a brand-new problem or seize a brand-new
opportunity.
Each of these approaches involves a different balance between
disruptive and nondisruptive creation. The most effective way to show
these relationships is through a graphic. Accordingly, figure 2-1 presents
a holistic model of market-creating strategy. We call this graphic a
“growth model of market-creating strategy” because it shows which
strategic approach produces which kind of growth.
Let’s run through each of these in turn.
Figure 2-1
A Growth Model of Market-Creating Strategy
Offer a Breakthrough Solution for an Existing Industry Problem
When an organization creates a breakthrough solution for an existing


---PAGE BREAK---

industry problem, it strikes at the core of existing firms and markets,
whether at the outset or over time. Let’s go back to our music example.
CDs were a breakthrough solution to the problem of how best to store
and replay sound recordings, which is a central challenge for people
trying to enjoy music. In contrast to its predecessor, the CD offered
“perfect sound forever,” skipping effortlessly from one song to another
with none of the crackling and gumming up of twisted cassette tapes.
Not surprisingly, in a short time, the CD replaced the cassette as the
standard music medium. For years, people were thrilled with CDs—
until, that is, Apple’s MP3 player, the iPod, came around and offered yet
another breakthrough solution to the problem of storing and playing
music. Again, people rushed in droves to replace their old, now passé
and unwanted, CDs with Apple’s iPod and other MP3 players, which
gave them easy access to their entire music library. In each case, the
existing product was essentially replaced through disruptive creation.
In the same way, the internal combustion engine replaced the steam-
powered engine by offering a breakthrough solution to power generation
for motorized transport. Ditto for digital photography, which effectively
replaced film photography with a far better way to take, develop, share,
and store photos.
The main effect, therefore of developing a breakthrough solution to
an existing industry problem is the displacement of existing offerings
and jobs, as the old is disrupted by the new. Existing markets are re-
created from their core and expanded beyond their previous boundaries,
turning red oceans into blue. Growth occurs with this market re-creation
and boundary expansion as the breakthrough solution pulls in new
demand, converting once noncustomers into customers. Just think, for
example, of how many more people today take photos with digital
photography than took pictures with film in the past.
Identify and Solve a Brand-New Problem or Seize a Brand-New
Opportunity
On the other end of the spectrum, organizations that identify and solve
brand-new problems or create and seize brand-new opportunities unlock
new markets beyond existing industry boundaries. Here disruptive
creation is hardly at play. Think back to Viagra and Grameen Bank,
which identified and solved problems that had not previously been


---PAGE BREAK---

addressed. Or think of Sesame Street and life coaching, which identified
and created brand-new opportunities. All these moves established new
markets beyond the bounds of any existing industry.
Similarly, the multibillion-dollar industry of ringtones has delivered a
brand-new opportunity for people to express their individuality and get a
small boost of pleasure throughout their day, whenever their phone rings
and their favorite song or sound plays. If there’s been any disruption
here, it’s only been in eliminating monotony and boredom. This market
space was created beyond the existing industry boundaries.
As our growth model indicates, solving a brand-new problem or
capturing a brand-new opportunity results in nondisruptive creation
because the new market hardly eats at the core, or even the margins, of
existing industries. This type of growth is nondisruptive to society as
well, because it grows profits, revenues, and jobs—not to mention
society’s imagination—without destroying any others. Areas like
cybersecurity, obesity, life-long learning, virtual reality, the environment,
and health services provide ample new opportunities for nondisruptive
creation. So does the bottom of the pyramid—that is, opportunities to be
found and new problems to be solved among the billions of poor people
at the base of the financial pyramid.10
Redefine and Solve an Existing Industry Problem
In between solving an existing problem and identifying and solving a
brand-new problem or creating a brand-new opportunity are market-
creating strategies that redefine and solve the problem an industry
focuses on. Problem redefinition allows an organization to replace
assumptions and reconstruct industry boundaries in new and creative
ways. Here both disruptive and nondisruptive creations are in full play.
Take the well-known example of Cirque du Soleil. It made a leap in the
kind and degree of value the industry offered by redefining the problem
it focused on, from how to maximize the fun and thrill of the circus, to
how to combine the best of it—clowns, tents, and amazing acrobats—
with the best of theater and ballet—their artistry, music, dance, and story
lines. It created a new market space between these industries, drawing a
slice of demand from each. At the same time, it enlarged the overall pie
by pulling new people into this blue ocean of newly created market
space. Adults without children and corporate clients, who never dreamed


---PAGE BREAK---

of going to a circus before, became customers of Cirque du Soleil.
André Rieu and the Johann Strauss Orchestra also created a new
market by redefining the problem the classical music industry focused
on, unlocking both disruptive and nondisruptive creation. Dubbed the
“maestro for the masses,” Rieu has consistently appeared on the top-
ranking lists of touring concerts worldwide for the past 20 years, along
with Coldplay, Beyoncé, and the Rolling Stones. Unlike traditional
classical music orchestras, Rieu’s orchestra combines easy listening
classical and waltz music—think the “Blue Danube,” “Barcarolle,” and
“O Mio Babbino Caro”—with contemporary music like Michael
Jackson’s “Ben” or Celine Dion’s hit, “My Heart Will Go On” that many
people find more accessible. Rieu also moved away from pretentious
theaters, choosing instead to hold his concerts in large stadiums with
spectacular light and sound effects and a fun, interactive atmosphere.
While major concert halls can seat, on average, a maximum of 2,000
people, Rieu’s stadiums can easily sell out at 10,000-plus people. While
Rieu wins a slice of customers from classical music concerts, he also
creates huge new demand by drawing a mass of new customers,
including people who were previously put off by the formality and
pretension of classical music. That’s because André Rieu’s orchestra,
like Cirque du Soleil, strikes at the margins of these other industries, not
at their core, by solving a redefined problem that doesn’t go head-to-
head with the problem anyone else is solving.
Groupe SEB’s blue ocean shift, which we talked about in chapter 1,
also belongs here. Groupe SEB redefined the problem its industry
focused on from how to make the best electric French fry maker to how
to make mouthwatering fresh, healthy fries with no frying. While
ActiFry has won a slice of demand from the traditional electrical fryer
market, the leap in the kind and degree of value the ActiFry delivers
inspired people who had never bought a fryer to become customers,
growing overall industry demand by nearly 40 percent in value.
Likewise, by redefining conventional boundaries, the National Youth
Orchestra of Iraq opened up a new value-cost frontier and brought in
new customers. But, it did not replace other kinds of youth orchestras,
although it drew some of the same audience.
Simply put, offering a breakthrough solution for an existing industry
problem generally results in disruptive creation. Identifying and solving
a brand-new problem or seizing a brand-new opportunity most often


---PAGE BREAK---

gives rise to nondisruptive creation. And redefining and solving an
existing problem draws on elements of both disruptive and nondisruptive
creations.
Focus on Value Innovation, Not Technology Innovation
When we speak to audiences around the world about market-creating
strategy, we often begin by asking them to consider Google Glass,
Motorola’s Iridium satellite phone, and Apple’s Newton personal digital
assistant. “Were these market-creating moves innovation?” And “Were
they commercial successes or failures?” Audiences usually answer “yes”
to the first question and “failures” to the second.
Then we ask another set of questions: “Who invented the personal
computer?” And “Who invented the home VCR?” When it comes to
PCs, people most often reply Apple or IBM. As for VCRs, people come
up with all sorts of consumer electronics companies, the most common
being Sony or JVC. The right answers, we then tell them, are actually
MITS and Ampex, respectively. Most people are not only surprised when
they find that out, but also appear to be unfamiliar with either company.
Putting these conversations together reveals an important point about
market creation. While technology innovators may lay extraordinary
eggs, they are seldom the ones who ultimately hatch them. The focus of
a successful market-creating strategy should be not on how to lay a
technology egg per se, but rather on how to hatch the egg for its
commercial success. Thus although MITS invented the first personal
computer, it was Apple and IBM, among others, that dominated the new
mass market for PCs by adapting the technology to produce a leap in
buyer value. Likewise, although Ampex invented video recording
technology in the 1950s, companies like Sony and JVC dominated the
long-profitable home VCR industry by adopting the technology and
making video recorders easy enough to use and affordable for the mass
of buyers; in essence, converting a technology innovation into what we
called value innovation.11
There’s no inherent reason that an organization can’t capitalize on its
own inventions, and certainly some companies have succeeded in doing
both. But history shows that egg laying and egg hatching are often
performed by different players.12 This, we suggest, may be one reason so


---PAGE BREAK---

many people don’t even recognize the names of technology innovators
now gone from their markets and instead mistakenly believe the value
innovators—the ones that hatch new markets—are the technology
pioneers as well.
It’s a win for everyone if a market player lays the technology egg,
hatches it, and opens up a profitable and growing new market space that
others may eventually enter. But the key lesson to remember here is that
to succeed in creating a new market, your focus must be on offering a
quantum leap in value for buyers, not on technology innovation per se.13
Google Glass, Motorola’s Iridium, and Apple’s Newton all suffered by
getting this wrong. Google Glass was considered unattractive, nerdish,
expensive, and raised hugely uncomfortable privacy issues. The Iridium
satellite phone was a technological feat that worked in the Gobi desert
but not in buildings or cars, where people needed it most. As for Apple’s
Newton PDA, well, it just didn’t do what it said it would, so it’s not
surprising that buyers didn’t see value in it.
The fact is, successful market-creating strategies often don’t rely on
technology innovation at all. Think of Grameen Bank’s microfinancing,
Starbucks, or the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq—all created new
markets with little or no bleeding-edge technologies. Even where
technology is heavily involved, as with Salesforce.com or Groupe SEB’s
ActiFry, the reason buyers love these offerings isn’t because of the
technology. Buyers adore them because they are so simple, easy to use,
fun, and effective. That is, they love them because the technology is
fundamentally linked to a leap in buyer value.
Economics has long taught us that R&D and technology innovation,
as measured by R&D spending and numbers of patents, are the central
drivers of innovation and growth. This may be true at the macro level of
the economy, which could be one reason people tend to think of
technology innovation first when they think about creating new markets.
But such reasoning does not necessarily hold true when we apply it to
the micro level of the individual organization. To take one example,
Apple’s R&D spending-to-sales ratio has been among the lowest of its IT
peers over the last decade. Microsoft, on the other hand, has one of the
highest rates of R&D expenditures and impressive research centers the
world over. But while Apple has been one of the most—if not the most—
innovative companies in the commercial world, it’s hard to think of a
single market Microsoft created in the last 10 years.


---PAGE BREAK---

As a prescient article in Time magazine on Dean Kamen, the inventor
of the Segway Personal Transporter, noted at the time of the Segway’s
launch: “One of the hardest truths for any technologist to hear is that
success or failure in business is rarely determined by the quality of the
technology.”14 The Segway was an engineering marvel, one of the most
talked-about technology innovations of its day when it was launched in
2001. But that did not convince enough people to pay US$4,000–$5,000
for a product that left them in a quandary over where to park it, how to
take it in a car, whether it could be brought on a bus or a train, and where
it could be used—on sidewalks or roads? While the Segway was
expected to reach breakeven six months after its launch, the company
continued to lose money until it was sold in 2009.
When companies mistakenly assume new market creation hinges on
breakthrough technologies, their organizations tend to push for products
or services that are either too “out there”—ahead of their time, too
esoteric, too complicated—or, like the Segway, lack the complementary
ecosystem needed to open up a new market. In fact, many technology
innovations fail to create and capture new markets even as they win
accolades for their organizations. Think of TiVo, whose original DVR
garnered a lot of fanfare and is in the US Patent and Trademark Office
National Inventors Hall of Fame, but which left most people wondering
what it did and why they would want it.
Blue ocean shift is built on this insight. Just as value innovation is a
cornerstone of market-creating strategy, a successful blue ocean shift
occurs only when unprecedented buyer value is created by opening up a
value-cost frontier that didn’t exist before. Value innovation anchors
innovation to the value it gives buyers, not to the cleverness of the
technology. It can be achieved with or without new technology. This
holds true whether your blue ocean market-creating efforts set out to
provide a breakthrough solution to an existing industry problem, to
redefine the problem your industry focuses on, or to identify and solve a
brand-new problem or create a brand-new opportunity.
You Don’t Need to Be an Entrepreneur to Create a New Market
Are you true blue or bloody red? That’s the name of a simple but telling
quiz we put together a decade ago. We give it to executives when we
meet to get a sense of the situation they’re up against. It asks questions


---PAGE BREAK---

about, among other things, the ferocity of their competition, the pressure
on their margins, and the intensity of the commoditization they face.
People’s overriding response: They’re operating in red oceans and need
to get out.15
Yet when we dig deep, we find that even when companies
deliberately set out to create new markets, those efforts are usually
geared less toward getting out of red oceans and more toward making
further investments in existing, overcrowded markets. There is a
mismatch between what organizations aspire and need to do and what
they’re actually doing. Why? Apart from the familiarity of current
markets and the everyday pressure competition poses, the answer, we
believe, comes down to the way people think about and manage market
creation.
Ever since Schumpeter, entrepreneurs have been seen as the chief
drivers of innovation and therefore of market creation. Entrepreneurs
take risks and learn through trial and error as they attempt to seize
opportunities by applying their intuition and ingenuity. But for market
creation to be an integral part of an ongoing organization’s strategy, it
cannot be a random, high-risk endeavor, conducted through trial and
error. It needs to be a reliable process that can be reproduced. Without
that, as much as organizations may need to make market-creating moves,
they will continue to shy away from investing accordingly.
Some progress has been made in this regard over the years.16 But we
still need a market-creation process built on concrete market-creating
tools that systematically link innovation to buyer value and provide
guidance on how to apply them. More than that, the process must
recognize and address people’s fear of trying new ideas and encourage
them to push boundaries and overcome the forces and habits that keep
them where they are. In short, it must be grounded in humanness to
inspire people’s confidence.
As you will see, a humanistic, teachable, and systematic process
makes market creation accessible to everyone, not just highly creative
people or natural-born entrepreneurs. It allows ordinary people like us to
create markets and do extraordinary things. With it, Paul MacAlindin, a
classically trained conductor, was able to create a new type of orchestra
that could inspire peace and hold up to the world a vision of the beauty
of a united Iraq. With it, government leaders and ordinary civil servants
in Malaysia collectively conceived a new way to deal with petty


---PAGE BREAK---

criminals, which dramatically cuts recidivism and gives these inmates
the gift of a second chance while lowering the government’s costs.
It doesn’t matter what industry you’re in, or whether you consider
yourself to be an entrepreneur. The process we will describe unlocks the
potential all of us possess to see beyond what is to what could be. The
success of such efforts is ultimately a probability game, of course, as all
strategic initiatives are, be they red or blue ocean ones. Still, the whole
point of strategy is to raise the probabilities of success, and that’s
precisely what the blue ocean shift process does.
With that understanding, we are now ready to dive into the mindset of
a blue ocean strategist. Adopting this mindset is essential to setting the
right direction for your blue ocean shift. In the next chapter, we outline
its defining features and explain why those features matter, so you can
grasp the mental framing you will need as you embark on your own blue
ocean shift journey.


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 3
The Mind of a Blue Ocean Strategist
HOW DO BLUE OCEAN strategists see new opportunities where
others see only red oceans of declining profits and growth? They don’t
get taken in by what everyone else takes for granted. They embrace a
perspective that allows them to ask fundamentally different sets of
questions, which, in turn, enable them to perceive and appreciate the
fallacies behind long-held assumptions and the artificial boundaries we
unknowingly impose upon ourselves. Their perspective is very different
from the market-competing logic that dominates most executives’ mental
models.
To fully delineate how blue ocean strategists think, let’s explore two
strategic moves—one by a nonprofit B2C, and the other by a classic for-
profit B2B—so you can see how this mindset applies across industries
and sectors.
From Pity Pleas to Doing Something Funny for Money
Can you imagine someone hitching around town carrying a refrigerator?
Or a town where highwaymen and -women dressed only in underpants
accost motorists and passers-by to solicit small donations? Or your CEO
coming into work, holding meetings with a soft squishy red ball the size
of a golf ball affixed to her nose all day? Welcome to Comic Relief, a
UK charity formed in 1985, and Red Nose Day, an event it holds once
every two years. In the 16 Red Nose Days since its founding, the UK
charity has raised more than £1 billion in the UK alone, with its 2017
Red Nose Day raising over £73 million.
Now imagine the UK charity fund-raising industry at the time Comic


---PAGE BREAK---

Relief was born. It was redder than red. Not only were there thousands of
charities, but for most causes there was huge overlap, including more
than 600 cancer charities and 200 charities for the homeless just in
London. What’s more, in little over a decade, the number of charities had
jumped by over 60 percent. So competition was way up.
At the same time, donor fatigue was setting in, and the number of
British people donating to charities had dropped by more than 25
percent. People were tired of being made to feel guilty, of the continuous
solicitations, of the difficulty in choosing the right charity to support
among the plethora of options. And they were suspicious of how the
funds were actually being used—to cover overhead or to go to the cause?
At the time, fund-raising charities followed a fairly predictable
strategy, a pattern we see played out in industry after industry. Almost in
lockstep, they concentrated on competing more effectively within the
boundaries of their existing industry space. They focused on their biggest
customers, in this case wealthy, educated, mostly older (55–64-year-old)
donors. They invested heavily in year-round marketing and solicitations.
They publicly recognized large donations to encourage the same people
to give more. They organized ever-fancier fund-raising galas, all the
while using serious and depressing campaigns to trigger feelings of guilt.
In short, they fought to capture a greater share of the industry’s already
shrinking demand by focusing on the same customers and factors their
industry had long competed on. This had the decidedly negative effect of
raising their costs at the precise moment demand was going down,
annoying existing donors even further.
Comic Relief took a fundamentally different approach. It created Red
Nose Day, a national day of wacky community fund-raising, together
with a star-studded (and entirely pro bono) comedy telethon, Red Nose
Night, which revolutionized charity fund-raising. Today, Red Nose Day
is almost like a national holiday in the UK, and Comic Relief has built an
amazing 96 percent brand awareness.
To achieve this, Comic Relief redefined the charity industry’s
problem, from how to get the wealthy to give out of guilt, to how to get
everyone to do something funny for money; in essence, crowdsourcing
fund-raising. Whereas most charities hold glamorous special events to
attract the wealthy, Comic Relief eliminated or reduced expensive fund-
raising galas, year-round solicitations and the writing of grants, and
counseling and care services. Nor does it target wealthy donors. It


---PAGE BREAK---

refuses to limit itself to such a small segment; it targets everyone—the
poor, the rich, the young, the old, even kindergartners! With some
imagination and perhaps a bit of courage, even the poorest person can
make a major contribution. Take the London travel agent with a
reputation as a chatterbox who got her friends to sponsor her to stay
silent for 24 hours, raising over £500 in sponsorships; or the hairy
“man’s man” from Manchester, who had all his body hair waxed off,
raising £500 as well. Taking part is as cheap and easy as purchasing one
of the hard-to-resist little red plastic noses that are sold everywhere and
currently cost £1 apiece. All those connected to the telethon, including
the TV station, donate their services because they love the cause and
generate such goodwill by participating.
By offering star-studded quality entertainment, community “fun”d-
raising where everyone gets the opportunity to go just a little bit mad,
and selling little red noses across the country, Comic Relief creates a
unique, inspiring event that attracts masses of people. And because Red
Nose Day happens only once every two years, there is no time for donor
fatigue to set in. Comic Relief has fans, not supporters. What’s more,
unlike other top UK fund-raising charities that can give roughly 87
percent of their income to their charitable purpose, Comic Relief
guarantees that 100 percent of donations go directly to the cause. Comic
Relief is able to guarantee this Golden Pound Promise, because its costs
are low, thanks to all that it eliminated and reduced, and because
sponsors and investment income cover its far lower administrative costs.
As for marketing costs, they are zero in the UK, as a result of all the free
word-of-mouth advertising generated by the Red Nose Day activities
held across the country. In 2015 Comic Relief formally brought Red
Nose Day to the United States.
Energy Flows Where Your Attention Goes
An inspiring story, no doubt. But what have we learned? Could Comic
Relief have been conceived with a red ocean perspective? To find out,
let’s run through four sets of questions. As we do, ask yourself about
your own state of thinking.
One. If Comic Relief had accepted existing industry practices as a
given, and let the structure of the UK charity fund-raising industry shape
its strategy, would the idea for Red Nose Day ever have been conceived?


---PAGE BREAK---

Or is it more than likely that, with competition so intense, demand down,
and costs up, it might not even have entered the industry? How about
you? What would you have done in this scenario?
Two. If Comic Relief had focused on benchmarking other charities
and tried to emulate—and better—their best practices, what would the
likely result have been? Would its strategy have been different? Or is it
more likely that the more it focused on benchmarking and outpacing the
competition, the more its strategy would simply have looked like the
competition’s? Is this something your organization does all too often,
too?
Three. Customer satisfaction and understanding customer needs are
hot buttons. Most organizations regularly monitor customer satisfaction
scores. But if Comic Relief had focused on better satisfying existing
wealthy donors, would those customers have given them the idea to ask
everyone—rich and poor alike—to do something funny for money? Or
would they have urged them to do what the industry was already doing,
only better? Do your existing customers keep you focused on what is,
instead of what could be?
Four. If Comic Relief had pursued either differentiation or low cost,
how would its strategy be different? With a differentiation strategy,
wouldn’t they simply have been likely to add bells and whistles to the
industry’s current approach, paying scant heed to what they could
eliminate or reduce to simultaneously achieve low cost? If instead they
had pursued a low-cost strategy, wouldn’t they likely have cut back the
industry’s existing competing factors without creating anything new to
stand apart? How about you? Do you act on the assumption that, to
achieve differentiation you need to spend more, while to win through
low costs you need to compromise on the distinctive value you can
offer?
From Red Noses to Blue Oceans in the B2B Space
Now let’s turn to the corporate B2B sector and consider the customer
relationship management (CRM) software used to manage organizations’
interactions with customers and sales prospects in all areas of their
business. CRM software is a growing multibillion-dollar industry. Not
surprisingly, it’s also highly competitive. Major enterprise resource
planning vendors, such as SAP, Oracle, and Microsoft, had long


---PAGE BREAK---

dominated the industry. They have what most start-ups don’t have—the
deep resources needed to cover the steep R&D costs associated with
product development.
And yet, despite these impressive vendors, from the customers’ point
of view, all the offerings looked pretty much the same. All these firms
made highly customized software to match their clients’ needs. They all
applied the traditional software business model of selling perpetual
software licenses, which allow customers to use the software
indefinitely. Software was installed, configured, and customized on-site
for each client, which required both significant professional services on
the part of the vendor and significant internal expertise on the part of the
customer. The software also had to be integrated with the client’s legacy
systems, which could entail substantial changes to their work processes
and infrastructure. Overall, CRM software was expensive and time-
consuming to install, with a high total cost of ownership. To stand apart
in the industry and close a sale, vendors normally pursued one of two
strategies: Either they tried to differentiate their product by adding still
more features or they offered big discounts in the final stages of
negotiation. Either way, everyone in the industry focused on selling
CRM software to the businesses that could afford it: large, complex
corporations.
The irony of this is that because the software was complex, expensive
to purchase and maintain, hard to install, and required considerable
middleware and hardware to run, CRM software vendors effectively
limited demand for their own industry.
Enter Salesforce.com. Formed in 1999 by four people, former Oracle
executive Marc Benioff, Parker Harris, Dave Moellenhoff, and Frank
Dominguez, Salesforce.com did not take the existing industry structure
as given, nor did it set out to beat the competition. Instead, it strove to
make the competition irrelevant by removing all the pain points the
industry had traditionally imposed on its clients, pain points companies
ironically had come to accept. This last point is worth mulling over, as it
happens in all too many industries. If we need a vaccination, we take it
for granted that this will usually require a shot, even though most people
cringe at the prospect. If we go to the airport, we take it for granted that
there will be lines, and we’ll feel a measure of stress. And if we fly first
class on a domestic US flight, we take it for granted that the first-class
seats of US carriers will hardly be roomier or recline much further than


---PAGE BREAK---

those in economy, despite the steep ticket price.
Determined to break out of the red ocean of similar offerings,
Salesforce.com launched a market-creating strategy that unlocked a blue
ocean of new market space. It created a highly reliable, easy-to-use CRM
solution accessible over the web, which worked the moment business
users signed up for it via a monthly subscription. Not having to purchase
a software license or expend resources on infrastructure, deployment,
and maintenance reduced the total cost of ownership by roughly 90
percent. Salesforce.com also significantly reduced the risk of deploying
its software by allowing subscriptions to be canceled at any time. What’s
more, by initially offering only one version of CRM software,
Salesforce.com dramatically lowered its per-unit development costs. It
could also learn which features mattered and which ones didn’t based on
usage rates, allowing it to focus strategically on what mattered most to
users.
The result: In just 10 years since it was founded, Salesforce.com
earned more than US$1.3 billion in annual revenues. It pulled medium-
size and even small businesses into the industry, converting former
noncustomers into customers as it grew overall demand. Today,
Salesforce.com has over 20,000 employees and annual revenues
approaching US$8 billion.
Clearly, the CRM software and the UK charity fund-raising industries
are worlds apart. Yet, here again, we see striking parallels between the
two. First, we see again that players in an industry all too often move in
lockstep with one another. They compete in the same way, invest in the
same things, and focus on the existing customers of the industry, largely
commoditizing and limiting the size of their own industry. Second, we
see again that while industry players fight to capture a greater share of
existing demand, the market universe of total potential demand is often
far greater. And yet, organizations act as though the existing market
boundaries define the de facto universe when in reality these boundaries
are not fixed but are merely products of our minds. They can be
transcended when we apply a new lens to our thinking. Finally, we see
again that organizations can redefine the basis of strategy in an industry
to open up new market space and achieve differentiation and low cost.
But the question is—how do they do it?


---PAGE BREAK---

Reframing Your Thinking from Red to Blue
We are now ready to deduce the mindset of blue ocean strategists and the
distinctive ways their thinking departs from red ocean logic. The aim
here is for you to understand how blue ocean strategists think so that you
can embrace this logic as you embark on your own blue ocean shift
journey. This mindset acts as a compass to guide your strategic direction.
Without getting it right, the market-creating tools, however good, may be
misapplied in action and fail to produce your intended shift. As we go
through each guiding principle, think about how it allows you to begin to
see opportunities where before only constraints were visible.
Blue ocean strategists do not take industry conditions as given. Rather, they set out to reshape
them in their favor.
When executives develop strategy, they nearly always begin by
analyzing the environment: Is the industry growing, stagnant, or
shrinking? Are raw material prices rising or falling? Are competitors
building new plants, launching major new product lines, laying off
hundreds of employees, or hiring new talent? Is customer demand up or
down? Most executives build their strategies on the basis of these
assessments. In other words, structure shapes strategy.1 This view of
strategy is deterministic in that: (1) It treats an organization’s strategic
options as limited by the environment; and (2) it bounds executives’
imaginations by the industry’s current conditions.
This works fine when industries are attractive. But what if your
industry structure is unattractive, and your number-one competitor is
barely scraping by or even losing money? What will your strategy be
then? To lose less money than everyone else? To pull out? Neither is
terribly inspiring, nor is it a path to strong, profitable growth.
What a blue ocean strategist recognizes, and what most of us all too
often forget, is that while industry conditions exist, individual firms
created them. And just as individual firms created them, individual firms
can shape them too, the way Comic Relief and Salesforce.com did.
Reflect for a moment on many of the greatest industries. Back at the turn
of the 20th century, didn’t Ford create a mass market for the auto
industry, as Xerox did later in the copier industry, followed by Canon in
the personal copier industry? How about McDonald’s in fast food? Apple
in apps? FedEx in express delivery? Or even DryBar, which launched the


---PAGE BREAK---

“only-blowouts” market space in US hair salons, rather than offering
haircuts, coloring, and perms.
Just as single organizations can drive entire industries with powerful
ideas, single organizations can shape existing industries and create new
ones.2 Industry boundaries are not fixed. They are as fluid as your
imagination. And one of the greatest ironies is that often it is
organizations themselves that contribute to their industry’s declining
conditions. Think of the US Postal Service that today teetters on the
brink as people shift to alternatives like email and express delivery
services, which are significantly more expensive. Why is demand for
government postal services shrinking? Is it simply because these new,
alternative industries are so strong? Partially. But it’s also because the
total postal experience is so poor. How many times have you entered a
US post office and found fast efficient service, with every window open,
no lines, and postal workers who actually seem happy to serve you? Was
the experience a pleasant one you would want to repeat? Probably not.
More likely, you were one of many people standing in line with a
dissatisfied look on your face. Or maybe you were one of those people
who, after waiting five minutes in line, threw up your hands and walked
out, frustrated, with time wasted and nothing accomplished, swearing
never to go back.
Organizations contribute to their own downfall more often than they
realize, and then blame exogenous market forces they don’t control
instead. Blue ocean strategists don’t. They refuse to take existing
industry conditions as givens. Nor do they blame those conditions for
their difficulties. They look to themselves for answers, and don’t let
industry conditions frame their understanding of what is possible and
profitable. While shared industry logic may help you make sense of the
world, it dramatically restricts your creative thinking. It impels you to
leave assumptions unquestioned and ideas unexplored, and to defend the
status quo. It also disempowers you. As Steve Jobs put it, “You tend to
get told that the world is the way it is… But that’s a very limited [view].
Life can be much broader once you discover one simple fact. And that is
everything around you that you call life was made up by people that
were no smarter than you. And you can change it. You can influence it.
You can build your own things that other people can use. And the minute
you understand that you can poke life… that you can change it. You can
mold it. That’s maybe the most important thing—to shake off this


---PAGE BREAK---

erroneous notion that life is there and you’re just going to live in it.…
And once you learn that, you’ll never be the same again.”3 Blue ocean
strategists act on this insight, which widens their creative palette and
drives them to seriously weigh, rather than instantly write off, ideas that
set out to shape, not merely accept, industry conditions.
Blue ocean strategists do not seek to beat the competition. Instead they aim to make the
competition irrelevant.
Most organizations are stuck in the trap of competing.4 Having accepted
the industry structure as a given, executives proceed to benchmark their
rivals and focus on outperforming them to achieve a competitive
advantage. Indeed, one can hardly speak of strategy without invoking the
idea of building a competitive advantage. But focusing on building a
competitive advantage has an unintended and deeply ironic effect,
because it leads to imitative, not innovative, approaches to the market.
How can this be? This is a critical point to grasp because it’s probably
affecting your organization and what you do more than you know.
Let’s start with the obvious. Every winning organization, by
definition, 
has 
a 
competitive 
advantage. 
Comic 
Relief 
and
Salesforce.com certainly do. So having a competitive advantage is good.
No one is arguing with that. But that competitive advantage explains
what the organization has achieved, the outcome of its strategy. In
statistics, this is known as the dependent variable. The trouble is that,
over time, people have confused the outcome of a winning strategy,
namely a competitive advantage, with the process of achieving it or the
independent variable. So managers have been increasingly urged to build
competitive advantages to beat the competition.
At first glance this appears reasonable. If winning organizations have
competitive advantages, pursuing a competitive advantage would seem
to be the direct path to achieving it. The problem is one of framing.
When managers are urged to secure a competitive advantage, what are
they likely to do? They automatically look to the competition, assess
what their competitors do, and strive to do it better. But, in so doing,
their strategic thinking unknowingly regresses toward the competition.
The competition becomes the defining variable of strategy, not buyer
value. This narrows an organization’s view to the competitive factors and
shared assumptions held among existing competitors, leading it to
improve along the established trajectory.


---PAGE BREAK---

But should your strategy be driven in this way? Our research suggests
not, especially if you are in an increasingly unattractive industry.
Focusing on building competitive advantages distracts you from
reshaping old industries and creating new ones. It blocks creativity and
keeps you locked in the same way of competing as everyone else.
In direct contrast, blue ocean strategists are keenly focused not on
building competitive advantages but on how to make the competition
irrelevant.5 They have a quiet disregard for what the competition is
doing. They don’t assume that just because competitors are doing
something it’s the right thing to do. The question they obsess about is
this: What would it take to win over the mass of buyers, even with no
marketing? Why the stipulation? Not because these organizations don’t
believe in or use marketing just like everyone else. They do. It’s just that
their aim is to push their organizations to create offerings so compelling
that anyone who sees them or tries them can’t help but rave about them.
As Michael Levie, cofounder of citizenM, which created the new market
space of affordable luxury hotels, put it, “Our aim is not to rely on
marketing to sell hotel rooms. It is to create a hotel experience that in
itself becomes our marketing, because people can’t stop recommending
it and sharing pictures of it on Facebook and Instagram.” That’s precisely
what drove Steve Jobs’s relentless challenge to Apple to create “insanely
great” products and services, not products and services that were better
than competitors’, though, in the end, they were that too.
When organizations frame the strategic challenge this way, the futility
of benchmarking the competition becomes clear. It causes managers to
fundamentally challenge and rethink all the factors an industry competes
on and invests in, and to push for a quantum leap in value. For while an
incremental improvement over what competitors do may give you a
competitive advantage, nothing short of a quantum leap in value will
make the competition irrelevant.
It is this drive to make the competition irrelevant that opens
organizations’ eyes to the difference between what industries are
competing on and what the mass of buyers actually values. Ironically,
although blue ocean strategists are not focused on building a competitive
advantage, they often achieve the greatest competitive advantage in the
end.
Blue ocean strategists focus on creating and capturing new demand, not fighting over existing


---PAGE BREAK---

customers.
Almost every organization of a certain size regularly engages in some
form of customer satisfaction survey. Even if you run a small business or
nonprofit organization, satisfying existing customers is usually a key
priority. So organizations elicit feedback from customers on what they
like and don’t like, on how they are doing, and on what they need to
improve. As organizations garner insights, this often leads to a richer
appreciation of the nuances in what current customers value. This, in
turn, triggers finer segmentation and greater customization to meet their
customers’ specialized needs. Improved customer satisfaction almost
always follows. “Exactly,” you may think. “That’s what we do. We’re
great at that.” Or “We have a really creative way to tailor our offerings to
best meet our individual customer needs.”
For all its strength, however, this drive to improve customers’
satisfaction scores also tends to keep organizations anchored in the red
ocean of existing market space. In most industries, organizations
converge around a common definition of who their customers are: older,
wealthy, educated donors for the UK charity industry, for instance, or
large complex corporations for enterprise resource planning software.
This common definition then defines whom they expend their resources
and efforts on. While this focus on existing customers is fine when
industries are growing, it starts to impose real limits when demand is
stagnant or in decline. It prevents organizations from seeing the wider
potential of new demand outside their industry that they could tap into.
And as Comic Relief and Salesforce.com show, in many industries,
existing customers are just a drop in the bucket, compared with all the
noncustomers who can be reached through market-creating strategies.6
Moreover, when you ask existing customers, “How can we make you
happier?” their insights tend toward the familiar, such as “Offer me more
for less.” But this focus almost always drives you to merely offer better
solutions to your industry’s existing problem, keeping you trapped in the
red ocean.7 The US retail industry painfully pays for this focus at the end
of every year, when their customers, who have been trained to expect
preholiday sales, ask for the sales to start even earlier and for the stores
to offer ever-larger discounts. Now holiday decorations can be seen in
stores as early as October. As for strong, profitable growth, customers
may be happier with the earlier and larger discounts, but retail sales have
hardly inched up while profit margins continue to shrink.


---PAGE BREAK---

Instead of fighting to win a greater percentage of existing customers,
blue ocean strategists seek to create new demand by looking to
noncustomers. They recognize that extra demand is out there, waiting to
be unlocked. By looking to noncustomers and what turns them off about
an industry, they begin to uncover the major pain points—like pity pleas
—imposed by their industry that make people choose against it. In this
way, they glean critical insight into how to open up new market space.
As you will discover on your blue ocean shift journey, noncustomers,
not customers, provide the greatest insight into what your industry is
doing to limit demand and how you can overcome this. The opportunity
here is to create new demand where there is no competition, not to
simply get a tad more of a shrinking red ocean.
Blue ocean strategists simultaneously pursue differentiation and low cost. They aim to break,
not make, the value-cost trade-off.
As discussed in chapter 1, for a red ocean strategist, strategy requires
making a choice between differentiation and low cost. By contrast, blue
ocean strategists follow a different path and see market-creating strategy
not as an either-or, but as a both-and approach. In short, they pursue
differentiation and low cost simultaneously.8
Think back to Comic Relief. With its little red noses, its focus on
community “fun”d-raising and mayhem, and its shift from year-round
solicitations to a unique experience once every two years, Comic Relief
is clearly the most differentiated fund-raising charity in the industry. At
the same time, it has a low cost structure. Unlike traditional charities,
Comic Relief doesn’t plow time and money into expensive galas, or
write grants to solicit funds from governments and foundations, or
engage in counseling or care services. Instead, it uses high-street retail
outlets, from supermarkets to fashion stores, to sell its little red noses. By
some estimates, Comic Relief has stripped away more than 75 percent of
traditional fund-raising operations. Comic Relief’s staff costs are also
very low, with ordinary citizens volunteering to do the bulk of the fund-
raising by engaging in silly antics that others sponsor. What’s more,
thanks to the widespread media attention and free word-of-mouth
advertising that Red Nose Day generates, Comic Relief avoids large
advertising costs. The result: Comic Relief broke the value-cost trade-
off, pioneering a new value-cost frontier.
Organizations that pursue differentiation to stand apart from


---PAGE BREAK---

competitors tend to focus on what to offer more of. Those that pursue
cost leadership tend to focus on what to offer less of. While both of these
are viable strategic options, which a great many organizations currently
pursue, both will keep you stuck in the red ocean, operating on your
industry’s existing productivity frontier. To offer buyers a quantum leap
in value and break the value-cost trade-off, blue ocean strategists focus
as much on what to eliminate and reduce as they do on what to raise and
create. It is the simultaneous pursuit of differentiation and low cost that
allows blue ocean strategists to leapfrog the competition, creating the
positive buzz that drives thumbs-up and five-star ratings on websites,
and attracting not just new customers but fans, who can’t do enough to
sing their praises.
Expanding Your Field of Vision
Adopting the perspective of the blue ocean strategist is like looking up at
the night sky at the single constellation your industry has long been
focused on and then turning your head to see the vast expanse of the
universe that hadn’t been in your field of vision before. It shifts your
thinking from constraints to new opportunities. With it, you will be
guided in the right direction to challenge industry structure, break from
industry logic, look to noncustomers, and craft strategies that achieve
both differentiation and low cost. You can’t expect to create a blue ocean
if you think like a red ocean strategist.
Now let’s dive into the next chapter. There we outline how
humanness is systematically built into the blue ocean shift process and
how that inspires and builds people’s confidence so that they own and
drive the process. The chapter also shows how people’s creative
competence is unlocked in the process and what you can expect at each
step.


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 4
Humanness, Confidence, and Creative
Competence
PEOPLE ARE PARADOXICAL. We aspire to make a difference. We
want to change the world for the better. That’s what makes our energies
soar, our hearts beat faster, our adrenaline surge. Yet, simultaneously,
most of us fear we can’t. We need reassurance.
No matter how tough, confident, or polished we may appear, all of us
are tender at our core. When we think about people as people, not as
corporate executives, entrepreneurs, or government officials, and
certainly not as human resources, we realize that, behind our titles, all of
us are incredibly vulnerable. We strive to avert reproach. We want to
avoid making fools of ourselves. We steer clear of revealing what we do
not know. In our organizations, opening ourselves up and putting
ourselves out there all too often trigger fears of losing status, respect,
security, and power. So, our penchant is to cling to what is, instead of
exploring what could be. This includes people at the top, whose egos are
often the most fragile of all.
That is your truth, our truth, and virtually everyone else’s truth. That
does not make us weak. It’s what makes us human. Not addressing these
basic human truths, or assuming them away, is why so many change
efforts and attempts to drive organizations to become more creative and
innovative fail. They have not acknowledged and built what we call
humanness into the process. The process of conceiving and executing a
blue ocean shift does.
Humanness builds psychological understanding into the strategic
process so that people are willing to engage fully at every step—even
when they’re hesitant, may not trust one another, or are skeptical of their


---PAGE BREAK---

ability to succeed on the transformation journey. When we feel genuinely
understood and appreciated for who we are as whole people, when we
feel respected not because we are brilliant, bold, and perfect, but because
we have something to contribute and want to make a difference despite
our insecurities and vulnerabilities, we stop feeling like imposters with
something to hide. We trust other people. We burn with desire to honor
the faith that we feel is placed in us by putting in the extra effort to make
success happen.
Humanness, in short, builds our confidence to act by eliciting our
emotional engagement. It relaxes us and makes us feel secure enough to
reach beyond what we know and explore the as-yet unknown. It inspires
us to tap into our curiosity and creativity, which are abundant, powerful,
and vastly underutilized by our organizations as well as ourselves. This
is critical for reshaping and reimagining industry boundaries.
From Humanness to Creative Competence
While humanness builds our confidence to act, market-creating tools and
clear guidance on how to apply them build our creative competence.
Market-creating tools and guidance give people the intellectual
understanding of the legwork needed to make a blue ocean shift happen.
Think of it like aiming to create your ideal body. Having the right
mindset will direct your thoughts away from the kitchen to the gym. The
confidence to act will inspire you to actually get in your car, go to the
gym, and exercise. But as any athlete will tell you, to transform your
body you need to know the specifics of what you have to do: how often
to go to the gym, how to stretch, what machines to use in what order
with how much weight, how many reps to do, the proper balance
between cardio and strength conditioning, and how to eat properly.
Without that knowledge, you aren’t going to be able to create the
strength, resilience, and flexibility to transform your body. That’s the
power that a systematic process, built on creative frameworks and
actionable tools, brings to market-creating strategy. The tools and
frameworks provide the specifics of what it takes to create and re-create
markets. They transform your ambition into what we call creative
competence and give you the levers of control you need to reshape
market boundaries in your favor.
When confidence to act and creative competence meet, real results


---PAGE BREAK---

are achievable. Don’t let anyone ever tell you that one without the other
is sufficient when transformation is your goal. An organization that has
the confidence to make a blue ocean shift but lacks the knowledge of
how to get there is like a gambler. It can expect lots of misdirected
efforts and failed attempts. Conversely, an organization that knows
everything you can and should do to create a blue ocean but lacks
confidence to act will never actually do it. Let’s look at how the blue
ocean shift process achieves both.
How Humanness Is Built
To help people develop the confidence to act, three elements that address
different aspects of our humanness are built into the blue ocean process:
atomization, firsthand discovery, and the exercise of fair process. Let’s
look at each one in turn.
Atomization
While making a blue ocean shift represents a step-change approach to
the market, it is purposely designed not to feel that way inside the
organization. The process recognizes that the bigness and newness of the
goal can be overwhelming. “You want us to chart a future beyond the
existing market? You count on us to think differently and shape industry
boundaries? Are we… am I even capable of doing this?” That’s most
people’s knee-jerk reaction, and it’s natural.
Then how do you get people to make a blue ocean shift? You don’t.
That is, not with one great leap. Instead, you break the challenge down
into small, concrete steps that move people forward in increments that
inspire and build their confidence. So, for example, people are asked to
identify the factors an industry competes on. Or to pinpoint the biggest
obstacles to simplicity in an industry. Or to zoom in on buyer groups that
could benefit from your industry’s offering but don’t currently purchase
it. When framed this way, each step pushes the boundaries of our
thinking, but no one step overwhelms us. And, at any one stage, none of
us can say that what is being asked of us is too big a leap. Yet, the
culmination of these small steps leads to a blue ocean shift.
We call this atomization after Einstein’s reflection that if you
deconstruct any challenge into its basic components, or atoms, and focus


---PAGE BREAK---

on solving them one at a time, even the largest challenge shifts from
being overwhelming to being intellectually and psychologically
solvable.1 As people register the feasibility of each step, tangible
evidence that creating new market space is possible accumulates. People
come to appreciate how what once appeared to be a daunting objective
is, in fact, within their reach. Fear begins to melt into quiet confidence
and pride, as people feel their creative competence expand.
Firsthand discovery
Our ideas about what is possible and what we are capable of are not only
a function of the size of the challenge we face. They are also grounded in
our past perceptions and experiences. And, in organizations, what most
of us see and know to be true is the red ocean of intense competition.
This makes it our safe harbor, emotionally and intellectually. So we cling
to it, even when we know we shouldn’t. Every time a new person is
“shown the ropes,” it reinforces the organization’s existing strategic
perspective.
Challenging people’s view of the world by asking how the established
strategy may need to change goes against this natural tendency. But
natural does not mean inevitable. The question is, if defending the status
quo and trying to bend reality to fit within it comprise the organization’s
default behavior, what can a leader do?
Creating the conditions that will enable people to discover for
themselves, firsthand, the need for change, instead of being told, is the
answer that emerges from our research. The blue ocean shift process
achieves this in two important ways. First, people are handed no
predetermined conclusions. Rather, at each step, people are given tools
that allow them to arrive at the answers themselves. The tools show them
how to think in new ways and allow them to discover for themselves the
need—or the lack of need—to make a blue ocean shift. With no
predetermined conclusions, people don’t feel manipulated. And because
the process allows them to reach the conclusions themselves, their
creativity and understanding of what matters expand, as does their
ownership of the results.
Second, the process changes what people see and experience, leading
us to open our minds and change our understanding of what we know to
be true because we witnessed it ourselves.2 The process achieves this by


---PAGE BREAK---

creatively putting you and your team face-to-face with the market,
instead of praying for insight, or building it and assuming people will
come, or relying on third-party market research. It gets you out of the
office and into the field to speak with both customers and noncustomers,
to act like buyers and experience products and services as they do, to feel
buyers’ pain points that were always there but that you’d never seen
before, to observe alternative industries and human behavior—in short,
to collect visceral insights. In this process, people start to see and feel the
need for change and how they might shift the strategic playing field to
make it happen.
Seeing truly is believing. It moves us from the unsettling, highly
vulnerable mindset of “I don’t know” to the quietly confident one of “I
know,” not because we have been briefed by a report or told by a third-
party focus group, but because we saw and experienced it for ourselves.
People start waking up, thinking, “Why didn’t we ever see that before?
It’s so obvious!” No matter how stubborn people are, they start to see
patterns that had escaped them or that they’d written off as anomalies
before. Confidence rises. Optimism increases. People’s creativity
expands.
Fair process
The third element of humanness is fair process. Fair process speaks to
the fundamental fabric of who we are as people. It confers the gift of
trust, enabling us to relax and inspiring our commitment and voluntary
cooperation.
What is fair process? Essentially, it comes down to three principles
that we have written about and studied for nearly 30 years: engagement,
explanation, and clear expectations.3 The power of these principles
cannot be overstated. They are the foundation on which the blue ocean
shift process is built. Engagement means actively involving people in
strategic decisions that affect them by asking for their input and allowing
them to refute and challenge the merits of one another’s ideas and
assumptions. When managers do that, they communicate their respect for
the people who work for them and for their ideas. It builds collective
wisdom. Fostering engagement in this way generates better decisions and
greater commitment from those involved in executing them.
Explanation means providing people with a clear account of the


---PAGE BREAK---

thinking that underlies the process and the strategic decisions reached at
each step. Explanation reassures people that their opinions have been
considered, and decisions have been made with the company’s overall
interests at heart. This fosters people’s trust in managers’ intentions—
even if their own ideas were rejected.
Lastly, clear expectations means just that: stating clearly what people
can expect, and what their roles and responsibilities are, at each step and
in moving forward after the process is complete. Although the
expectations may be demanding, when people know what the goals and
milestones are, and who is responsible for what, they feel safe and
respected.
When we talk about expectations, we mean expectations for the entire
organization, not just the blue ocean team, so that everyone who will be
affected by the shift is brought along and not surprised at the end by an
alarming fait accompli. Just as the team’s leader exercises fair process
with team members, they, in turn, have to exercise it with their functional
cohorts: engaging them in what the team is finding; explaining the
process behind it; setting clear expectations about what will come next
and why. If you want buy-in, surprises do not tend to go down well in
most organizations. Even good surprises may be rejected if the process
leaves people feeling discredited and rolled over.4
What makes fair process so powerful is that it communicates through
its action how much people are valued as individuals and recognized for
their intellectual and emotional worth.5 When we feel valued, we feel
emotionally secure and are intrinsically motivated to give our all. We
trust, we commit, and we move from being self-protecting to being open
to sharing, exploring the new, and giving our best ideas even when we
are uncertain as to how they will be received. Anyone who has ever
worked in an organization understands how important this is.
The courtesy of the respect that fair process conveys triggers
something at the core of the human spirit. Fair process internally
civilizes us. It helps us suspend judgment and build trust so that we can
listen, learn, weigh others’ points of view, and contribute. Otherwise, it’s
too easy for people to put on a show of acceptance, while intending to do
the exact opposite, because they feel internally violated. Fair process
takes a huge step to closing that gulf, which is especially important when
change is at issue.
By weaving fair process together with atomization and firsthand


---PAGE BREAK---

discovery into the process, humanness and, hence, confidence to act are
instilled and reinforced. By doing so, execution is no longer an
afterthought. Rather it is built into the process by creating people’s buy-
in to the outcome of the process itself. What’s special about this buy-in is
that it persists, even when the resulting decision is at odds with what
people had originally hoped for. While we may wish it were otherwise,
we also accept that things cannot always go our way, and that short-term
personal sacrifices are sometimes needed to advance the success and
promote the survival of an organization. This acceptance, however, is
conditional on the presence of a humanistic process.
Figure 4-1 captures in one graphic the essence of how humanness is
built into the blue ocean shift process. The figure shows how the three
elements address different aspects of our humanness and collectively
produce the confidence to act and make a blue ocean shift. As shown,
atomization breaks the challenge down, so that it is easy to act on;
firsthand discovery allows people to see things that they never saw
before and firmly believe in the need for change; and the exercise of fair
process makes people feel valued and respected, inducing their voluntary
cooperation.
Figure 4-1
How Humanness Is Built in the Process
When strategy implementation is internally driven in this way, instead
of externally imposed or manipulated through carrots and sticks, people
voluntarily support and enact strategies to make a blue ocean shift. The
attitude at the end of the blue ocean shift process is palpable. In two
words, it’s “We’re launching.”


---PAGE BREAK---

The Right Tools with the Right Guidance
Eight to 9 out of 10 entrepreneurs fail. In almost any other context that
would be a shocking statistic, but, for some reason, it’s something that
the entrepreneurial community has long accepted as okay. We were never
okay with it. The blue ocean shift process comprises five systematic
steps that minimize the randomness and trial and error in creating new
markets so you maximize the chances of hitting the bull’s-eye. It uses
proven market-creating tools and frameworks to build an organization’s
creative competence to pioneer a new value-cost frontier with a
supporting business model that simultaneously achieves differentiation
and low cost. And it provides clear guidance on how to apply these tools
in action, including what to expect and how to avoid errors and missteps
along the way. The tools are visual, which makes them easy to
understand and apply. We’ve used them with equal effectiveness with C-
suite executives, people on the front lines, and the owners of small Main
Street businesses. People in the arts, government, and education have
also used them to unlock blue oceans. So have high school students and
religious organizations. We dare to say that no one who goes through the
process will ever see and understand their market—or any market—the
same way again. Here’s the sequence the process follows, and the tools
and guidance you’ll learn in each step.
Step One: Get Started
Step one tackles how to choose the right place to start your blue ocean
initiative so that your zone of transformation is not too ambitious and
you focus on areas that are most feasible in light of the organizational
constraints you may confront. To achieve this, we introduce the pioneer-
migrator-settler map, which guides you to target the area where you
have the most to gain by the blue ocean journey. Here we discuss how to
apply the map, and what the results reveal. We also identify the key traps
and pitfalls teams fall into in applying this tool and explain how to avoid
them.
Once the scope of your transformation is set, it’s time to construct the
best team for your journey. How many people should be part of the
team? What mix of skills should ideally be brought together, and what
levels of functional and hierarchical authority should be represented?


---PAGE BREAK---

How much time can team members and you expect to commit to the
process, and how will that affect people’s regular work? And what will
this look like if you’re a small business owner or entrepreneur, a CEO, a
product manager, or a government leader?
Step Two: Understand Where You Are Now
Step two tackles how to inspire a natural wake-up call in the team and in
the wider organization about the current state of play in your industry. It
shows how to collectively build a clear picture of the current competitive
landscape. When people see what the strategic reality is, and agree on the
need for change, you can create real alignment and a collective will to
make the shift.
To achieve this, this step introduces the strategy canvas tool. The
strategy canvas allows your organization to see in one simple picture all
the factors an industry competes on and invests in, what buyers receive,
and what the strategic profiles of the major players are. It exposes just
how similar the players’ strategies look to buyers and reveals how they
drive the industry toward the red ocean. Importantly, it creates a
commonly owned baseline for change. In this step you will learn how to
draw the strategy canvas, what you can expect as people work together
on this, how to interpret the completed canvas and build a shared
understanding of its strategic implications, and what the potential traps in
applying the tool are and how to avoid them. The beauty of this step is
that, once you’ve completed it, you will not need to tell anyone that a
blue ocean shift is necessary. Rather, the organization will find this out
for itself and tell you. People will viscerally feel it.
Step Three: Imagine Where You Could Be
To make the shift from what is to what could be, step three introduces
the buyer utility map. This analytic tool helps you discover the specific
pain points and points of intimidation that your current or target industry
is imposing on buyers throughout their entire experience. More
importantly, it helps you identify the unexplored spaces where value is
trapped and waiting to be unlocked. In the blue ocean shift process, pain
points and boundaries are not constraints. They are blatant opportunities


---PAGE BREAK---

to change the playing field of strategy—opportunities that most
industries have become blind to. Here we walk you through how to apply
the buyer utility map to your situation, and what to watch out for as you
trace and assess buyers’ total experience. We discuss how to interpret the
results, and highlight the potential pitfalls in working through the tool
and how to overcome them. By understanding the ways in which an
industry, even an intensely competitive one, blocks buyer value and
narrows the basis of its appeal, the seeds for new pathways to unlock
innovative value begin to sprout. People gain confidence that blue ocean
opportunities are out there, and that they just might have what it takes to
create them. Already the organization has benefited from the
identification of low-hanging fruit.
Step three then shows you how to break away from conceiving too
narrowly of whom an industry’s customers are. To achieve this, we
introduce the three tiers of noncustomers. This analytic framework
allows an organization to identify the total demand landscape that lies
outside the current industry understanding. Here we show you how to
apply each of the three tiers to your situation, discuss how to interpret the
results, and highlight the questions people are likely to have in working
through the framework and how best to address them. In this step,
noncustomers that were once invisible to an organization are made
visible, so latent demand can be unlocked. With shock, amazement, and
sometimes even humor, people wake up to discover that the customers
everyone has been fighting over are often only a fraction of the potential
total demand. The concept of a blue ocean is no longer a metaphor.
People start to see, feel, and define its potential.
Step Four: Find How You Get There
Step four is where organizations learn how to create commercially
compelling new market space by redefining the playing field of strategy.
This is when you learn how to put random brainstorming aside and apply
systematic paths to reconstruct market boundaries and create and re-
create markets. The six paths framework, the analytic tool introduced in
this step, demystifies and provides a structure for blue ocean creation.
The paths show you how to look at the market universe anew and to see
what others don’t see. Here you will learn how to explore each path to
extract the insight needed to redefine, reimagine, and shift market


---PAGE BREAK---

boundaries: whom you should interview and observe in the field to gain
insight; how to record and synthesize your findings; and how to identify
and avoid the common traps that lie along the path to reconstructing
market boundaries. The result is firsthand insight into practical ways to
reframe and redefine the problem an industry focuses on, identify and
solve brand-new problems or seize brand-new opportunities, and create
breakthrough solutions to the existing problem of an industry.
Step four then shows you how to make sense of these insights and
formulate them into well-constructed strategies. To achieve this, we
introduce the four actions framework, which drives the team to focus
on what they could eliminate, reduce, raise, and create to construct six
potentially viable blue ocean strategic moves. What makes this tool so
powerful is that it forces everyone to push their thinking to pursue both
differentiation and low cost, which is what will break the value-cost
trade-off and create blue oceans.
Step Five: Make Your Move
Step five introduces the blue ocean fair, where the decision is reached
on which blue ocean move to pursue. The fair is designed to take the
politics out of the decision-making process, obtain validation and
feedback on the strategic options, and consolidate people’s commitment
to and support for the chosen move. This step addresses the dynamics of
the fair, including who will attend, what should be presented, the
dynamics of the presentations of the strategic moves, and how the
participants vote on the moves’ strengths and weaknesses. It also
illustrates the calibration that occurs as people voice their opinions and
reasoning, and how, ultimately, top management selects which option to
move forward with.
The result is a clear decision, validated by key stakeholders with a
wealth of feedback and insight on how the chosen strategic move can be
further refined and potential gaps in execution can be efficiently and
effectively closed. After the fair, rapid market tests with the chosen
offering’s rough prototype are conducted to cross-check market reactions
and refine the idea, as needed.
Step five then elaborates on how to finalize and launch your blue
ocean move. Here we show you how to formalize a big-picture business
model for the move that can deliver a leap in value for buyers and strong


---PAGE BREAK---

profitable growth for you or, in the case of a nonprofit, a leap in the net
donations available for the cause. You’ll learn how to effectively launch
and roll out your new blue ocean move and how to use the strategy
canvas to guide decisions on what to do and what not to do, so the
organization has integrity in its execution. The rollout process also
outlines how to further validate, calibrate, and refine your blue ocean
approach to maximize the size of your new market and hence your
success.
How to Make the Process Work for You
Figure 4-2 provides a high-level overview of the process. The process is
a balance of hearts and minds, of humanness, confidence, and creative
competence. And when you balance hearts and minds, you gain hands:
People act. The beauty of the process is that each of the five steps with its
corresponding analytic tools and guidance has value on its own. This is
important because, although the five steps comprise the full process for
making a blue ocean shift, not every organization will be at the same
starting point. For example, you could be part of a company that was
once a market leader and whose profits are still strong, but whose
competitors are closing in fast. Buyer reviews suggest your company’s
offering no longer stands out, but most of management remains in denial.
You may not be ready to go through the full process, but you know you
need to wake the organization up to the imminent threat, and you don’t
want the wake-up call to be hitting the wall and entering the valley of
death. What to do? Apply step two and the analytic tool of the strategy
canvas. It is a highly effective way to change the conversation from one
of illusion and denial to one grounded in reality.
Figure 4-2
Overview of the Blue Ocean Shift Process


---PAGE BREAK---

Or suppose your organization’s offering still stands apart, but the size
of your industry is small and you are yearning to grow. Fighting over
existing customers will cut your profit margins. Yet you don’t have a grip
on who the industry’s noncustomers are. Jump to step three and apply the
analytic framework, the three tiers of noncustomers, to gain insight into
the latent demand you might be able to tap into.
Are you tired of A/B testing random new business ideas in the hope
of someday hitting on one that will create a new market? Do you find
your creative pathways blocked? In either case, jump to step four to learn
how to apply the six systematic paths to creating commercially


---PAGE BREAK---

compelling new market space.
The principle of atomization that works for individuals also works for
organizations. While most organizations today need to break out of the
red ocean, we’ve found that, despite their desire to create a blue ocean,
many are not yet ready to embark on the entire journey. That doesn’t
mean they can afford to stand still, however. That’s why we designed an
atomized process so that every organization can get value out of
applying a step or steps, as needed, to start moving. In other words, the
process is not an all-or-nothing deal.
As illustrated above, organizations can zoom in on the step that best
addresses their current need and apply it independently. Insights on
moving from red to blue can be had at each step, whether done in
isolation or as part of the overall process. As we discuss each step in the
following chapters, the independent value that can be derived from it will
become clear. In this way, every organization can start sailing, based on
who they are and what they are ready for. Importantly, each step has the
three elements of humanness woven in, so your organization’s
confidence will strengthen as its creative competence grows. In this way,
mobilization is built into each step of the process.
With the above understanding of the blue ocean shift process and how
each step simultaneously builds confidence and creative competence,
let’s dive in. The next chapter tackles the first part of step one by
showing you how to choose the right place to start your blue ocean
initiative.


---PAGE BREAK---

PART TWO
The Five Steps to Making a Blue
Ocean Shift


---PAGE BREAK---

Step One: 
Get Started


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 5
Choosing the Right Place to Start
AT THE THRESHOLD OF every blue ocean initiative is this
question: Where do we begin? The answer: We begin by scoping out the
initiative, which means working out which business or product/service
offering you’re going to tackle.
For a start-up or an organization with only one predominant offering,
choosing the right scope is straightforward: To ensure that it gets
launched in the blue ocean, not the red, a start-up needs to focus on the
offering it’s setting out to create. Focused organizations and small
entrepreneurs—be they owners of a single restaurant, a plumbing
service, or a local dental practice—should concentrate on their existing
offering.
For existing organizations with multiple offerings, however, choosing
the right scope is not at all straightforward. Think about GE, IBM, or
Procter & Gamble, whose corporate umbrellas cover many large
businesses, each with wide product and service offerings. Even a single
division of a large organization can present a multitude of possibilities.
The Consumer Lifestyle Division of Dutch electronics giant Philips, for
instance, offers products ranging from electric shavers, to electric
toothbrushes and air flossers, to blow dryers, curling irons, and women’s
electric epilation devices.
To help complex organizations like these set the scope of their blue
ocean initiatives, we created a simple, but powerful tool called the
pioneer-migrator-settler map. It allows you to assess your current
portfolio of businesses or offerings in one simple graphic and hence to
see beyond today’s performance. With this tool, you will gain a clear
picture of your organization’s value innovation pipeline, or the lack


---PAGE BREAK---

thereof, and the prospects for growth inherent in your portfolio.
In this chapter you will learn how to create a pioneer-migrator-settler
map for your organization. We will show you how to use the map to
select the right scope for your blue ocean initiative. We will also show
you how the process of creating and using it builds people’s confidence
in and support of the initiative, and how to avoid the traps in plotting it
that can be especially problematic for organizations with histories of
success behind them.
Mapping Today to See Tomorrow
Traditionally, leaders have used two measures to assess the strength of an
organization’s portfolio of offerings: market share and industry
attractiveness. The more attractive the market, the thinking goes, and the
larger the piece of it you have, the healthier you are, and—here’s the
important point for strategy—the less need there is to change course.
But is this so?
Market share is important. And most organizations want more of it.
But market share is a lagging indicator. It’s a reflection of past, not
future, performance. Kodak, for example, was the market leader in the
photographic film industry at the precise moment digital film was taking
off. Its market share was staggeringly large, but its strategic vulnerability
was high. On the flip side, Apple’s share of the smartphone market was
tiny when it launched its iPhone, while BlackBerry’s share was
commanding. Yet we all know what happened. Apple’s small market
share was a product of its recent entry into the industry, not a predictor of
its future success, just as BlackBerry’s large market share was a product
of its history that masked its strategic vulnerability.
A similar argument can be made for industry attractiveness, since
today’s seductively tempting industry may become singularly
unattractive tomorrow if, for example, lots of other organizations decide
to jump in and put lots of resources behind their move.
The pioneer-migrator-settler map largely gets around these issues by
replacing market share and industry attractiveness with “value” and
“innovation.” Value is crucial, because it forces you not to rest on your
laurels but to assess each of your businesses based on the value they
currently deliver to buyers. The value you deliver today drives buyer
behavior, which determines your future growth prospects, whereas the


---PAGE BREAK---

value you delivered yesterday determines your current market share.
Innovation, on the other hand, is key because it allows you to
overcome existing industry conditions. Without it, companies are stuck
in the trap of competitive improvements. With it, even a once-declining
industry can be turned into a highly profitable growth market. Think of
ActiFry’s strategic move, which turned a highly unattractive commodity
industry—electric home French fry makers, which had been declining in
value 10 percent per year—into a high-growth, high-margin, new market
space. Or citizenM Hotels, which is transforming the stagnant low-profit,
midrange hotel industry into a high-growth, highly profitable, new
market space of affordable luxury accommodations. Industries, in the
end, are what we make them. Do exciting things, innovate, and your
industry will become vibrant. Do more of the same, and watch the
industry’s attractiveness decline.
Assessing your product/service offerings according to how much
innovative value they offer buyers lets you see how strategically
vulnerable or healthy your portfolio really is. What you want to
understand is this: which of your offerings or businesses are “me-toos”
that offer only imitative value; which are better than competitors’ but
only marginally so, delivering improved value; and which, if any, are
value innovations that deliver a true leap in value. To capture this, the
pioneer-migrator-setter map is divided into three segments:
• Pioneers are businesses or offerings that represent value
innovations. They don’t have customers; they have fans. They
offer unprecedented value that opens up a new value-cost frontier.
These are the businesses or offerings that hold the key to renewing
your portfolio. Their strategy breaks away from the competition.
Pioneers are poised for strong, profitable growth.
• Settlers are the other extreme. These are businesses or offerings
that offer value imitation. They compete by making incremental
changes to an offering or its price. Their strategy converges with
the rest of the industry. Unless the industry itself is growing and
profitable, settlers have little or no prospect for growth.
• Migrators lie somewhere in between. They represent a value
improvement over the competition and may even be best in class.
But they do not offer innovative value.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 5-1 shows the filled in pioneer-migrator-settler map of a
consumer appliance company. While each circle represents a different
business, product, or service, for convenience we’ll refer to all of these
as “offerings.” Adding in the current revenues derived from each of the
offerings via the size of its circle shows you not only which are poised
for growth, or vulnerable to decline based on their position on the map,
but also how much is at stake, with a larger circle indicating that more
would be at stake.
Figure 5-1
The Pioneer-Migrator-Settler Map of a Consumer Appliance Company
In the case of the consumer appliance company shown in the figure,
one thing immediately jumps out: This organization is strategically
vulnerable, because it is essentially living off its past success. It may be
profitable today, thanks to its commanding market share in several of its
units. But it is dominated by settler businesses, which means it is playing
off past strategic moves, rather than creating new moves that will


---PAGE BREAK---

become the bread and butter of the future. In organizations with blue
ocean offerings, you will see pioneers that are planting the seeds for
tomorrow’s profit and growth.
Were you to plot Microsoft’s portfolio on the pioneer-migrator-settler
map, you would see that it is in a similar position. Over the last 10 years
or so, Microsoft has earned more than US$100 billion in profits; yet its
stock price has remained relatively flat, and it is no longer the talent
magnet it once was. Why? Were you to plot its offerings on the map, you
see that almost all of its profit comes from just two products—Microsoft
Office and Windows—both of which are now decades old and settlers.
What the stock market and talent no longer see is the company’s next big
killer app or any other pioneer. Sure its R&D labs are among the most
impressive and well-funded in the world. The trouble is the company is
not translating its advances in technology into value innovation
offerings.
Microsoft is not alone. When we ask organizations to plot their
current portfolios, most resemble the consumer appliance company’s
we’ve mapped out here. How about you? If you were to plot your
organization’s portfolio, how do you think it would stand in value
innovation terms? Are you building your blue ocean growth businesses
for tomorrow? Or not?
Understanding your company’s portfolio in terms of its degree of
value innovation is critical for two fundamental reasons. First, it allows
you to see beyond today’s performance numbers so you can identify
whether you are strategically vulnerable and, hence, need to act. Second,
having an aerial view of your portfolio, based on value and innovation—
the indicators that fundamentally drive buyer behavior—readies you to
begin scoping out your initiative. We say readies because even if your
portfolio is dominated by settlers, as the consumer appliance company’s
is, the last thing you want to do is embark on a corporate initiative to
shift them all. That’s simply too broad a scope. And introducing too
much change at once will lower people’s trust—in you and in the process
—and likely exhaust everyone’s energy.
A successful blue ocean process is based on what we call an “earn the
right to grow” approach. This means selecting one settler offering,
applying the blue ocean shift process to it, seeing the results, and then,
based on this experience, rolling out the process to other businesses or
product/service offerings in your portfolio. In addition to helping size an


---PAGE BREAK---

initiative properly, this approach can build confidence among your
people and trigger the feeling that you’re being both fair and reasonable,
thereby relaxing them and strengthening their willingness to open their
minds to new ideas.
How to Plot Your Pioneer-Migrator-Settler Map
Now let’s turn to you and your organization’s map. Defining the scope of
your initiative will allow you to create a shared understanding of your
portfolio in value innovation terms, and to see how widespread the need
for change and blue ocean initiatives is across your organization. Here
are the steps you want to follow.
Identify the key businesses or product/service offerings in your portfolio
Start by identifying your key businesses or product/service offerings and
choosing the people who will participate in the process. At a minimum,
the group should include the heads of each of the organization’s units.
Oftentimes, the people selected may wish to bring one or two of their
key people into the group. This can be very helpful, as well as feel
reassuring, because it means they can calibrate their thinking with others
from their unit when it’s time to plot their offering.
Identify which offerings are pioneers, migrators, and settlers
Next, provide each manager with the definitions of pioneers, migrators,
and settlers, as we have above. Be clear that the goal is to arrive at a
reading of where each business or product/service offering stands in
terms of value and innovation and not in terms of market share or
industry attractiveness. It is also important to remind people that each
offering should be assessed from the point of view of buyers, not in
terms of your organization’s other offerings. That is, how would buyers
judge your offering: as a pioneer, a migrator, or a settler, compared to the
other offerings available to them in the market? We’ve seen managers
mistakenly plot an offering as a pioneer because it was the most
innovative one the company had. But when we asked them to articulate
how their offering provided a quantum leap in buyer value, compared to
the available alternatives, it became clear that, from the buyers’ point of


---PAGE BREAK---

view, it was actually quite similar and should be plotted as a high settler.
This kind of myopia is symptomatic of an organization that is too
internally focused.
In plotting the businesses or offerings, let everyone know that the size
of the circles should be drawn as a function of their revenue, relative to
the organization’s other businesses (that is, the higher the relative
revenue, the larger the circle). If you have a pioneer that does not have a
mass following, and therefore is a small circle, place a question mark
inside it. When an offering delivers unprecedented value, its revenues
should reflect that. When that’s not the case, the question is why. It may
be because the offering was just launched, which would make sense. But
it might be because it’s actually not a value pioneer at all, but a
technology pioneer that few buyers can see the value of. Be sure to
explore this point. Many organizations with significant R&D budgets or
that operate in technology-intensive industries fall victim to this
misconception. When they plot their pioneer-migrator-settler maps, they
show a scattering of pioneers. But the circles are usually small, and that’s
not because they represent new offerings. As we probe, it becomes clear
that, although the managers of these businesses can explain why these
offerings represent breakthroughs in technology, they struggle to
articulate in simple terms how and why these breakthroughs provide a
leap in value for buyers. That’s an important point: It almost always
signals a strong disconnect between the development people and buyers,
which needs to be addressed if the money invested in R&D and
technology development is to translate into commercially compelling
blue oceans.
Plot your portfolio
Now, using a blank pioneer-migrator-settler map, plot your group’s
assessment of each business or offering. To help you perform this task
effectively, relevant materials and templates are provided for your free
download and use at www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates.
Usually, once a top management team has learned the core concept and
workings of the pioneer-migrator-settler map in action, together they can
complete their map with relative ease.
The aim is to capture each offering’s current position on the map.
Notice that we said “your group’s” assessment and not “your”
assessment. Why? As we explained in the previous chapter, firsthand


---PAGE BREAK---

discovery and fair process are critical components of the blue ocean shift
process. While you may have an instinctive sense of how your
organization’s portfolio should be plotted, that doesn’t mean other key
players will agree. Say the manager of a sizable business or
product/service offering has an inflated view of his or her unit, even
though its offering may have long since become just like everyone else’s.
If you were to plot that business or product/service offering as a settler,
he or she would most likely pull back, resist, and resent you for seeming
to downgrade his or her unit.
The best way to avoid this problem is to have the managers of the
different units plot their offerings collectively. As a starting point, ask
each of the managers to plot their unit’s offerings on the map. Then open
a discussion so that people can probe one another on why the offerings
are plotted as they are. Working together in this way helps keep everyone
honest. As managers hear others’ perceptions, everyone’s knowledge of
the organization’s total portfolio is upgraded, creating a shared
understanding. So, in the end, the offerings that get plotted as settlers or
low migrators get plotted as such by the people running those units. It’s
their call, not yours, which is the outcome you want.
While plotting the pioneer-migrator-settler map, your managers may
say they need additional research to assess their offerings’ positions
accurately. This seems reasonable. Yet in our work we’ve found that
when people are brought together to do the plotting as a group, their
perceptions tend to be close to 80 percent accurate. The aim here is
capturing the relative position of offerings within their industry, not
perfection. In most cases we’ve found that quantitative market research
results in slight, but not dramatic, movements on the map. But that
research does not fundamentally change the relative position of the
offerings. For example, with additional research, what we call a “low
migrator” may be found to actually be a “high settler,” meaning it falls
just below the demarcation line, rather than just above it. However, the
marginal difference does not change the ultimate conclusion. So should
this issue arise, try asking questions like these: “If further research were
done, what would you expect?” “Do you think your current plotting
would shift substantially, or would it be likely to nudge up or down?” “Is
it likely that what appears to be a settler might actually be a pioneer, or
vice versa?” In practice, we’ve found that nudging is almost always the
answer. This tends to put this issue to rest so that the group’s focus can


---PAGE BREAK---

come back to the big picture.
If disagreements within the group arise about how high or low an
offering should be plotted, get them to challenge one another’s
assumptions by asking what is distinctive about its value and
innovativeness. Is the business or product/service offering really a
migrator or a pioneer? What is the unprecedented value it delivers? Does
it capture the target mass of the market? Alternatively, if people think an
offering is plotted too low, ask, “Is it really a settler?” Check to make
sure that people don’t have an inflated view of their unit’s offering. Or,
conversely, that they’re not underrepresenting its accomplishments.
Continue to challenge people and keep the discussion going until there is
a consensus that every business or product/service offering is properly
positioned. This should allow you to agree on a fairly robust assessment
of your current portfolio.
Developing the pioneer-migrator-settler map is an interactive process.
Although there is often initial dissent about the appropriate assessments,
we find that disagreements very soon become minor and that, after some
shuffling, everyone agrees with the final picture.
Inside an Electronics Service Company
What are pioneer-migrator-settler map discussions really like? Let’s
listen in on the dynamics of a top management team for a US electronics
service company that we’ll call ESC, who were called in by the president
to plot their pioneer-migrator-settler map. ESC has built a successful
business in field repair for the end customers of electronics corporations
and corporate IT and telecommunications infrastructure. Here, we will
show how they interact with each other and build their shared
understanding as they go through the process of plotting the map. Along
with the president, attendees were the business development director,
global operations vice president, IT director, strategic planning manager,
controller, European operations vice president, Asian operations vice
president, and the HR manager.
“As you know, we’ve been doing very well over the last few years,”
the president begins. “We are now approaching US$500 million with
over 5,000 employees in more than 10 locations.” The president turns to
the controller. “And as I can confirm,” the controller adds, “we continue
to earn operating margins notably higher than our parent company [a


---PAGE BREAK---

multibillion-dollar corporation].” Heads nod. Almost to a fault, people sit
straighter in their chairs on hearing this. People visibly feel good about
their performance and proud.
“Despite good business results so far,” the president continues, “what
are our prospects for future profitable growth? There are a number of
new challenges emerging in the market.”
After receiving an overview of the pioneer-migrator-settler map from
a blue ocean expert, the team sets out to plot their portfolio. Upon first
blush, it looks like the organization is swimming in a blue ocean. “Those
corporate accounts are clearly pioneers,” the business development
director argues as they begin plotting their portfolio. “The margins here
are at the top of our industry.” “We agree,” the Asian and European
operations vice presidents add, nodding their heads. After checking and
verifying sales numbers, the controller confirms, “Globally our pioneers
account for 35 percent of our total business. Not only are margins high,
but so are revenues.” High-fives all around. After more discussion, the
team plots another 30 percent of their portfolio in migrators, with only
35 percent of their business in settlers. The top team is feeling pretty
good.
In presenting the map, the blue ocean expert notes that the team has
plotted their portfolio based on corporate accounts, not based on their
portfolio of service offerings. From the perspective of corporate
accounts, the map looks strong. Only that’s not the point of the map, so
the expert challenges the team. “In our industry,” one member shoots
back, “we think and act based on corporate accounts, not service lines.
That’s how our industry works.”
“When you are in a B2B service industry like ours, the dynamics are
different,” the business development director explains. “It’s all about
chasing RFPs [requests for proposals] for large corporate clients. That’s
where the money is.” Heads nod in agreement. “When corporate
accounts are highly profitable, we’re clearly doing something right. To
us—and probably to the rest of our industry—that’s a pioneer.” The
temperature in the room is rising slowly.
“All true,” the president responds. “Seen from the perspective of
corporate accounts, we certainly have done a good job so far. But we all
know that competition has been heating up. The question is: Are the
services we offer what they need to be to stand apart and win big
accounts in the future without significantly reducing our margins? If not,


---PAGE BREAK---

why should we expect strong profitable growth in the coming years?”
You could visibly see people register the significance of the president’s
subtle reframing. The industry may focus on chasing large RFPs and
high profit margins, and ESC may have succeeded in doing so with its
existing service offerings. But the prospect of ESC’s future profit and
growth performance needs to be assessed based on how compelling its
portfolio of services are from the perspective of customers. Customers
will go where they can receive a leap in value.
The team agrees to go back and redraw their portfolio from a service
line view of their business. This mapping of their business reveals a very
different picture. No matter how much the top team debates and searches
for what allows each service line to stand apart, the same answer
ultimately comes back. Service line after service line is a me-too settler.
“As far as we can tell,” the team concludes, “we essentially offer the
same services in the same way as everyone else. Roughly the same
quality of repairs, same pricing, same level of customer service, same
turnaround speed…”
The team goes silent. Their pioneer-migrator-settler map looks very
red. “How can the switch from corporate accounts and profitability to
service lines and value innovation paint such a different picture?” one
member asks. “We thought we were largely swimming in a blue ocean.”
As the team probes the discrepancy, a realization hits them. Many of the
corporate accounts originally mapped as pioneers are longtime
customers, whose contracts date back five to seven years, while the more
recent customers of less than two years are the ones the team has plotted
in the settler section of the map.
The standard of what truly constituted a pioneer, or even a migrator,
begins to take shape in people’s minds. The team realizes that they may
hold inflated views of their business. Given the multiyear contractual
nature of the industry, the higher-margin corporate accounts, in fact,
seem to better reflect historical success and customer inertia, rather than
innovative value delivered or future performance. More recent RFPs won
have taken far longer to secure and have profit margins significantly
lower than those of several years back. A new mood has set in. The
atmosphere is somber.
The president breaks the atmosphere. “We are not in the valley of
death,” he reassures the team. “We are still recognized as a leader in the
field. We should feel good about that. But nontraditional players are now


---PAGE BREAK---

entering the industry, like major consulting companies intent on
chopping the market up. There is also growing talk of some companies
keeping field repair processes in-house as a way to build customer
intimacy.”
“What are our growth expectations for the next five years?” the HR
manager asks.
“Ten percent in real terms,” the controller responds.
“Does our pioneer-migrator-settler map show we have the horses for
that?” the IT head continues.
“I was just thinking along the same lines,” the business development
director says, as he projects the map the group has just collectively
plotted on a wall for everyone to see clearly. The silence in the room
speaks volumes. The team realizes that their efforts are focused on
benchmarking competitors and making operational improvements. ESC
has scant planned investments to rethink and innovate their service line
to make it stand apart.
“Well, now. We have our work cut out for us, don’t we?” the
president concludes.
What Your Plotted Map Reveals
Once your organization’s map is complete, you are ready to discuss its
strategic implications. Is your portfolio settler-heavy—like ESC’s and
that of the majority of companies that are stagnant or declining? Has a
business that was once a pioneer, generating huge profits and growth,
recently become a settler, suggesting that the organization’s growth is
likely to slow if another pioneer is not launched?
The ideal portfolio to aim for depends, of course, on your industry. In
fast-moving industries, for example, you will want and need to have
more pioneers than settlers. In industries with large fixed costs for
organizations and sunk costs for buyers, a portfolio with a few solid
migrators and maybe one pioneer would be the right mix for securing
today’s success while building for tomorrow.
Stress to the group that the objective is not to create a portfolio
dominated by pioneers. It is to create a healthy balance between today’s
businesses—your settlers that provide cash and a measure of earnings
stability—and the pioneers that are the growth engines for tomorrow.
This is the path to profitable growth. Figure 5-2 depicts this path for the


---PAGE BREAK---

consumer appliance company, showing how its managers have set out to
shift their portfolio’s center of gravity from settlers toward a better
balance of migrators and pioneers.
Figure 5-2
Creating a Healthy, Balanced Portfolio: The Case of the Consumer Appliance Company
If, after this exercise, you find that your current map already has a
healthy balance across pioneers, migrators, and settlers, your
organization is on a solid track to build for the future while seizing the
present. In that case, you can hold off on launching a blue ocean
initiative. To have a strong growth portfolio, a company needs robust
pioneers; but it also needs stable revenues and cash flow to manage
market expectations and provide resources. This is where settlers and
migrators can add great value.
If, on the other hand, the portfolio you’ve plotted presents a situation
not too far from the portfolio in figure 5-1, help the group to appreciate
the strategic implications through questions like these: “What are the
prospects for strong profitable growth from our settler and low migrator
offerings?” “Are their industries growing so rapidly that we can expect


---PAGE BREAK---

strong profitable growth despite the offerings being settlers and
migrators?”
Ask what might happen if you were to share the map with Wall Street
analysts. Would they expect a positive earnings surprise from the
organization, or would they be likely to rate your stock a hold or
downgrade it? And, finally, discuss how customers might react to the
map. If buyers saw your offerings as settlers or low migrators, would
they be impressed and swear loyalty to your offerings? Or would that
make them more inclined to demand price cuts and put further pressure
on your profit margins?
The point here is to use the map to build a shared understanding of
the likely consequences of inaction. Are the organization’s growth
ambitions consistent with the aggregated pioneer-migrator-settler map
the group has drawn? Or is there is a discrepancy? As the implications
sink in, the team’s motivation to launch a blue ocean shift initiative takes
hold and grows stronger. Now it’s time to catch the wave and share your
intention to select a single business or product/service offering to launch
a blue ocean shift initiative and begin upgrading your overall portfolio.
Defining the Right Scope
As you study the map you’ve created, you may find that, like ESC and
the consumer appliance company in figure 5-1, you still have too many
candidates to choose among. In the face of this common dilemma, we
have found the following criteria to be particularly helpful. Ideally, the
scope of your initiative should be defined by the business or
product/service offering that meets all (or the greatest subset) of these
four criteria.
First, the business or product/service offering is a settler or a low
migrator; that is, it’s only slightly above settler status, making it clear
that it’s currently swimming in a red ocean.
Second, it’s headed by a manager who is eager to break out of the red
ocean and believes that fundamentally rethinking the strategy is key to
doing that. Selecting a unit with such a manager is crucial: The
manager’s enthusiasm and conviction that change is needed are what
people in that unit will feed off during the process. This kind of energy
both builds people’s confidence and signals that waffling will not be
allowed. That goes a long way toward getting everyone on the same


---PAGE BREAK---

page. By contrast, selecting a manager whose unit may desperately need
to change, but who offers nonstop excuses as to why things are the way
they are, or myriad reasons for why no new idea or approach could
possibly work, is to court failure before the process even starts. These
kinds of managers project the wrong kind of energy, the kind that signals
to those below them that they don’t really believe in the initiative. That,
in turn, will eat at people’s confidence and willingness to give their all.
You can lead a horse to water, but you cannot make it drink. So don’t try.
Third, ideally, no other major initiatives should be underway in the
unit. If the people who support a business or product/service offering are
already stretched by a major reorganization, say, or the implementation
of a new enterprise resource planning system, this is usually not where
you want to start, even if the leader is genuinely interested in
undertaking the initiative. People can do only so much beyond their
regular jobs and do things well.
Fourth, the business or product/service offering has its back against
the wall. While a settler offering may have limited prospects for growth,
as discussed above, that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s losing money. In
fact, it could still be quite profitable. When a settler or a low migrator
offering is not just swimming in a red ocean of competition, however,
but is also operating in the red, or facing an onslaught of all-new
competitors that are gaining traction fast, that situation helps create a
sense of urgency and a willingness to try new ideas to turn the tide. This
natural energy tends to unlock a hunger for a new approach that a blue
ocean initiative can leverage.
Over the next week or weeks, if needed, engage the managers of each
unit in a series of discussions to assess their readiness—and that of their
units. Then select the one that best meets all or the greatest subset of
these four key criteria.
With the right scope for your initiative set, and with credibility and
positive energy building, you are now ready to put the right team
together to make a blue ocean shift happen. That’s the subject of the next
chapter. So let’s get started.


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 6
Constructing the Right Blue Ocean Team
“I THINK THE BOX WITH the wide pink stripe looks best. It really
pops. And the bright color gives it a nice edge.”
“I couldn’t agree more. It will definitely catch women’s eyes.”
The trouble is the packaging the marketing team decided on wasn’t
for a women’s product. It was for an iron that didn’t require ironing, and
it was designed principally for men and young adults of both sexes. You
simply hang your wrinkled shirt or pants on a clothes hanger or the back
of chair, run the small handheld device up and down the garment, and
voilà, with the help of a strong burst of steam, the wrinkles fall away—in
less than half the time ironing takes. No skill necessary. No ironing
board, either.
The trouble had started eight months earlier, when the head of
domestic appliances, whom we’ll call “Brad,” spoke with his counterpart
in marketing (let’s call him “Joe”) about including one of his staff on the
team Brad was assembling for a blue ocean initiative. Quickly outlining
how busy marketing was with “major” new product launches and
campaigns, Joe’s attitude was clear: “Just create the new product and
don’t worry. We’ll take it from there. We know the market. That’s our
forte.”
Truth be told, Brad wasn’t exactly keen on bringing someone from
marketing onboard the team, either. Within the division, the commonly
held belief was that “When it comes to the consumer and the market,
marketing never listens to anyone. They don’t think anyone else has
anything to add or knows better than they do.”
To motivate his team, Brad decided not to push it and to forgo getting
marketing involved. It just seemed easier and made everyone—both his


---PAGE BREAK---

division and the marketing team—happier. So the business division
rolled up its sleeves and set about applying the blue ocean shift process
to the humble iron.
The market in Europe for irons couldn’t have been bloodier. The
process revealed a range of similar irons at every price point, with the
number of special features climbing with each jump in price. Convinced
there was most likely no new path to go down, the team was surprised as,
step-by-step, that belief was overturned when new insights began to
emerge. Like how, despite all the cool features added to irons over the
years, no iron addressed the greatest issue of all: People hated ironing.
They didn’t want ironing made better. They wanted no ironing at all.
What’s more, to iron you had to have an ironing board—and a good
one, for the iron to work well. This was an unwelcome added cost.
Ironing boards were also big, clumsy, hard to store, and a hassle to set up
and put away. Those issues had never been addressed, either, since
ironing boards were in another industry and, technically, not the iron
makers’ responsibility.
The team saw a huge opportunity in these unaddressed problems, as
well as a growing ocean of noncustomers: men, who, as they married
later in life and lived on their own longer, were doing more and more of
their own household chores. Men didn’t like going out looking sloppy,
but they hated the tedious task of ironing even more. And most couldn’t
afford to have their clothes professionally pressed. Young adults of both
sexes were also a largely untapped ocean of noncustomers. Yet the
industry generally acted as if it were still the 1950s, and that when it
came to domestic chores like ironing, women should be the focus of their
efforts. And women, it was also believed, wanted to do a meticulous job.
The ironless iron would change all that.
As agreed, the blue ocean team shared the prototype and the results of
the process and rapid market tests with marketing. And, as agreed, the
marketing team took the baton. But not having been part of the process,
marketing was full of doubts.
“It can’t create a crease. Creases are important,” said some of the
marketers.
“They don’t get it. Women buy irons, not men, and rarely young
adults,” added others.
So the marketers decided to do damage control. They knew you had
to target customers, not noncustomers. That was just plain common


---PAGE BREAK---

sense. So they put the new “device” in a box with a striking pink stripe to
attract existing customers, and they pitched it as a supplemental iron
made for those times when creases weren’t necessary. Packaged and sold
that way, women saw the ironless iron as just one more add-on, another
thing to store in their already crowded cupboards. They never thought it
could replace ironing. It was never sold as if it could. And men and
young adults—the ocean of noncustomers who were the prime targets—
never gave the pink-striped box a second glance.
What the marketing team did went against what the blue ocean team
found mattered. But what the blue ocean team found mattered went
against the accepted wisdom the marketing team had mastered. The
lesson: If people are not part of the process and there to discover
firsthand the power of the ideas that open up new value-cost frontiers,
it’s too easy for them to dismiss those ideas as irrelevant, deny their
validity, and push to bend them right back to the industry’s so-called
“best practices,” even when those best practices may be outdated or just
plain awful.
That’s why putting together the right team to carry out a blue ocean
initiative is incredibly important. When you are shifting—changing what
you are doing and the factors on which your industry has long competed
—all the key players who will make that shift need to be involved.
We’re going to talk here about how to construct the right team in an
established organization or division (be it for-profit, nonprofit, or public)
with typical line and staff positions, where executing a new strategy will
likely depend on the cooperation of people across various functions, and
the usual politics and naysayers will need to be overcome. If you own a
small, family-run business or a single store on Main Street, or you’re an
entrepreneur just starting out, you may well have only a handful of
professionals at most in your organization. But while you may not have
the depth of talent to draw on that a larger organization can bring to bear,
don’t worry. Founders and owners almost always have much more
control in aligning people around their blue ocean vision. By
understanding the dynamics of what makes a team successful, you’ll be
in the best position to know how to leverage your employees or the
people you have access to as you set out on your blue ocean shift
journey.


---PAGE BREAK---

What Does the Right Team Look Like?
Who, then, should be on this team? As our cautionary example about the
iron suggests, you want representatives from all the functions and
organizational levels that will play a key role in bringing a new offering
to market. In a typical corporate setting, that would usually include
someone from HR, IT, marketing, finance, manufacturing, R&D, and
sales, as well as someone on the front lines, like a call center staff
member or someone who works on the store floor. While organizations
routinely separate functions and hierarchical levels to achieve
efficiencies, these divides create silos, often break trust, and motivate
people to suboptimize when what you need is all the parts working
together so that ideas get built for execution from the start and everyone
owns them.
All in all, you should look to create a team with 10 to 15 people. The
lower limit is to make sure all the major functions and areas are
represented, have a chance to contribute, and discover firsthand the need
for change. The upper limit is to keep the process manageable and the
team flexible and fast. More than that tends to become unwieldy and
frustrating for those involved, unnecessarily sapping the team’s energy
and breaking down the integrity of the process.
When setting up the team, we’ve found that executives can be
hesitant to include people from a particular function who might be
perceived as more trouble than they’re worth, or who could slow the
process down as they struggle to get into the blue ocean mindset. Like
Brad, they may shy away from marketers or want to leave out HR
people, whom they see as benefits administrators with little strategic
vision. However, we caution against this. Have you also heard the refrain
“Finance trumps strategy”? We certainly have. Over the years, many
people have told us how their efforts to innovate were thwarted by
finance staffers inclined to support what they knew and could measure,
not what could be. Not surprisingly, they worry that the same result will
befall their blue ocean shift initiative.
We’ve found otherwise, however, in our research over the last 10
years.
When finance people are included on the team, and go through the
process, just like the other members, they develop firsthand insight into
the need for a strategic shift and the power of the blue ocean strategic


---PAGE BREAK---

move they’ve helped create. Finance staff members become bean
counters when they are asked to sign off on strategic imperatives they
don’t deeply understand. Like all of us, they simply don’t feel
comfortable putting money behind ideas that are foreign to them. To turn
finance into your ally, put a finance representative on the team from the
start. The team will gain the power and robustness of this functional
discipline, and finance will become your true strategic partner in the
investment decision-making process. All sides learn and grow from the
process.
While you want a cross section of people on the team, be sure that
everyone selected is directly involved in the division or product/service
offering you’re aiming to shift from red to blue and therefore has skin in
the game. This cross section is critical, because it ensures that there’s
someone from every function who can personally and authentically
affirm the credibility of the shift the team is developing. These people
will be the conduits to their functions and to the hierarchy at each step of
the process, relaying firsthand updates on the team’s findings. This is
what makes those findings believable and testifies to the robustness of
the process.
Contrast the experience of the iron manufacturer with this one from a
corporate foreign exchange provider. Before starting the blue ocean shift
process, the company was convinced that account executives were one of
their key competitive advantages vis-à-vis large banks. Not surprisingly,
the account executives agreed, as their swagger and status in the
company showed. But as the team went through the process, one truly
unexpected finding that emerged was that buyers disdained the account
executives’ role and hated wasting their time talking with them. They
saw the account executives as the people who focused on coming up
with creative excuses and smoothing over the problems and frustrations
clients had with the company’s services. What good was attention from
an account executive when wire transfers were frequently executed late,
or customers failed to get confirmation that transactions had been
executed, or they received scant market knowledge to properly hedge
their currency payments. Had the account executives not been on the
team and heard this feedback for themselves, rest assured they would
have vehemently insisted that the process had not been done correctly,
that the team members didn’t know what they are talking about, and that
—to the contrary—account execs were what set the company apart. But


---PAGE BREAK---

because they were included and heard customers say the same thing time
and time again, they couldn’t deny it.
More telling, this finding led account executives to a realization about
themselves. Yes, they had long been perceived as the company’s
superstars. But now they could see that all too often they were heroes not
because they added real value for clients but because they stopped clients
from leaving by being smart in excusing, apologizing, and calming them
down. And so, the team made the decision—with the support of the
account executives themselves—to phase out the position. Account
executives became sales reps for large, high-value accounts, effectively
tripling the company’s sales force and increasing the company’s revenue
generation capability significantly with no increase in cost.
In organizations with geographically scattered operations, a common
refrain is “Our area is different.” In one company that had a poor track
record of rolling out virtually any initiative globally, subsidiary managers
summed up their take on the head office’s view of the world as “Nuts in
the field, brains in the center.” Not surprisingly the “nuts” took great
pride in quietly derailing and slowing down head office initiatives.
Having someone from each key geographic region included on the team
goes a long way toward remedying this situation. People feel their area is
valued and that they are not viewed as brainless doers to command.
What typically happens first on such international teams is that the
regional members grouse about how their area is different, and how no
new “global” strategy can possibly work there. To which the response we
recommend is, “If that’s true, the process will reveal it. And if it does,
we’ll say sayonara to the aim of creating and rolling out a blue ocean
shift globally.” The clarity of that single statement goes a long way
toward creating openness and engagement in the process. Then, as the
teams get started, what they typically discover is that, if the organization
could shoot the lights out on a few key common concerns voiced by
customers and targeted noncustomers around the world, people would
gladly forgo the majority of their idiosyncratic regional wish lists. This
reinforces real buy-in and excitement in the process. While more than
one team is needed for multinationals with geographically diversified
operations, for the purpose of clarity and simplicity, we will focus on the
one-team situation.


---PAGE BREAK---

What to Look for in Team Members
So far we’ve been talking about where your team members should come
from. In fact, we’ve equated the individuals with their functions,
referring to “marketing” and “finance” as if the people were their jobs.
Now we’ll shift gears and talk about the individuals themselves.
Human dynamics is something many leaders gloss over. And, true,
setting the right human dynamics does take time and thought up front.
But the rewards are priceless. That’s why, when it comes to whom to
select for the team, job title is not the most important factor. Character is.
What you are looking for are people who are well respected and already
have credibility with others in the organization. That may or may not
overlap with their status in the organization. You want to select people
who are good listeners, are known to be thoughtful, and are willing to
raise questions when others don’t. People who not only can dream big
but also are noted for their commitment to getting things done. These are
the people others will naturally tend to admire and listen to. Such people
elevate the credibility of the team within the organization and the respect
team members have for one another.
At the same time, you will also want to put one (or potentially two)
known naysayers on the team. Though to ensure that they can’t dominate
the team’s dynamics or undermine its positive energy, they must be the
clear minority. Why have them there at all, then? For one thing, putting a
devil’s advocate on the team boosts the credibility of the process and the
team’s findings. It signals your confidence that the process can withstand
their doubts and misgivings. It shows that you intend to scrupulously
examine any idea that challenges the status quo to ensure that potential
downsides are fully considered and not simply glossed over, only to
come back and bite you later. In addition, when skeptics go through the
process and see, feel, and experience for themselves the ways your
current strategy fails to excite the market, they tend to stop complaining.
And when they are convinced, the momentum for change is reinforced
further.
Back in the day, when Bernie Marcus was still running Home Depot
with a viselike grip, the leader of one of its second-tier suppliers of
electric lighting felt his company needed to make a blue ocean shift to
get a bigger slice of Home Depot’s and other major retailers’ business.
But neither argument nor numbers could convince the naysayers in his


---PAGE BREAK---

company that their products weren’t good enough. They claimed it was
the sales force that needed upgrading. Full stop.
Then the leader took a different tack. He put the two key naysayers
on the initiative team to meet the market. The team started with customer
#1, Bernie Marcus himself. And Bernie let it rip: The product was a me-
too. It was too expensive. It was not reliable. It was a waste of valuable
shelf space. After that naked feedback from Bernie, the naysayers were
visibly ashen. No more urging for a new strategy was needed.
Be prepared for people to be, on the one hand, glad they are chosen
for the team and, on the other, apprehensive about the extra work that
will require. On average, team members will spend 10 percent of their
weekly work time on the initiative, with peak points, when they will
need to set aside around 20–25 percent, scattered over the course of the
project. This work almost always comes on top of their day jobs. But as
they say, “No pain, no gain.” Fortunately, we can also say the gain will
outweigh the pain.
In the process, team members step up to leadership, gain experience
working with people from different functions and hierarchical levels,
learn firsthand and up close about the market, and acquire a big picture
of the organization and the environment (often for the first time)—all
highly valuable exercises for every person involved. Working on a blue
ocean initiative team changes the scope of the members’ day jobs,
shifting their focus away from the routine to more strategic concerns.
People learn to ask future-focused questions about how to create
innovative value, what adds cost but no value (like account executives at
the corporate foreign exchange provider), what could add a little cost but
deliver a leap in value, and who the industry’s noncustomers are and how
to convert them to customers. This transforms everyone on the team,
making them more valuable to the organization and to themselves. You
will want to discuss these benefits with team members up front. People
appreciate knowing that the extra work they’ll take on will be more than
repaid by the new skills, team connections, and ideas about future
opportunities they will gain by participating.
Appoint a Kingpin Team Leader
Job title isn’t everything, but the head of the team, whether it is you or
someone you appoint, does need to outrank the other members. That


---PAGE BREAK---

simply makes it easier for them to accept and follow the leader. The
disproportionate influence of a strong kingpin, both on the team
dynamics and across the company, will help mobilize large swaths of the
organization to support the initiative.
The team leader is expected to act as the team’s first contact point,
maintaining direction and excitement, keeping everyone informed, and
helping the team navigate through the organization. The leader also
needs to anticipate problems that could hinder the team’s ability to
complete its tasks and address these issues proactively. Organizations are
often tempted to delegate a lot of this work to assistants. However, we
strongly advise against this for a number of reasons. When a team leader
directly undertakes these tasks, it signals that the initiative is important
and not to be taken lightly. It shows respect for team members. And it
keeps the fire burning, closing loopholes for procrastination and
halfhearted efforts. It’s far too easy for people to play games with
assistants, telling them, “We’ll get back to you soon,” only to respond
three weeks later, compromising the process and draining energy from
the initiative.
For Dysfunctional Organizations: Enlist a Consigliere
Is your organization dysfunctional? Ridiculously bureaucratic? Or highly
political so that getting things done feels akin to walking through a
minefield? Large, older organizations may feel this way. So can
government entities. In these situations, in addition to putting the team
together and selecting the right team leader, you also want to think about
enlisting a consigliere. This is particularly important for organizations
that have operated in the same way for a long time or have a strong
institutional culture.
A blue ocean shift initiative can overturn many established industry
and organizational conventions. This may have ramifications for how
work is currently done, which, in turn, may inspire anxiety in the hearts
of the people doing that work now. Where human emotions and behavior
are involved, an ounce of prevention is truly worth its weight in gold. So
you need to be mindful throughout the process of any potential resistance
that may be brewing or poised to arise when it comes time for
implementation.
A consigliere can help you anticipate these issues before they become


---PAGE BREAK---

intractable. A consigliere is someone in the organization with an ear to
the ground, a master of organizational politics, who knows who the big
players and blockers are, and who’s hungriest for change and likely to be
one of your strongest supporters. As a respected insider, he or she can
advise the team and provide air cover from potential detractors, as well
as garner support from individuals who might otherwise want to thwart
the initiative actively or through passive aggression. The best candidate
is someone who is highly influential, can be a quiet advocate, and also
has the will to get involved, if necessary, to remove obstacles the team
might face.
With the scope of your initiative set and the right team in place,
you’re ready to move on to the second step of the process. Here we’ll
discuss how to get a clear understanding of the current state of play in
the industry, align everyone on the team, and inspire a natural wake-up
call among the team members and the wider organization about the need
to make a blue ocean shift.


---PAGE BREAK---

Step Two: 
Understand Where You Are Now


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 7
Getting Clear About the Current State of
Play
DO YOU HAVE ONE simple picture that captures your overall
strategy, a picture that every manager understands and that puts everyone
on the same page? Do you know what factors your industry or target
industry competes on and invests in? Do you know what sets your
product or service offering apart, and how it diverges from the
competition’s? In short, do you and your team have an objective view of
the current state of play in your industry?
Whether you are about to embark on a blue ocean shift, or simply
want to make sure you truly understand your industry’s status quo,
having a clear and shared picture of the current strategic landscape is
critical. First, it ensures that you have a strategy, not merely a collection
of tactics that may make sense individually, but that don’t add up and
may even be contradictory. Second, it ensures that everyone is on the
same page. Only when people agree on what the current strategy and
strategic landscape are, and see and agree on the clear need for change,
will you create real alignment and inspire their willingness to act. You
and the team leader you’ve chosen may appreciate the need to break out
of the red ocean and fundamentally rethink your strategy, but that doesn’t
mean others on the team will share this view, let alone the wider
organization.
Beyond this, we’ve found that while managers typically have a strong
sense of how they and their rivals compete on one or two strategic
dimensions, few grasp the full picture. They may have slogans, which
they confuse with strategy, like “We are the friendliest airline,” or “Our
strategy is to be the best full-service global bank.” But when we probe


---PAGE BREAK---

for specifics, the discussions are typically fuzzy and full of sound bites
that competitors could just as equally easily use to describe their
products or services.
To address this problem, we developed the strategy canvas, the
diagnostic tool that you will use throughout the blue ocean shift journey.
Drawing the “as-is” strategy canvas for your offering will give the team
—and, through them, the wider organization—an objective picture of
current industry dynamics as well as your own and your competitors’
strategies. Because there is no foregone conclusion about what the
strategy canvas will—or won’t—reveal, the team will be able to discover
for themselves the relevance, or irrelevance, of challenging the status
quo and rethinking the strategic profile of your organization’s offering in
blue ocean terms. This combination of fair process, with firsthand
discovery and atomization, is what ensures that people will own,
internalize, and have confidence in the results of their work.
The Strategy Canvas
The strategy canvas is a one-page visual analytic that depicts the way an
organization configures its offering to buyers in relation to those of its
competitors. It crisply communicates the four key elements of strategy:
the factors of competition, the offering level buyers receive across these
factors, and your own and your competitors’ strategic profiles and cost
structures. And it tells a story: It allows you to see—and understand—
where you and your competitors are currently investing; the product,
service, and delivery factors the industry is competing on; and what
customers receive from existing competitive offerings. Drawing the
strategy canvas of the industry you intend to penetrate is equally critical
if you are an entrepreneur intent on creating a new business, or a new
nonprofit, because it highlights in one simple picture what you will be up
against in strategic terms. It’s also a potent visual to use in discussions
with potential investors or funders.
Figure 7-1 shows the strategy canvas for the UK charity fund-raising
industry before the launch of Comic Relief. The horizontal axis specifies
the key factors the industry historically competed on and invested in,
which range from pity pleas, to advocacy counseling and care services,
to year-round fund-raising events and activities. Note that this axis
captures the “key competing factors,” not the key value factors for


---PAGE BREAK---

buyers. This is important. Why? Because as you will likely soon
discover, there is often a stark difference between the factors
organizations compete on and assume deliver value and the factors that
buyers actually value. In fact, what companies compete on often not only
fails to add value from the buyer’s perspective, but can actually detract
from it. Think of the year-round fund-raising events and marketing
solicitations that charities compete on, which create donor fatigue, rather
than inspiring people to give. Think of all the buttons on the average TV
remote control, which frustrate and confuse more than they assist. Or
think of the vast array of channels you get when you sign up with a cable
TV provider, when all you really want are the three or four that carry the
shows you love to watch.
Figure 7-1
Strategy Canvas of the UK Charity Fund-Raising Industry (Pre–Comic Relief)
As your team focuses on identifying your industry’s key competing
factors, they will also begin to surface all the areas you and your
competitors currently invest in as you attempt to keep up with or surge
past one another. These factors increase your cost structure, absorb your
organization’s time, and can complicate operations. But because they
seem to be de rigueur, they are rarely questioned. So as the team
expressly identifies these factors, they will also be creating a roster of


---PAGE BREAK---

candidates to consider later, when you’re looking for things to eliminate
or reduce in order to drop your cost structure while simultaneously
offering buyers a leap in value.
The vertical axis of the strategy canvas captures the offering level
buyers receive or experience for each of an industry’s key competing
factors. In the case of the UK charity fund-raising industry or, for that
matter, any nonprofit, donors are effectively the buyers of the nonprofit’s
mission and credibility, which they “pay” for with a donation. A high
score on the vertical axis means that an organization offers buyers—here,
donors—more, while a relatively low score means that an organization
offers less. You now connect the dots to create your strategic profile—a
graphic depiction of your organization’s relative performance across its
industry’s factors of competition—and your competitors’. A strategy
canvas, as exemplified in figure 7-1, is what we call the as-is strategy
canvas because it captures the industry’s current as-is state of play. It
helps to create a common understanding on industry reality among the
team.
What the Strategy Canvas Reveals
Looking at the canvas in figure 7-1, we can literally see why the industry
had become a red ocean of competition. The industry has essentially
commoditized itself. Despite the fact that there are thousands of charities
in the UK, from the donors’ point of view there is enormous
convergence in their strategic profiles. From a donor’s perspective, large
traditional fund-raising charities all effectively compete in a similar way.
The same can be said for small fund-raising charities. What’s more, the
strategic profiles of both large and small charities essentially follow the
same basic shape, only at different offering levels. As both large and
small charities try to improve the value of their offerings by providing a
little more for a little less, and benchmark industry best practices, the
basic shape of their strategic profiles converges. The result, as seen in the
figure, is that industry players’ strategic profiles become nearly mirror
images of one another without challenging the basic shape of their
curves. This is not rare. It is commonplace.
Think about major retail banks in São Paulo, New York, Paris, Lagos,
or Tokyo. Are there any stark differences in their relative locations,
façades, atmosphere, or even tellers? Or, from the buyers’ point of view,


---PAGE BREAK---

are almost all of them pretty much the same, except for the language
spoken? What about gas stations the world over? Any major differences
in what you would expect? Again, the same. Or law firms and
management consultancies? Here, too, they’re fairly similar, other than
potentially being distinguished by a famous high-profile lawyer or a
thought-leader consultant. And these are just a few examples. Take a
moment and we are sure you will come up with your own long list of
organizations whose strategies are driven by one-upping the competition.
The strategy canvas helps you change that. It pushes you to take a
step back from the detail you are typically enmeshed in, and clearly see
your industry’s defining contours—to differentiate the forest from the
trees. It allows you to capture and depict a macro picture of the current
state of play in your industry, without getting lost in the technical details
of small operational differences. Focusing on the basic shape of the
industry’s strategic profile is essential, because it’s impossible to make a
blue ocean shift without challenging and altering the industry’s basic
strategic norms. Depicting the small operational deviations that
individual players are making in their offerings will only clutter the big
picture that buyers see and be irrelevant for your intended strategic shift.
The Importance of Focus, Divergence, and a Compelling Tagline
To make a blue ocean shift, the basic shape of your strategic profile
cannot look like everyone else’s. It must distinctively diverge, so that
when buyers think about your offering, they do not lump it together with
the offerings of other industry players. Specifically, to make a blue ocean
shift and stand out to buyers, your strategic profile needs to meet three
criteria: First, it should be clear that its basic shape on the strategy
canvas diverges from the industry’s average profile. It shouldn’t simply
be a little more, or a little less, than what the competition does. Second,
your strategic profile has to be focused. It shouldn’t just over-deliver or
under-deliver on the same set of factors the rest of the industry competes
on. Rather, it should concentrate on the key factors that can offer buyers
a leap in value, while eliminating and reducing others. This is what
allows your strategy to achieve lower costs at the precise moment you
are also offering greater value.
Finally, your strategic profile should have a compelling tagline that
speaks to the market and honestly reflects what your offering provides. It


---PAGE BREAK---

must have integrity, not be a wishful marketing slogan. Buyers see
through empty slogans fast. A compelling tagline is an important initial
litmus test to ensure that the divergence and focus behind your strategic
profile are actually linked to a leap in buyer value, and not merely
differentiation for differentiation’s sake. Consider the strategic profile of
Comic Relief, known as Red Nose Day in the United States, which we
discussed in depth in chapter 3. Figure 7-2 shows how its strategic
profile meets all three criteria, opening up a blue ocean of new market
space in the UK charity fund-raising industry. Later on, in step four of
the process, we will show how this new, or “to-be,” strategic profile can
be derived.
Figure 7-2
Strategy Canvas of Comic Relief “Doing Something Funny for Money”
What does the as-is strategy canvas of your industry or target industry
look like? Would it look like that of the UK fund-raising charity industry
pre–Comic Relief, where all the major players’ strategic profiles
followed the same basic shape, and essentially converged, from the
buyers’ point of view? What does it reveal about your strategic profile?
Does it march in lockstep with everyone else’s, or does it stand apart, as
Comic Relief’s does? These are not questions for you to answer yourself.


---PAGE BREAK---

These are the questions you should ask the team to answer through the
process of drawing the as-is strategy canvas of your industry.
How to Draw Your Strategy Canvas
The as-is strategy canvas is a self-assessment, not a customer survey.
The aim is to understand the team’s perspective, what the team members
see and register about the current strategic landscape: What do they
believe the business or product/service offering you’ve identified
competes on? How much or how little of each key factor does your
organization and the competition offer? What is the offering’s price point
relative to the competition’s? What is its relative cost structure? You will
likely be amazed by the plethora of insights drawing your as-is strategy
canvas can reveal.
Here is how this step unfolds.
Name the industry you are in
Start with a blank as-is strategy canvas, which, along with a supporting
explanation, are provided for your free download and use at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates. Ask the team to name the
industry that the business, product, or service you’ve selected for this
initiative competes in or, if you are an aspiring entrepreneur, the industry
you desire to enter. The aim is to ensure that everyone on the team has
the same reference point and that this reference point is decided by the
team, not imposed on them, so that they will fully own the as-is strategy
canvas they are about to create. This is typically a straightforward,
rapidly accomplished task. However, on rare occasions a team member
will start to hypothesize about what industry “we should be in.” If this
happens, simply remind him or her that at this stage you’re focused on
defining the industry “as it is,” not “as it should be.” That will come later
in the process.
Identify the key factors your industry competes on
Before the team settles down to address this task, it’s important to
establish a few parameters:


---PAGE BREAK---

• Identify no fewer than 5 and no more than 12 key competing
factors on the as-is strategy canvas. A minimum of 5 pushes teams
who say they only compete on price to challenge their assumptions
and to uncover factors that may have become so familiar they no
longer register. Basic B2B industries like chemicals and plastics,
for example, often fall into this camp, because they take it for
granted that the product they sell is a commodity and argue that
price is the only distinctive point on which they compete, when, in
fact, the competitive factors usually include assessment and
technical support services, delivery lead times, inventory
availability, and more. Conversely, a maximum of 12 factors
pushes teams who come up with overly long lists to focus only on
“key” competing factors and not every factor they can name. The
aim is to keep the team focused on the big picture and neither
oversimplify nor get lost in minutiae. In the case of for-profit
companies, price should always be included in the key competing
factors.
• Key factors can be related to an offering’s product, service, or
delivery platforms. So think about all three platforms in coming up
with your list. For example, for a turbine engine manufacturer, key
competing factors might include customer financing (a service
factor), engine power (a product factor), and speed to fulfill orders
(a delivery factor).
• Avoid supply-side technical jargon and use words that describe the
factor from the buyers’ point of view. For example, speed instead
of megahertz.
Before taking up this task as a team, each of the members should
develop their own list independently. Beginning this way is key for three
reasons. One, it avoids groupthink, which tends to stifle people and to
lead to lists that do not fully reflect the range of views within the group.
Such self-censorship can engender an unspoken “what if” mindset that
may never go away and can discredit the initiative’s conclusions. “If I
had mentioned this, would the result have changed? Why didn’t I speak
up?” is not the kind of thinking you want when implementation is the
ultimate aim. Two, it challenges everyone on the team to name the


---PAGE BREAK---

factors they believe the industry competes on. You will likely find this is
a question that few people have ever given much thought to, even though
they often come into the process assuming they have. As they usually
soon discover in sitting down to answer this question, it’s not easy.
Three, it allows the team to appreciate the differences in how each of
them interprets what their organization and industry do, and how often
people may identify the same factor and yet mean different things (we’ll
get to that in a minute). People’s jobs tend to induce tunnel vision, which
this process helps to break down.
Once all the team members have created their lists, the team should
reconvene as a group. At this juncture, have everyone read their list of
identified factors and, as they do, record them on a whiteboard so
everyone “sees” what others are thinking. When a factor is mentioned
more than once, make a check mark next to it, so that the team can also
see which factors most members identified and agreed on.
At this point we typically find that roughly 50–60 percent of the
factors identified will be the same. We also often hear members
comment casually to one another about the time it took for them to come
up with their lists, even if they have just completed their organization’s
annual strategic planning process. “If it’s hard for us to identify and
agree on the range of factors we compete on, how can we have a clear
strategy that is executed with integrity?” is an all-too-common insight.
Or, as one executive aptly put it, “Now I know why we never get there.
We don’t know where we’re going.” In and of itself, this reckoning
opens team members’ minds to the realization that they need to think
more deeply about their strategy.
Now initiate and lead a discussion focused on the factors where there
was no consensus. Asking each member to explain the reasoning behind
the factors he or she identified ensures that everyone will appreciate the
variety of ways in which their colleagues perceive the industry and
enable them to register factors that were always there but were somehow
overlooked. At this stage, the team usually finds that another 20–30
percent of the identified factors are actually getting at a similar point,
even though members have labeled them differently. They also learn
about factors that only one or two members may have identified, but that
are quickly recognizable as “key” factors once the proponents have
articulated why.
As the team identifies the key competing factors that will appear on


---PAGE BREAK---

the horizontal axis, they may need to be reminded to describe them from
the buyers’ point of view, not the organization’s. Good people or state-
of-the-art IT are examples of organizational factors people often confuse
with key competing factors. While these may indeed be strengths of the
organization, they need to be translated into factors that speak to buyers,
if they do. The factors buyers don’t see or experience should be
scratched. Good people, for example, might be customer responsiveness,
if that’s what the good people produce for buyers. And state-of-the-art IT
might translate into ease of use, if that is what it leads to. The point is to
continually bring the team around to describing the offering and key
competing factors from buyers’ point of view, not the supplier’s.
Similarly, team members often identify brand as a key competing
factor. In almost all cases, however, an organization’s brand is a direct
function of its strategic profile; that is, of what it offers buyers/users.
Apple’s brand is strong because its offering is strong: leading edge,
reliable, easy to use, and stylish. Google’s brand is strong because its
product works amazingly well, it’s quick, it’s easy to use, and it delivers
reliable results. A brand, in short, is the result of what you do. It’s not an
isolated, independent factor. To get beyond brand, ask what customers
derive from the brand that makes it compelling. For example, what
explains Federal Express’s brand? That it’s reliable, fast, gives peace of
mind, and so on. To get to the root of the value the team believes a brand
conveys, encourage members to think of the top three reasons buyers
would purchase the offerings of the organization to which it belongs.
Decide which key player(s) to compare yourself with
Once the team has whittled down the list of key competing factors, they
have to decide on the best player(s) to plot their offering against. We
recommend selecting the industry leader, whose strategic profile is
usually the benchmark others have focused on keeping up with or
beating. If you are the industry leader, select your strongest competitor.
You may think, “Hey, how can the as-is strategy canvas capture the
industry if only the best player is plotted besides ourselves?” To which
we reply, take a moment and think about Pepsi versus Coke or Sotheby’s
versus Christie’s. Or imagine what the strategic profile of every major
investment bank, every major haute couture house, every major
accounting firm, and every major state university looks like.
Players in these industries may well argue that there are differences


---PAGE BREAK---

across them, and no doubt there are. But, in the big picture, seen from the
buyers’ (or donors’) perspective, they all are pretty much the same. The
market leader’s strategic profile typically captures the profile others have
been converging toward or, in many cases, have already come close to
mimicking. Besides, the strategic profile of the best in class is also the
gold standard that defines the industry.
If team members feel that an additional player should be plotted for
the strategy canvas to be valid, then let them do so. However, we
strongly discourage plotting more than three strategic profiles, lest the
strategy canvas become cluttered and start to exaggerate inconsequential
differences for buyers. For example, a car that accelerates up to 100
miles per hour in 3 seconds versus 15 seconds may matter to car
manufacturers and a small segment of auto enthusiasts. But as ordinary
car drivers ourselves, our response to such a difference is—sorry,
engineers—“no big deal.” Remember you are looking to capture the big
picture from buyers’ perspective, not technical differences from the
supplier’s perspective that may speak to a relatively small niche.
That said, there are contexts where it does make real sense to plot
more than one best player. This typically happens when an organization
operates in a market space served by two distinct strategic groups or
alternative industries. For example, in the case of the blue ocean
initiative team that was headed by Christian Grob at Groupe SEB, at the
start of the blue ocean shift journey, the team plotted the strategic profile
of its electric home French fry maker not only against its best-in-class
traditional competitor’s, a global consumer appliance company, but also
against a new class of competitors, the best-in-class retailer brand’s.
With large retailer brands gaining power in the market, Christian’s team
saw them as important to include on the as-is strategy canvas.
When we worked with a company in the budget hotel industry, the
organization plotted its strategic profile against the market leaders in two
strategic groups that were relevant from the buyers’ point of view: one-
star and two-star hotels. In another organization, team members agreed
that, although the strategic profile of the market leader was generally
representative of what other industry players were doing, there was also
a newcomer that appeared to be defying industry logic, growing at a fast
clip, and garnering lots of attention. This was not just a new player. This
was a new, fast-rising entrant that hadn’t started to dominate the industry,
but looked like it was on course to do just that. In this case, the team


---PAGE BREAK---

argued that the strategic profile of both the industry leader and this
newcomer should be plotted along with its own. These are the types of
reasons that make strong strategic sense and that you should look out for.
Rate your offering and the best-in-class player’s or players’ along the key competing factors
Having chosen the best-in-class player(s) you’ll compare yourself with,
the team is now ready to rate the offering level for each factor of your
business or product or service against theirs. If the team decided that two
strategic profiles or groups should be plotted along with your own, rate
the offering levels for both of them. For simplicity, however, we’ll
reference only one strategic profile here in addition to your own.
Using a 5-point Likert-type scale (or some variant thereof), with 1
equal to very low, 3 equal to average, and 5 equal to very high, ask the
team to rate your offering level for a given factor and then your reference
player’s for that same factor, before moving on to the next factor. We
have found this approach the most effective way to proceed, because it
offers a quick reality check if the ratings tend to be too high or too low.
As people challenge one another on just where they and the best-in-class
player stand on each factor, and why they feel as they do, a lively
discussion usually ensues. What team members often begin to viscerally
understand during these discussions is that, in the past, they and their
colleagues often had different mental baselines for calibrating their
offering, and had essentially talked past one another. As a result, while
annual strategic plans were produced, they were more often about tactics
to hit performance goals than about the big picture. This is another aha
moment that seldom gets lost on team members, further opening people’s
minds.
In plotting price, the team should use the absolute price—the price
tag buyers see. So, a high price should be ranked high on the vertical axis
and a low price ranked low. While this may sound self-evident, teams
often get this wrong and plot a low price high on the vertical axis and a
high price low. Why? Because they are incorrectly interpreting price to
mean value. But price is not value. Price is price. Just as a low price tag
with a dismal product or service offering does not translate into high
value, a higher price tag with a compelling offering does not mean low
value.
Team members also often ask whether each competing factor should
be weighted as part of this step. To this, our answer is no, because it


---PAGE BREAK---

drives you to focus on the wrong thing. The objective of the as-is
strategy canvas is to record the factors the industry currently competes
on and invests in, and the offering level buyers receive for each factor as
objectively as possible. The aim of this step is not to provide a
subjective, value-laden assessment of each offering level, but an
objective one: Do we absolutely charge a little or a lot, or offer or focus a
little or a lot on each factor, and hence invest accordingly? Later in the
process, when team members meet the market, we will drill down into
value judgments and shift from what is to what should be.
Draw your as-is strategy canvas
With ratings for the key competitive factors in hand, the team is ready to
plot their as-is strategic profile and that of the best-in-class player. The
team should begin by putting price as the first competing factor on the
horizontal axis, so that it’s clear what value is: Value is what is
exchanged when the buyer pays. Everything to the right of price on the
horizontal axis is what the buyer is gaining. When the strategy canvas is
viewed in this way, it is easy to see what buyers get for the price they
pay.
Next, the team needs to plot the other key competing factors along
the horizontal axis. In plotting, you want to keep your completed as-is
strategy canvas from looking like a bowl of spaghetti—a zigzag, where
the offering can be described as “low-high-low-high-low-high.” With
such a drawing, it will be very hard to make sense of and communicate
the industry’s current state of play. To avoid this, the team needs to plot
key competing factors with similar ratings next to each other.
Once this is done, plot the offering level scores the team arrived at for
each key factor and then connect the dots to create your as-is strategic
profile. The team can then overlay this with the strategic profile of the
best-in-class player to arrive at the as-is strategy canvas. Finally, team
members are asked to reflect on their as-is strategic profile and see if
they can give a compelling tagline that reflects their offering. When they
do this exercise, you should make sure the team doesn’t develop an
advertising slogan, which doesn’t really relate to the strategy in any
meaningful way. The tagline should authentically reflect the strategic
profile they are trying to headline. They will likely struggle to come up
with a compelling tagline—one that resonates with integrity—for their
as-is strategic profile if its basic shape converges with that of the best-in-


---PAGE BREAK---

class player(s).
What to Expect as You Draw Your Canvas
To appreciate the kind of dynamics that unfold and the insights that
emerge as a team draws their strategy canvas, consider this vignette from
the experience of a US commercial food-service company we’ll call
School Foods. The company’s profitable growth had stalled for some
time, and two major players dominated the industry. In this instance, the
CEO who took on the project chose to be the team’s leader as well.
After discussing their factors of competition, the team began to plot
their strategic profile against the two dominant rivals. Given the strength
of both, the team argued it couldn’t afford to focus on only one. This
concern, however, was quickly found to be groundless. The team fast
discovered that not only did the strategic profiles of the two rivals
converge, but their own strategic profile also followed in lockstep. The
strategic profiles of all three converged along the same dimensions of
competition: financial accountability, quality of management services,
transparency of bidding processes, and the like. The only difference was
that the two industry leaders had higher name recognition, whereas
School Foods had a high sense of mission, which the team wanted to
include on the canvas as a distinguishing key competitive factor. The
team was probed: “Do any of your customers know that you value your
sense of mission?” “No, not really… I guess not,” a team member
reluctantly replied. Upon reflection and discussion, the team then agreed:
They might be proud of their mission, but customers were clueless about
it.
“Do you know what your competitors have to offer in terms of food,
quality of service, or ambience?” a blue ocean expert asked. The entire
team went quiet. There were blank faces all around. Eventually, a team
member responded, “No, we don’t really know what they offer, nor do
we really know how our food offering is valued versus theirs by our
customers.” The probing then went deeper: “Why isn’t the quality of
food or variety in the offering noted as one of your factors of
competition? You are a food-service company after all, aren’t you?” The
group was amused, but ashamed. “I guess we are so focused on winning
the bid to provide the service by offering the best financial package
desired by the management of the school,” one team member confessed.


---PAGE BREAK---

“Elsewhere at work you always talk a lot about the importance of
building relationships in your business. Why isn’t that on your strategy
canvas?” The team members looked at one another. The head of
operations said, “We’ve always spent a lot of energy on developing and
maintaining relationships, but you know it really doesn’t add value to
customers.”
“The industry principally competes on offering an adequate service at
the lowest price,” one team member chimed in, “but that’s only half the
picture, isn’t it?” “When we really think about it,” another team member
added, “the factors our industry competes on are contract-related—price,
transparency of our costs in bidding, inclusive pricing. It’s about giving
the customer the best financial deal, not necessarily the best food deal for
the end user.”
In the span of a 45-minute discussion, the School Foods team realized
they were a “me-too” business: Customers didn’t see how their offering
differed from their competitors’. With their lower name recognition, they
now have a good understanding as to why their company’s growth has
stalled for some time. They did not have a clear sense of how their
offering compared to that of their competitors in the core of their product
—food. And they competed on factors of little or no value to their real
customers—the students who eat the food. This was good news. The
entire industry was competing on four cylinders. All members of the
group could collectively see the wide-open opportunity space to create a
blue ocean and now share their willingness and urge to turn on all eight
cylinders. They were excited to get started.
Building a Shared Understanding of the Strategic Implications
Now it’s time to draw out the strategic implications of your completed
canvas. To start, ask all your team members to write down the key
insights they gained from drawing the canvas. Tell them that to kick off
the group discussion, each one of them will be called on to share their
insights. Inviting people to reflect, collect their thoughts, and crystallize
the takeaways that jump out at them is a crucial part of building the trust,
confidence, and ownership that are at the heart of making a successful
blue ocean shift. Setting clear expectations in advance about what will
happen during the group session reinforces that this is a fair process,
while turning up the heat to encourage everyone to think deeply.


---PAGE BREAK---

After each of the team members has shared their insights, you’ll want
to reflect on everyone’s observations, using open-ended questions to let
people appreciate their collective strategic insights. There are several
areas to probe: Does the basic shape of our offering’s strategic profile
converge with or diverge from that of the best-in-class player(s)? Does
our strategic profile merit a compelling tagline that has integrity? Or
does our strategic profile confirm that a more honest tagline might be
something like “We try hard, but we’re hardly different from our rivals?”
If potential customers saw the completed as-is strategy canvas, would it
give them reason to be our fans and purchase our offering, or would they
be largely indifferent to it? And if investors saw it, would this give them
cause to upgrade their estimate of our future profitable growth prospects
and sign off on further funding? The strategy canvas is a powerful tool to
use in seeking funding, and in objectively demonstrating to buyers why
—when your organization has a compelling strategy—they should, in
short, fall in love with you.
To ensure that important insights revealed in the process of drawing
the strategy canvas don’t get lost, the team leader should also delve into
how much agreement, or disagreement, arose throughout the process. If
team members diverged in their lists of key competing factors, relative
offering levels, or choice of best-in-class competitor(s), probe for the
implications with questions like “How can we consistently sell to the
market, when there is no clear strategic vision we all embrace?” “How
can we convince customers to buy our product or service when we, as an
organization, can hardly agree on what we’re offering?” And “How can
we make consistent investment decisions when we hold different views
about what our strategy is?”
If you are in an established company with a well-known brand that
historically has dominated its industry, but have seen your profit and
growth prospects dwindle, along with your ability to pull in the best
talent, watch out for two things: In such situations, we have often seen
confusion and a high level of denial as to how serious this trend is and
how long it might continue. In this instance, your as-is strategic profile
may quickly reveal the exact opposite of what it takes to sail into the
blue ocean; namely, that in an attempt to monetize your well-known
brand, you are charging more for your offering than your rivals are,
while ironically offering less along the industry’s key competing factors.
(This is usually due to some combination of coasting on your reputation,


---PAGE BREAK---

arrogance, and the rise of rivals who now play your game better than you
do.) What your as-is strategy canvas may also reveal—and we’ve seen
this happen numerous times as well—is that your strategic profile has
essentially become a “me-too” with a high cost structure, because you
invest at high levels across the full range of competing factors.
Meanwhile, a newcomer that seems to be whizzing by you has a strategic
profile that is divergent, focused, and has a compelling tagline. Should
either of these scenarios be the case, challenge team members by
commenting that “Incremental improvements might buy us time,” and
adding, “but would they enable us to create strong profitable growth?
Would they really enable our offering to break away from the
competition and stand apart while having lower costs?” Then go silent.
Let the questions sink in and wait for the team members to respond.
When the as-is strategy canvas tool reveals that your organization’s
strategic profile is a “me-too” or inferior to your competition, it is a
powerful mobilization tool to underscore the need to make a blue ocean
shift. But don’t stop here. There is a maxim that a cup that is full cannot
hold any more water. Likewise, when people feel they know it all, they
lack thirst. As a result, their room to learn is limited. The challenge is to
help team members not only see the need to make a blue ocean shift, but
also make room in their mental cups so that they have the space and
thirst to look at the world anew, which is at the heart of opening people’s
minds to new ideas and making a shift.
To encourage a learner’s mindset, highlight the unknowns that
surfaced during this step by recapping the comments team members
themselves made along the way. The kind of comments we often hear
and that serve this purpose well include:
• “It was more difficult than I thought to identify our key competing
factors. Few of us have a good grasp of the big picture and see the
industry through the lens of buyers—although, before we drew the
canvas, most of us assumed we did.”
• “We and everyone else in the industry tend to reflexively accept
the same key competing factors and assume that, because we
compete on them, they deliver buyer value. But is this true? Maybe
they’re sacred cows or unquestioned orthodoxies that we’ve
simply failed to question.”


---PAGE BREAK---

• “Our strategy tends to be reactive and driven by the competition.”
• “If we had drawn the strategic profiles of all the other players in
our industry, they would hardly look different than ours or our
chief competitor’s, plus or minus minor differences in customers’
eyes.”
• “I see contradictions in our offering, where we offer a high level on
one competing factor, while ignoring others that support it—
investing heavily in making our online store beautiful, for instance,
while not investing in the speed of loading pages.”
• “There are strategic inconsistencies between the level of our
offering and the price. Basically, we’re offering less for more.”
Moving Forward
With the as-is strategy canvas drawn, the team now has a one-page
picture that captures the current state of play, the assumptions the
industry acts on, and the degree of competitive convergence across the
existing players. Instead of being told that change is in order, team
members have discovered for themselves the need for change. And
because they confirm the need for change, they own it. The completed
strategy canvas provides not only a compelling, objective case for why a
blue ocean shift is in order—or not in order—but also a good baseline
against which to evaluate new ideas.
Occasionally (as we saw in the School Foods example), the team will
include an executive member who may also serve as the leader of the
blue ocean initiative. Obviously, this has major benefits; but it is not
always possible. For this reason, be sure to keep the executive team
apprised of the main insights being revealed throughout the process. By
keeping executive management informed, you set clear expectations and
manage their expectations.
Similarly, after this first step, it is key to have team members return to
their areas to share the findings and what they’ve learned from the as-is
strategy canvas. Whether with executives or colleagues in their area, they
need to walk everyone through the story of what happened in the process
of drawing the as-is strategy canvas. This includes explaining how their
understanding about the current state of play changed and why, what the
as-is strategy canvas reveals, and what the team’s plenary discussion


---PAGE BREAK---

brought to light. This builds buy-in and “no surprises” into the process,
which are key to implementation and form a powerful way to boost
everyone’s learning and create a common vocabulary and shared
“picture” of the as-is strategic reality the organization faces. As most
employees are seldom engaged in the strategic conversation of the
organization, this process cultivates a culture of inclusion where people
feel they matter.
This brings us to the next step in the process where you begin to
imagine what could be. In the next chapter you’ll learn to discover all the
ways the current industry or your target industry is creating hidden pain
points that limit demand for your offering and exclude potential buyers.
In the blue ocean shift process, pain points and boundaries are not
constraints. They are clear opportunities to change the strategic playing
field. So let’s start exploring them.


---PAGE BREAK---

Step Three: 
Imagine Where You Could Be


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 8
Uncovering the Hidden Pain Points That
Limit the Size of Your Industry
WITH THE AS-IS STRATEGY canvas in hand, everyone can see the
big picture—the current state of play in the industry. This gives the team
a commonly agreed-upon baseline to assess new ideas against. Now the
challenge is to develop an equally clear, big-picture view of the ways in
which the underlying assumptions and boundaries that define the
industry also limit its appeal and size by causing what we call “pain
points.”
Pain points are just what the name implies—aspects of a business,
product, or service that buyers, knowingly or not, are forced to put up
with, and which either diminish its utility in their eyes or are so
inconvenient that noncustomers turn to alternatives. While utility
captures the satisfaction a business, good, or service provides to buyers,
blocks to utility reflect just the opposite—the difficulties an industry
imposes on buyers, or pain points. In the blue ocean shift process, pain
points—which are often hidden—are not constraints. They are blatant
opportunities to change the playing field of strategy. But most industries
become blind to them, just as buyers often become numb to them,
because they assume that’s simply the way things are.
Take the US wine industry. Despite the country’s relatively high per-
capita alcohol consumption, there are still few wine drinkers. Of all
alcohol sales in the United States, wine accounts for a mere 15 percent of
the total. If you wonder why, ask yourself how easy it is to choose a
wine, given the thousands of wineries, the hundreds of varieties, and the
tens of thousands of complicated labels. For that matter, how easy is it
even to open a bottle of wine if you’re one of the 80 percent of American


---PAGE BREAK---

consumers who don’t own a corkscrew? Or to embarrass yourself in
front of guests by choosing the wrong wine or chilling it improperly.
To help teams get a snapshot of the practices in their industry that are
blocking utility for buyers and narrowing the basis of the industry’s
appeal, we developed the buyer utility map. This tool gives team
members a platform for developing a deep understanding of the ways in
which an industry, even an intensely competitive one, limits its demand
by creating pain points for current and potential buyers. As team
members work with the map, they begin to objectively register that blue
ocean opportunities exist, and that they just might have what it takes to
create them.
Ensuring that the team really begins to internalize this perspective is
critical, because at this juncture the members are typically experiencing
two powerful streams of emotion. Having drawn the as-is strategy
canvas, they have likely come to understand that maintaining or
tweaking the status quo will not put their organization on a strong,
profitable, growth trajectory. To get out of head-to-head competition and
into the blue ocean, something different will have to be done. Along with
this sentiment comes another underlying, but almost always unvoiced,
question, namely: If blue ocean opportunities exist, why has everyone in
our industry missed them? Which is to say, the team’s new awareness
goes hand-in-hand with that nagging self-doubt we’ve spoken about
before as to whether they—this team—can actually create a blue ocean.
What the team leader should not do is ignore these reservations.
Pretending they do not exist simply allows them to fester below the
surface. Then even a slight bump in the journey—and there will be
bumps—can easily shake the team’s confidence further. That said,
acknowledging these doubts and asking people to suspend them doesn’t
work either. They always resurface. What you have to do instead is nip
these doubts in the bud and continue building the team’s collective
confidence by allowing the members to keep on discovering their own
capabilities and creativity.
How? The team has already begun to experience the process of
firsthand discovery through the work of drawing their industry’s as-is
strategy canvas. Now they will have the opportunity to deepen it, as they
systematically uncover opportunities the industry has left on the table or,
more aptly, created via the self-imposed boundaries and assumptions its
players act under. This may seem counterintuitive. But by gaining a deep


---PAGE BREAK---

understanding of the accepted “truths” that define their industry, the team
begins to see who its pain points are forcing out, and who the
noncustomers they never thought were even in the picture might be. The
buyer utility map is the tool we’ve developed to help teams generate
these insights.
The Buyer Utility Map
The buyer utility map helps team members see that almost every industry
—including theirs—has significant problems worth solving. The map
outlines the full range of experiences buyers have in using your
industry’s offering. In so doing, it reveals the problems the industry has
failed to address, creating pain points worth solving and, conversely, the
levers that could be pulled to address them and unlock exceptional
utility. This lets the team identify not only the full range of ways an
industry delivers utility to buyers, but also, importantly, where it blocks
utility, producing hidden opportunities to break away from the
competition and expand the size of the market. Let’s see how this works,
by looking at the map’s dimensions in detail.
The Six Stages of the Buyer Experience Cycle. The map begins by
outlining the full breadth of buyers’ experience, which is almost always
wider than the view most industries hold. As the horizontal axis in figure
8-1 shows, a customer’s experience can be broken down into a cycle
with six distinct stages, running more or less sequentially from purchase
to delivery, use, supplements (that is, other products or services needed
to make yours work), maintenance, and disposal. Each stage
encompasses a variety of specific experiences. For a retail store, for
example, purchasing may include getting to the store, finding what you
want when you get there, and checking out when you’re ready to pay.
While these six stages provide a generic template that forces
organizations to think through the complete buyer experience cycle, they
can be and often are customized to better fit an industry’s particulars. To
illustrate, imagine once again that you’re a customer of the wine
industry. Your buyer experience cycle would be something along the
lines of: Search (variety, food pairing, region, etc.)  Purchase  Chill 
Opening/Sharing  Drinking  Disposal of bottle.
Figure 8-1


---PAGE BREAK---

The Buyer Utility Map
Interestingly, many industries focus on one or two stages of the
experience cycle and overlook all the opportunities the remaining stages
afford. This bounded rationality often creates pain points that escape
industry players because they simply aren’t considering them. By
identifying the full range of stages in the buyer experience cycle, the
buyer utility map begins to generate insight into the unquestioned
assumptions an industry is based on—assumptions that detract from
buyer value and can be reversed.
The Six Buyer Utility Levers. The map also displays the major
levers organizations can pull (or not) to provide greater utility for buyers.
While the six stages of the buyer experience cycle run across the
horizontal axis of the map, the six utility levers run down the vertical
axis, producing 36 potential “utility spaces.” In the case of simplicity,
fun and image, and environmental friendliness, the utility these levers
offer is clear. The idea that a business, product, or service could reduce a
customer’s financial, physical, or reputational risk is also fairly
straightforward. And a product or service offers convenience simply by
being easy to obtain or use. The most commonly used lever is customer
productivity, which captures how efficiently an offering can fulfill
buyers’ needs in each stage of the buyer experience cycle by saving them
time, effort, and/or money. Interestingly, just as industries tend to focus
on a small subset of stages, they also tend to focus on a small subset of


---PAGE BREAK---

the six potential utility levers, overlooking the expansive opportunities
the full set affords.
Where does your industry or target industry concentrate its efforts
among these 36 possible spaces? Executives in commoditized red ocean
industries typically focus on only a few, leaving the rest virtually wide-
open for blue ocean possibilities where today only inadvertent pain
points reside. As you will see below, that’s precisely what Christian
Grob’s team at Groupe SEB found when they filled in the buyer utility
map for the European electric French fry appliance industry discussed in
chapter 1. This is not an anomaly, either: Few industries or organizations
realize the breadth of utility spaces they could explore or, on the flip
side, the narrowness of their current focus. And simply asking people to
imagine, without any help, that new utility can be created seldom helps
them expand their field of vision.
When people can see how few spaces their industry focuses on,
however, and see and name the range of utility spaces there are to
explore, they literally see where trapped value may be hidden. That’s
certainly what also happened to Kimberly-Clark Brazil when the
company’s initiative team applied the map to toilet paper. “What could
we do with simple toilet paper?” was the initial question everybody had
in mind, since they all knew the industry was highly commoditized,
swimming in a bloody red ocean. They couldn’t imagine what could be
done beyond producing toilet paper more cost-effectively than the
competition. But as you will discover in a subsequent chapter, the map
helped them see ample untapped utility spaces they could exploit to
create a blue ocean in the industry.
To drill down and get clear on exactly what these pain points are and
where on the map they are hiding, the buyer utility map provides a
straightforward, structured method for systematically thinking through
all the possibilities. As shown in exhibit 8-1, team members are guided
to consider the biggest blocks to each utility lever and the factors that
give rise to them at each stage of the buyer experience cycle. As pain
points become visible that no one had ever noticed before, or that the
industry knowingly ignored—as players focused on beating one another
in the current game—more ahas emerge.
Exhibit 8-1
Uncovering the Blocks to Buyer Utility


---PAGE BREAK---

Purchase  Delivery  Use  Supplements  Maintenance  Disposal
Customer Productivity: What is the biggest block to customer
productivity in each stage? What are the key reasons for this block?
Simplicity: What is the biggest block to simplicity in each stage? What
are the key reasons for this block?
Convenience: What is the biggest block to convenience in each stage?
What are the key reasons for this block?
Risk Reduction: What is the biggest block to risk reduction in each
stage? What are the key reasons for this block?
Fun and Image: What is the biggest block to fun and image in each
stage? What are the key reasons for this block?
Environmental 
Friendliness: 
What 
is 
the 
biggest 
block 
to
environmental friendliness in each stage? What are the key reasons
for this block?
Plotting Your Buyer Utility Map
How do you plot a buyer utility map for your offering? Here are the
steps.
Start with the buyer experience cycle
Walk the team through the generic buyer experience cycle shown in
figure 8-1, making sure everyone is clear on what it captures. To help
you effectively perform the tasks discussed in this chapter, relevant
materials and templates are provided for your free download and use at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates. Then, using this as a
baseline, ask them to put themselves in the shoes of buyers, and imagine
their total experience from purchase through disposal. While the buyer
experience cycle for many industries generally follows the generic
pattern shown in the figure, the team can also customize theirs for their
business, product, or service offering, renaming some of the stages, for
example, or adding or deleting stages to fit the specifics of their industry.
In the case of personal computers, for example, a typical buyer’s
experience would include setup as a stage after delivery and before use.
Next, challenge the team to identify the specific activities that fall
within each stage of the cycle. This will help everyone begin to get a
rich, full understanding of what buyers actually experience over the life


---PAGE BREAK---

of the offering. Going back to the PC industry, for example, setup would
include getting the PC out of its big, tightly packed box; reading and
making sense of the setup instructions; connecting the PC’s wires to all
your other devices; climbing under furniture (which is when many of us
hit our heads) to plug the PC in; and throwing away the box and all the
protective casing inside it.
Explore the six buyer utility levers
Once the full buyer experience cycle is laid out, the team can turn to the
six utility levers. To ensure that everyone understands what each buyer
utility lever means, the team leader should post the summary definitions
presented in exhibit 8-2. Then move methodically from stage to stage,
posing the same two questions about each, as shown in exhibit 8-1,
namely: “What is the biggest block to [insert utility lever here, e.g.,
customer productivity] in this stage?” and “What are the key reasons for
this block?” While both questions aim to uncover the same problems,
we’ve found that the richest answers come from exploring both
perspectives.
Exhibit 8-2
What Each Utility Lever Means
To ensure that everyone is clear on what each buyer utility lever
means, below is a summary for your easy reference:
Productivity: Anything to do with efficiency—less time, effort,
and/or money—in fulfilling buyers’ needs.
Simplicity: Anything that eliminates or minimizes complexity
or mental hassle.
Convenience: When and where I want something—like 24/7,
365.
Risk Reduction: This may be financial, physical, and
emotional, including reputation.
Fun and Image: This is the tangible and intangible aesthetic
look, feel, attitude, and style an offering conveys.
Environmental Friendliness: This utility lever is about


---PAGE BREAK---

“green” matters. Is your offering environmentally friendly? Or
do buyers prefer your offering because of your organization’s
strong reputation for environmental friendliness?
To illustrate how dramatic the insights can be, consider the
experience of a company in the Mexican retail furniture industry. The
industry historically thought about delivery in terms of delivering new
furniture to the buyer’s apartment complex, which in Mexico City meant
depositing it in the building lobby. In fleshing out what delivery means
from the buyer’s perspective, however, the team quickly realized how
narrow this definition was and the pain points the industry unknowingly
imposed. Delivery for buyers was not only about getting the furniture to
the apartment building. It also encompassed getting the furniture from
the lobby up to the customer’s apartment. Many on the team recounted
horror stories about people struggling with family and friends to get their
new furniture up to their apartments after a tiring day at work. Yet,
somehow, even executives in the industry had simply assumed that
hassle goes with getting a beautiful new room of furniture.
Such assumptions are not uncommon. Don’t most of us assume that
dealing with an insurance company will entail getting the runaround, that
getting gas for our car is a drag, that bottled water will be hard to carry
and store, or that buying an iron also requires that we have a large,
clumsy, hard-to-store ironing board? As you flesh out the blocks to
utility that fall in each stage of the buyer experience cycle, even
executives who consider themselves market savvy are typically surprised
by all they’ve never thoroughly thought through.
Fill in the buyer utility map
As the blocks to utility surface, you should put an “X” in each space
where a pain point was revealed. Figure 8-2 shows a completed buyer
utility map, in this case for electric home French fry makers that Groupe
SEB found when the team applied the map. As shown on the map, make
sure to capture the reasons for each “X,” whether in speech bubbles, as
we’ve done here, or on a separate sheet of paper. Cataloguing the reasons
behind each pain point is important, because the team doesn’t want to
lose any of the work or insight gained here.


---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 8-2
The Buyer Utility Map of Electric Home French Fry Makers: Pre–Groupe SEB’s ActiFry
Finally, use an “O” to mark the utility spaces the industry currently
focuses on. To do this effectively and avoid putting “Os” all over the
map just because the industry minimally touches on a space, you should
get the team to distill the industry’s core utility. Once again, the aim is
the big picture. Go back to the as-is strategy canvas to provide the
baseline: What is the industry fundamentally offering from the buyers’
perspective? Boil down the central utility buyers experience by using
your product or service. Christian Grob’s team at Groupe SEB found, for
example, that despite the intensity of competition, the industry
essentially focused on only 1 of the 36 potential utility spaces—
productivity in use, that is, creating a reasonably priced electric French
fry maker that worked reliably. That is the “O” shown in figure 8-2.
As the team works to complete their map, you should remind them
that today’s negatives could become positives in tomorrow’s strategy,
and that the pain points they’ve identified reflect buyers’ perspective.
When the negatives of their industry are unearthed, people in established
organizations can feel uncomfortable or get defensive. Your role is to
remind them about the potential opportunities that lie behind these pain
points. Let them know that what your organization and the industry have


---PAGE BREAK---

focused on, as revealed by the map, may have been enough to succeed in
the past. The point here is not to look back and it’s certainly not to cast
blame. It’s to build a compelling future together and pain points provide
strong clues on how to do just that.
One last observation about this stage of the plotting process: In some
cases, after completing the map, one or more members of the team may
question the results. And, indeed, as the team goes through the rest of the
blue ocean shift process and meets with and interviews both customers
and noncustomers, these insights may well be refined and altered.
Hassles the team did not perceive in this initial step may make
themselves known and be found to be significant. Others the team
identified may be found to be less important than they had originally
thought. At this point, though, you should immediately follow up by
asking the team member or members who’ve expressed concern what
percentage of conceivable inaccuracy they’re worried about: 100
percent? Or 20–25 percent?
In our experience, the far lower range is almost always the answer.
That’s your opportunity to stress the strength of the results: Even
assuming 20–25 percent of the utility blocks the team identified are
inaccurate or incomplete, it doesn’t invalidate the other 75 percent
uncovered through this one step. In short, blocks to utility still exist, and
the flip side represents opportunities to redefine the strategic playing
field. Then go on to assure the team that as the initiative continues, they
will have ample opportunity to systematically meet customers and
noncustomers, validate or disprove their insights, and learn how to look
at the market in new ways. This type of honest, direct discussion eases
people’s anxieties and strengthens collective confidence. In the case of
Groupe SEB, for example, not only did the team confirm the pain points
noted in figure 8-2, but the next steps of the process led the team to
discover other important pain points that had long slipped under the
radar, such as how the high calories in French fries discouraged
noncustomers from patronizing the industry.
As an aside: We have seen the above concern come up often in
organizations that have a culture of analysis paralysis, where data tends
to be used not to help people take action, but rather to postpone and even
invalidate actions that move away from the status quo. Should this
happen, it’s an important signal to take note of as you move forward with
the process, because it means that additional handholding will likely be


---PAGE BREAK---

required as the team learns to step back and see the big picture, atomized
step by atomized step.
Is What You See What Buyers See and Experience?
With the completed buyer utility map in hand, the team can bring the
insight it contains to life. To initiate the discussion, ask the team
members to juxtapose the insights gleaned from the as-is strategy canvas
with those revealed through the buyer utility map. Have them first recap
what they learned and the conclusions they reached from the as-is
strategy canvas. Provide prompts as necessary: That competition is
intense? That the strategic profiles of the industry’s players have largely
converged? That the room for future profitable growth is viewed as
limited? That it is hard to find opportunities to break away from the
competition? Jotting down the key takeaways to these questions creates
an additional opportunity for team members to internalize the lessons
from drawing the as-is strategy canvas.
With that done, shift to the completed buyer utility map, asking:
“What, by contrast, does the map we collectively created reveal?” “Is the
industry, knowingly or unknowingly, imposing pain points on buyers
across their total experience?” “Could these pain points be limiting
current customers’ use of our industry’s product or service?” “Would
existing customers jump ship and champion an organization that
eliminated these blocks to utility, and even use more of its offering?”
“Could these blocks to utility also be discouraging or intimidating other
people—noncustomers—from patronizing our industry?” “How many of
the 36 utility spaces does our industry genuinely focus on?” As one
executive put it, while answering this last question, “We are here
[pointing to two utility spaces on the map], when there’s all that out there
[dragging his finger across all the “Xs” on the rest of the map].” That’s
when the team first begins to appreciate and see the real possibility of
creating blue oceans.
As the discussion above suggests, creating the buyer utility map for
their offering enables the team to see that red oceans need not be
inevitable, and that insights into new opportunity spaces begin to be
revealed just by applying this one analytic tool. Completing the map can
be tough, however, in industries where, over the years, management has
seemingly become disconnected from market reality and buyers’


---PAGE BREAK---

experience. We have been called into industries fraught with hassles and
inconveniences where, at the same time, management stares almost
blankly at the buyer utility map. Understanding the obstacles that buyers
experience in using their industry’s products or services, or even their
own product or service, is hard for them to get their heads around.
In some cases, organizations are so close to their industry that they
fail to see what hassles still exist. In others, the players have historically
held unique positions, which gave them little or no incentive to focus on
buyers’ experience and the blocks to utility they themselves created. In
still other situations, the organization itself has unwittingly put rose-
tinted glasses on management’s eyes, creating a gulf between the way
they see and experience their industry and the way ordinary people do.
One of the top three US automakers, for example, was known to have
employees systematically take care of management’s cars while the
executives were at work—making all the necessary tune-ups and repairs,
filling their tanks, and washing their cars. And when dealerships heard
that management would be dropping by, they rolled out the red carpet.
When you don’t have to experience any of the hassles of buying,
owning, and maintaining a car, or suffering breakdowns and waiting and
paying for repairs, and when dealerships couldn’t be more
accommodating and sparkling, it’s no wonder you’d lose touch with the
pain points imposed by your company and industry.
When any of the above is the case, our response is “Stop. Go no
further.” Likewise, if the answers coming back are thin, or lack
conviction, or are loosey-goosey in any way, or if there isn’t a deep level
of agreement among the team members, you need to take a different
tack. Have all of them get up, go out, and see with their own eyes what it
means to experience your industry’s offering across the entire buyer
experience cycle in the same way that ordinary people do. You’d be
surprised how many organizations lack a wide-angle understanding of
their buyers’ total experience and all the pain points they encounter
along the way. This is why we stress, time and time again, that seeing is
believing and that you should never, ever outsource your eyes or ears. In
fact, even organizations that don’t struggle with the map are often keen
to do this for added learning.
To see how this process works, and how, in executing it, the scales
fall from people’s eyes with a speed no market research report we have
ever seen was able to achieve, let’s look at the experience of a team that


---PAGE BREAK---

went into the field to learn.
Learning to Look Through Buyers’ Eyes
On a cold, snowy, late-winter morning, the senior executive team of one
of America’s largest pharmacy chains gathered in a hotel conference
room to work on their buyer utility map. The company was growing like
gangbusters; yet this growth was largely through acquisitions. Their
main rival in the US$250 billion US pharmacy market was following
suit.
8:00 a.m.
“OK. I need a volunteer.” The nine C-level executives look at the
team leader with mild anxiety. “I need a volunteer.” Heads turn, faces
contort, and at last the vice president for IT says, “OK, I’ll do it.”
“You’re all sick,” the team leader says. “Not a life-threatening illness,
but a serious one: an earache, a sore throat, a bad cold, the flu. What
would you do?”
“Go to work!” the executives unanimously respond.
“OK. Let’s say you have a sore throat that won’t go away. Maybe it’s
a strep infection. How’s your productivity?”
“Rotten,” they once again unanimously respond.
“How do your coworkers feel about you?”
“Not happy. You’re sick and infecting them,” they say.
“Great. So our productivity is low, we may be infecting our
colleagues, and none of us uses the pharmacies in our own stores for the
most common illnesses. Thank goodness others do.”
“Let’s start the day over,” the team leader then says. “I’d like you
[pointing to the VP of IT] to go home. Get back in bed. Don’t push
through the pain of your sore throat. We’ll go home with you. Let’s go!”
Back at the executive’s home, about 20 miles outside a midwestern
city, the team gathers around his bed. They have a video camera with
them to capture the buyer experience.
9:30 a.m.
“Now instead of going to work, call a doctor. You may have strep
throat. You don’t want to get anyone else infected, do you?”
The VP calls his doctor. It’s 9:30 a.m. The earliest he can be seen is
11:30 a.m. The team waits. Video is rolling. The executive is told to stay
in bed. He can only communicate on the phone or by email (preferable,


---PAGE BREAK---

as his fake strep barely allows him to speak).
10:30 a.m.
With his doctor’s office more than 30 minutes away when the roads
are clear, the team sets out. Between the snow and the stop-and-go
traffic, it takes 45 minutes to get there. All ten members sit or stand in
the crowded waiting room, which looks more like an emergency room:
children with hacking cough, adults sniffling in their sleeves, a few
infants spitting up. After 30 minutes of waiting—appointments are
running behind schedule—the team is let in to see the doctor.
11:45 a.m.
A nurse takes the “patient’s” weight and height. He sits down and is
told to strip down to his underwear. Hysterics aside, everyone on the
executive team feels bad for the VP as he goes to the bathroom and
emerges in his tighty-whities, or shorts.
12:15 p.m.
After, what seems like forever (particularly for the VP sitting up on
the examination table in his skivvies), the doctor arrives. He takes the
patient’s blood pressure, tests his reflexes, asks about his dietary habits,
probes why he’s overweight, asks how much he drinks, and if he’s
thinking about having children. Very intrusive.
After a throat swab, a few more minutes of waiting, and getting the
results from the nurse, the team is done. At this point, the team is several
hours into the buyer experience cycle. While the VP actually had a clean
bill of health (it was a fake strep throat, after all), the team improvises
that he has received a prescription for antibiotics and analgesic
medications. So they get back in their cars and drive to the pharmacy. As
most people do, the IT executive chooses the location nearest to his
house.
Another 45 minutes of driving and they’re at the store. As at many
American suburban pharmacies, the team finds ample parking. But as the
doors open, it is like walking into a grocery store. Aisles of merchandise:
chewing gum, toys, magazines, soft drinks, diapers, and finally, some 50
yards later, the pharmacist. The team goes over to the prescription
counter and realizes that after handing in their prescriptions, customers
are told to wait. Fifteen minutes is the average wait time recorded—a
small eternity for people who don’t feel well, many with children
climbing on their laps.
That is the buyer experience cycle of the person who does the right


---PAGE BREAK---

thing and doesn’t expose colleagues to contagion.
3:30 p.m.
The team reconvenes at the hotel meeting room. They now map the
buyer experience cycle with relative ease. As they start to assess the
utility blocks they experienced that day, the executives are flabbergasted.
One executive blurts out, “Who wants to spend their day doing that? It’s
so much easier being sick. There are just too many pain points.” Another
executive chimes in, “Think of all the people suffering needlessly just to
avoid all the hassles we experienced. Didn’t we even joke this morning
about going to work sick, even if our productivity is down, and others
don’t like it? We don’t even patronize our own industry when it comes to
a common, serious, but non–life-threatening illness!” Silence. Then
energy builds as possibilities to eliminate this pain point, break away
from the competition, and unlock new demand start to come into view.
“What if we put a doctor in the pharmacy?” suggests one team
member. “Too expensive,” replies another. “What about a nurse-
practitioner? They’re one-third the cost, and they can write prescriptions
for most of the common ailments we’re looking to treat.” “You walk in,
you see a ‘doctor,’ and you’re out within minutes! Hours and hours of
boredom and pain are gone.” “Sales grow.” “And people feel better.”
Quiet grins. Team members sit noticeably taller. Electricity runs through
the room as the red ocean parts and blue ocean possibilities begin to
open before them.
The First Rule of Fieldwork: Experience What Buyers Experience
As the example above reveals, when insights are lacking at this step,
there is no substitute for going into the field to discover them firsthand.
Asking the marketing department to come in and walk a team through
the buyer experience cycle, or provide research reports to fill in the
blanks, will not work. There are no shortcuts. We cannot emphasize
enough the danger of allowing a team to outsource their eyes and ears,
even to their subordinates. It will ensure that the members learn almost
nothing, and that what they do learn will be nonvisceral—data points that
seldom register and are rarely engraved on people’s hearts and minds.
In going out in the field, we strongly recommend that, wherever
possible, the team assume the role of ordinary buyers, or observe
existing buyers in their professional environments or homes, being


---PAGE BREAK---

careful to document the difficulties these individuals encounter across
the full buyer experience cycle. Do not confuse this with holding a focus
group. Focus groups are artificial forums. While they are fine for
gathering input on how to incrementally improve a product or service,
they will provide neither the rich insights nor the conviction you and
your team need and will only get by going into the field.
Teams who observed buyers at the point of sale alone have gained
insights into pain points that had eluded their industry for years. Similar
wake-up calls have occurred for teams who watched how their offerings
were explained, stored, set up, used, and disposed of. To document the
difficulties buyers experience, you may want to ask the team to take
pictures or to video what they see and experience to support their
findings.
Note that we have rarely met a team that wasn’t initially somewhat
reluctant to go out in the field, with some members even questioning
what they could possibly learn. However, we have also never observed a
team that didn’t come back glad they had done it and with a visceral,
grounded understanding of what buyers experience and the blocks to
utility they face. Such knowledge is immensely worthwhile.
In the end, one of the biggest obstacles to implementing a blue ocean
shift can be the executive team, even if they sanctioned the project.
Many executives become blind to the hassles and grievances that buyers
and users of their industry’s offerings face day-to-day. They may realize
they are stuck in a red ocean, and they may aspire to sail into the blue
ocean, but to build both their understanding of what this will mean in
practical strategic terms and their confidence in the team’s work, you
need to follow the principle of “No surprises—EVER.” This means
thoroughly debriefing senior executives about what the team has found
after this and every step, and having them hear it directly from the team
members themselves. Even if they say this isn’t necessary, it is
necessary. In fact, it’s more than necessary. It’s indispensable, because it
means that any doubts executives may have can be caught early and
addressed up front.
If the executive team seems to be discounting what the blue ocean
team has found, make sure to invite the doubters to see the pain points
ordinary buyers experience for themselves. When this has happened, we
have never witnessed executives be other than profoundly influenced.
The experience not only shifted their thinking, but renewed their


---PAGE BREAK---

confidence in the initiative. Their status and involvement also did
wonders to garner support for the project across the organization,
providing yet another illustration of how mobilization is built into every
step of the blue ocean shift process.
With the buyer utility map assessed, collective confidence created,
and the executive team apprised of the results, the team is now ready to
move on to the next task—understanding the three tiers of noncustomers
they can unlock to create all new demand and expand the size of the
economic pie.


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 9
Discovering an Ocean of Noncustomers
FOR THE PAST 25 years, the business mantra has been “customer
first.” The blue ocean strategist’s mantra is “noncustomers first.” The
aim of making a blue ocean shift, remember, is not to compete for
existing customers but to create new demand and grow your industry.
That’s done by unlocking new utility for your noncustomers. Yet, few
organizations have a sound grasp of who their noncustomers are or why
they continue to remain just that—noncustomers.
This brings us to the next task: understanding precisely who your
noncustomers are and why they don’t patronize your industry. The buyer
utility map gave the team initial insight into the pain points and blocks to
utility the industry imposes on its existing customers that may potentially
also turn noncustomers away. Now you will begin to widen the lens so
the team can see the total demand landscape. Doing this offers insight
into two of the questions executives raise most often: “Is the concept of
noncustomers relevant to our industry?” And “With a compelling blue
ocean offering, how much new demand could we unlock?” After
working through this step, no executive ever looks at demand in the
same way.
Think of Square versus Visa, MasterCard, and American Express. All
three rank among the world’s top 100 brands. Yet despite their global
reach, strong brand recognition, and deep pockets, all three compete
head-to-head, essentially striving to win a greater share of the wallets of
the same group of customers: established merchants and their customers.
This is particularly true in America, which accounts for the greatest share
of all three companies’ card circulation, and where nearly 75 percent of
all adult Americans already have more than one credit card.


---PAGE BREAK---

The way the industry saw it, the US credit card market was saturated,
with scant room for profitable growth, especially given the tighter
regulations on interest rates and fees that followed the 2008 global
financial crisis. But was it? That wasn’t the way Square saw it. To the
contrary, Square, founded in 2009 by Jack Dorsey, who also cofounded
Twitter, and Jim McKelvey, saw an ocean of noncustomers.
Yes, most Americans have a credit card, and almost all medium-sized
and large merchants accept them. But could Americans use their credit
cards to pay the pizza delivery person, the gardener, the electrician who
visits their home, the piano teacher, or the ice cream truck at the beach?
Could they use credit cards or debit cards to pay the babysitter or the
housekeeper, or to pay back the friend they borrowed $50 from? No.
Every person who wanted to make a person-to-person payment was a
noncustomer of the credit and debit card industry, and so were many new
businesses and microbusinesses, like farmers’ market vendors, food
trucks, and pop-up shops.
Of America’s 27 million small businesses, roughly 55 percent don’t
accept credit cards. Yet research shows that more than 55 percent of
customers wish they did. Moreover, other studies show that when people
are given payment options in addition to cash, they are likely to spend
more per purchase, which helps small businesses grow. In other words,
there were lots of entrepreneurs, small business owners, and newly
started businesses that didn’t offer customers the option of credit or debit
card payment, but would benefit handsomely if they did. And there were
lots of person-to-person transactions, typically handled by cash or check,
that people would be thrilled to use credit or debit cards for. This is the
ocean of noncustomers Square saw in 2009 and has been rapidly
capturing with its mobile payment system, which allows individuals,
small businesses, and even large organizations to accept credit or debit
card payments on their iPhones, Androids, or iPads, simply by attaching
a free Square reader, a small plastic device that’s literally a snap to use.
Today many other followers have joined in and, like Square, are
unlocking this ocean of noncustomers, which continues to grow, while
the industry itself is constantly evolving.
As Square, Comic Relief, Salesforce.com, and many others
understood, the universe of noncustomers not only exists, but provides
expanding growth opportunities. Yet most organizations are so focused
on their industries’ existing customers that they cannot see beyond this


---PAGE BREAK---

narrow frame. To be fair, it is always easier to talk with existing
customers, the ones who have already crossed your threshold. And, of
course, their opinions matter. But, to grow, you have to bring new people
into the industry.
The Three Tiers of Noncustomers
To help organizations broaden their vision, we developed a framework
that defines and identifies three tiers of noncustomers, as the graphic in
figure 9-1 shows. The three tiers provide successively wider lenses with
which teams can view the ocean of noncustomers they could tap into to
unlock new demand. We have found that without such an organizing
framework, the notion of noncustomers, though seductive, becomes too
broad a catchall to use to systematically analyze and understand—and
hence capture—potential demand. In this context, we present two
formulas that are key to making a blue ocean shift and, we would argue,
are increasingly tied to your organization’s ability to grow.
Figure 9-1
The Three Tiers of Noncustomers
First, contrary to common practice,


---PAGE BREAK---

Total demand potential ≠ function (existing industry customers)
Rather,
Total demand potential = function (existing industry customers +
first-tier noncustomers + second-tier noncustomers + third-tier
noncustomers)
Let’s consider the definitions of the three tiers, how they differ, and
why they are often closer to an industry than most organizations imagine.
First-tier noncustomers are all the soon-to-be noncustomers of your
industry. These buyers patronize your industry not because they want to,
but because they have to. They use current market offerings minimally,
to get by, as they search for or simply wait for something better. Upon
discovering a superior alternative, they will eagerly jump ship. In this
sense, they sit on the edge of your market. Go back to the US credit card
industry. Of the small and midsize merchants who accept credit card
payments and debit transactions, many do so reluctantly. They have
tolerated the cost of installing point-of-sale technology, the fees for
processing transactions, and the often hidden costs they may be charged
(especially those that don’t have the bargaining power to negotiate fees),
because they knew customers expected to be able to pay with their cards.
But these noncustomers would willingly make a switch if an easier, less
cumbersome, and less expensive alternative to the current system
existed.
Just think for a moment about how many industries you patronize
only because you have to, not because you want to, are proud to, or
enjoy the experience. And think about how you might love to jump ship
if a compelling alternative came along. If you are like most people, you
will quickly realize how many industries and organizations you are a
first-tier noncustomer of. First-tier noncustomers are not only highly
vulnerable to being poached, but if an alternative could eliminate their
pain points, it’s likely the rate and frequency of their use would multiply.
Do you know who your industry’s first-tier noncustomers are?
Second-tier noncustomers are refusing noncustomers—people or
organizations that have consciously thought about using your industry’s
offering, but then rejected it, either because another industry’s offering
better meets their needs or because yours is beyond their means, in
which case their needs are either dealt with by another industry or
ignored. For the credit and debit card industry, second-tier noncustomers
are all the new businesses, microbusinesses, and self-employed


---PAGE BREAK---

individuals who thought about offering credit and debit card payment but
in the end chose against it. Even though they knew customers would
probably appreciate it, their small annual sales, the fragility of their new
enterprise, or the perceived complication of setting up and paying for the
point-of-sale system made them reject the industry. Cash and checks tend
to be the standard payment options for this broad swath of organizations.
Think about how often you or your organization has been a second-
tier noncustomer. For example, did you recently choose to paint your
living room after contemplating the pros and cons of using wallpaper
instead? If yes, you were a second-tier noncustomer of the wallpaper
industry. Or did your management decide to use stone flooring in the
new head office after contemplating wood as an alternative? If yes, your
organization was a second-tier noncustomer of the wood-flooring
industry. You see, being a second-tier noncustomer is as easy as that, and
happens far more frequently than most people or organizations ever
assume, imagine, or give much systematic thought to. And yet, think of
how close second-tier noncustomers actually are to patronizing the
industry they chose against. The simple fact that they contemplated and
weighed the pros and cons tells you that the industry they rejected is still
far closer to capturing their wallets than most of its players ever realize.
Do you know who the second-tier noncustomers of your industry are?
And why, after considering your offering, they dismissed it?
Third-tier noncustomers are the furthest away from an industry’s
existing customers. Commonly, these unexplored noncustomers have
never been thought of as potential customers, nor targeted by any of the
industry’s players, because their needs and the business opportunities
associated with them have always been assumed to belong to other
industries. Go back to credit cards. Before Square, the industry always
assumed that a merchant was half of the transaction equation. All the
transactions that occur between individuals were left off the table and
unexplored, because they were assumed to belong to another industry—
cash and checks. After all, who would install a point-of-sale credit/debit
card system at home? Yet, we would wager that most of us have opened
our wallets to pay someone, only to discover that we’ve run out of cash
and wished we could use a credit card instead. But since we can’t, what
do we do? We reluctantly but hastily go to the nearest ATM. Those are
the third-tier noncustomers that Square set out to unlock through its
simple, easy-to-use, easy-to-carry, pay-only-when-you-use-it Square


---PAGE BREAK---

reader.
Do you, like Square, know who the third-tier noncustomers of your
industry are? Have you or your organization ever given much thought to
this tier? You should, because this can be the largest catchment of
noncustomers an organization can unlock. Quick caution, though: Do not
be tricked into thinking third-tier noncustomers are “everyone else.”
They are not. They are people or organizations that would ideally like to
use, or who could benefit from, what your industry fundamentally offers,
but who have never seriously considered doing so because your industry
has made this somehow unfeasible, unattractive, or unimaginable.
Identifying the Three Tiers of Noncustomers in Your Industry
When teams are introduced to the three-tiers framework, a natural first
reaction from some members is to question whether the concept of
noncustomers applies to their industry. The concept is typically easy for
executives to grasp when their organization operates in or intends to
enter a nascent industry. In those circumstances, most teams get the
applicability right away, even if they struggle initially to identify who the
dominant noncustomer categories in each tier are. Take, for example, the
MP3 player. As Apple was designing the first iPod, the number of
noncustomers of MP3 players was huge and far overshadowed existing
industry customers.
Noncustomers abound in every industry, however, not just new ones.
Think for a moment about orchestras or museums. Significant
noncustomers? Absolutely. How about credit cards? Square highlighted
just how many noncustomers there were. CRM software? Think of
Salesforce.com. Flying? Think about US aviation pre–Southwest
Airlines. Coffee drinking? You bet—Starbucks grew that industry. And
the list goes on and on.
The purpose of this exercise—and what you should aim for—is to
move the discussion of the three tiers from a theoretical concept to a
pragmatic reality. Identifying the three tiers of noncustomers in your own
industry allows you to make this happen.
Begin with the basic concept
Start by laying out the definitions of the three tiers of noncustomers


---PAGE BREAK---

using the descriptions and graphic from the previous section. To deepen
the team’s understanding, and to show how the tiers apply in various
industries, walk the team through several examples from outside their
own field. Table 9-1 shows the three tiers of several red ocean industries:
the credit/debit card industry discussed above, the UK charity fund-
raising industry examined before, the language translation industry, and
the orchestra industry. Ask the team questions like these: “If these red
ocean industries all had oceans of noncustomers could the same be true
in our industry?” And “If we were to zoom out, and apply a wider-angle
lens, would we see our own noncustomers?” You should pose these
questions to the team explicitly to ensure they are seeing the connection
between the noncustomer insights of these industries and your own
industry setting. As your team discusses these examples and answers
these questions, the meaning and relevance of the three tiers will begin to
sink in. This is typically a sit-up-in-your-chair moment for team
members, when their emotions start to shift from denial—“Nah, this
doesn’t really apply to our industry”—to wonder—“Could it be in our
industry, too? It might just be.”
Table 9-1 Noncustomers in Various Industries
The Credit Card/Debit Card Industry
First Tier of Noncustomers: Small and midsize merchants that
reluctantly accept credit and debit cards for payment
Second Tier of Noncustomers: New business, microbusinesses, and
self-employed individuals who do not accept credit or debit cards
Third Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals needing to make payments to
other individuals
The UK Charity Fund-raising Industry
First Tier of Noncustomers: Older wealthy individuals who feel
frustrated with year-round solicitations for funds
Second Tier of Noncustomers: Young professionals who choose not to
donate, due to the lack of transparency in percentage of funds that go
to the cause
Third Tier of Noncustomers: Children and low-income individuals
who never thought of donating
The Language Translation Industry


---PAGE BREAK---

First Tier of Noncustomers: Large corporations frustrated by the time,
expense, and fractured nature of securing language translation of
business materials, including website copy, brochures, product
documentation, etc.
Second Tier of Noncustomers: Midsize organizations that don’t use
translation services for the vast majority of languages, even though,
with the Internet, people from virtually every country can be their
potential customers
Third Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals with blogs and small
organizations, who never thought of using language translation, even
though it could open a far wider global audience and customer base
for them
The Orchestra Industry
First Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals who attend concerts once a
season or every few years, as it’s seen more as something they should
do than something they want to do
Second Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals who can afford to attend but
choose not to, as they find the experience boring, outdated, or too
pretentious
Third Tier of Noncustomers: Individuals who never considered going
to the orchestra, as they have no real knowledge of classical music
and feel the orchestra experience is essentially for the educated elite,
not ordinary people
Shift to your industry and offering
Realizing that noncustomers probably abound in their industry doesn’t
always make it immediately obvious who those noncustomers are. So
rather than ask your team to identify them now, start by discussing who
typically buys and uses the industry’s current offering. Everyone
working on the team (and in the organization) should have a good feel
for this information already. It’s also information that’s generally
available in considerable detail, so it provides a good reference point for
the team as they start thinking about the total demand landscape. The
objective, however, is not to engage in a deep analysis of fine-grained
demographic differences within the existing market, as marketers often
do. Rather, it is to see whether a major variable, such as age, sex,
income, family structure, or, for a B2B business, organization size is a


---PAGE BREAK---

reasonable predictor of who the industry’s existing customers are. For
video games pre–Nintendo’s Wii, for example, the dominant customer
demographic was young males between the ages of 14 and 26. Likewise,
higher-income, older, educated individuals were the predominant donor
group for the UK charity fund-raising industry pre–Comic Relief. As for
CRM software, before Salesforce.com entered the scene, the dominant
customer group was Fortune 500 and 1,000 firms.
Throughout this discussion, it’s important for you to keep the team
focused on the big picture, and not to let people get bogged down or lost
in minute details, like what proportion of young male video game users
are black, white, and Hispanic. Such a discussion and analysis may be
the path to refining an offering, but it will prevent the team from seeing
the major defining contours of the industry’s current customers. In our
experience, too many organizations that have analyzed their customers in
granular detail fail to see the big picture and the commonalities that unite
the largest group of them.
If team members identify several groups of existing customers,
challenge them to see whether they can identify a broader category that
would encompass most, if not all, of them. The point here is not to
duplicate what marketing departments are generally good at doing,
which is developing a refined understanding of the differences across
existing customer segments. Rather, the purpose is to seek a higher-level
understanding of the macro contours and commonalities that cut across
and unite existing customers so you’ll be able to see the forest for the
trees.
Identify the three tiers of noncustomers in your industry
Now we turn from current customers to noncustomers. Using the three-
tiers graphic, shown in figure 9-1, as a guide, ask each of the team
members to think through and write down their thoughts about who
might be in each tier. To help you perform this task effectively, relevant
materials and templates are provided for your free download and use at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates. Here are the questions you
want to ask:
1. Who sits on the edge of our industry and uses its offering
reluctantly and/or minimally?


---PAGE BREAK---

2. Who considers our industry and then consciously rejects it,
satisfying their needs through another industry’s offering or not at
all?
3. Who could strongly benefit from the utility our industry offers,
but doesn’t even consider it, because the way it is currently being
delivered makes the industry seem irrelevant or out of their
financial reach?
For many people, this will be the first time they’ve ever been asked to
systematically think through the issue of noncustomers. As we have
witnessed, if an organization has given thought to noncustomers, it’s
usually in terms of their competitors’ customers, not the noncustomers of
their overall industry. They ask, “Who are our competitors’ customers,
and how can we win a greater share of those who patronize other
players?” But this is not the meaning of noncustomers in blue ocean
terms. What is key at this stage is getting team members thinking deeply
about noncustomers and, critically, letting them discover for themselves
how little they may know or have thought about the wider opportunity
landscape that exists beyond the current industry’s horizon.
Organizations often become comfortable commissioning and
outsourcing large, formal market studies. Hence, it is not surprising that,
at this juncture, we’ve often been asked, “Don’t we need to be supported
by formal market research so we will know, concretely, who the three
tiers of noncustomers are?” In response, remind them that the blue ocean
shift process is built on firsthand discovery that will be done when the
team goes out in the field. The purpose here is to maximize the team’s
firsthand learning and confidence in what they see for themselves in the
field. With firsthand discovery, the resulting strategy is likely to be
executed strongly, as the confidence that emanates from the team
reverberates throughout the larger organization.
Much to their surprise, team members generally find that, by
struggling through this exercise independently, they flesh out a rich list
of noncustomer groups and are really pushed to broaden their thinking.
Equally important, they see how tightly focused on existing customers
their strategic lens has been. When people are spoon-fed answers by
having reports commissioned up front, they seldom realize what they
don’t know, and too often easily conclude that they “got it, knew it, no


---PAGE BREAK---

big deal,” when, in fact, they didn’t have or know it, and it is a big deal.
People seldom realize what they don’t know or appreciate the value of
what they’ve learned if they haven’t struggled to obtain it themselves.
Making people discover firsthand that what they know—and don’t know
—is key to getting them to internalize and value what they learn.
After each of the team members has compiled their list of
noncustomers, ask them to share their thoughts about whom they put
where and why. The objective now is for the team to identify and select
the people or organizations they collectively see as the dominant
noncustomer group or groups in each tier. Note that team members may
continue to feel a bit uneasy, because they’re being asked not only to
move away from what they know, but also to share their thoughts in front
of their colleagues. Some unease is good, however, because it means that
team members are being pushed to broaden their current understanding.
As each of the team members contributes their thoughts on each of the
three tiers, you should record and post them in front of the group. This
allows everyone to see the whole team’s thoughts, which in itself is eye-
opening, as they get to appreciate the differences and similarities in how
each of them views the same market reality.
As people share and debate their selections and the thought processes
behind them, team members’ understanding of who potentially belongs
in each tier starts to deepen. So does their confidence that opportunity
exists in the untapped demand that lies beyond the boundaries of their
industry as it’s currently defined. Typically, as members discuss the
validity of one another’s reasoning, a number of customer groups are
crossed off, and different sets of customers get grouped together,
producing fairly solid agreement among team members as to whom they
see as the main noncustomer groups in each tier. With this, a good
understanding of the industry’s total demand landscape starts to come
into focus.
Determine the rough size of the new demand landscape
In this age of Google, where search is simple and easy, and a significant
amount of industry information is available online, the team can now
proceed to get a good sense of the new demand that a reconstructed
offering could potentially unlock. Break the team into subteams, and ask
them to Google basic statistics on the rough size of each of the
noncustomer groups. What are the relative proportions of the groups?


---PAGE BREAK---

Just how big is their respective potential demand, based on their per-
capita or, for B2B players, per-organization spending? Have each team
do this for all three tiers.
The objective here is not to nail down specific numbers for each tier,
but to get a rough sense of how potentially important each tier could be
to the organization, if it were unlocked. For example, if a noncustomer
group is currently small and only growing in single digits, it’s likely this
tier will remain small for the foreseeable future. On the other hand, if a
noncustomer group is growing at a fairly consistent clip of, say, 30
percent a year, the team can reasonably surmise that even if the group is
relatively small today, this tier has the potential to become a significant
source of noncustomers within a meaningful time frame.
By the end of this step, teams have usually surprised themselves by
how much they agree on who the key groups of noncustomers in each
tier are and the relative demand potential for each. In the next stage of
the process, these answers may be revised: The relative proportions of
potential demand across the three tiers may shift, for example, or a new
group of noncustomers may be identified. Nonetheless, these insights
allow the team to see both that there is clear scope for creating new
demand and how limited their understanding of the unlocked demand
beyond their industry’s conventional boundaries has been. The power of
this step lies not only in the insights and confidence gained, but also in
the speed with which team members achieved and internalized these
insights. This can usually be accomplished in a half- or full-day off-site
meeting.
To see how the three-tier exercise can transform a team’s
understanding of the potential demand for their offering, let’s listen to a
group of educators discover their noncustomers.
Discovering an Ocean of Potential Undergraduates
A private, four-year, US university that we’ll call CU faced a mounting
challenge. With a student body composed primarily of first-generation,
college-bound youth from families in the bottom 25 percent of the
country’s income distribution, CU had a vital mission. But the school’s
retention rates were falling and operational costs were rising. The
president of CU not only wanted to turn this situation around, he wanted
to grow CU and make it a model urban university for youth.


---PAGE BREAK---

The CU blue ocean initiative team, comprising faculty and
administrators, had just completed the buyer utility map exercise. As the
team leader summed it up, “There are a lot of pain points in our industry,
based on outdated, misguided, or wrong assumptions.” “Exactly!” said a
team member. “We believe we provide a quality education because our
hearts are in it, we work long hours, and we charge a premium. But none
of that really matters. Quality is what students get out of school and what
they can afford. And the competition is getting tougher.”
“The question is,” the team leader continued, “Will surveying our
current students give us the answers we need to create a blue ocean and
break away from the pack?” Team members quickly agreed that existing
students were likely to request the same things their peers at other
schools did: better dormitories, a more lively campus, better teachers,
greater course selection, better school food. “What we’re saying,” the
team leader concluded, “is that if we start looking for solutions by asking
our students what they want, at best, we’ll achieve incremental gains at
an even higher cost. And we won’t grow. To do that we’ll have to look
outside our market, at our noncustomers. We know who our customers
are, but who are our noncustomers? Maybe we can discover some
answers by focusing first on what our ultimate purpose really is.”
After some spirited discussion, the team reached a unanimous
conclusion about what constituted their purpose: providing a step change
in the lives of young people in terms of their economic prospects, self-
confidence, and ability to thrive in the world. “If that is really the case,”
said the team leader, “and we all heartily believe it is, then let’s use that
to be more specific about who the dominant noncustomer groups in our
three tiers are.”
“First tier are bright students who enrolled in CU but now are
insufficiently challenged by their classes and classmates,” one professor
observed. “They are increasingly tempted to transfer to other schools for
a greater intellectual challenge.”
“An even bigger group are students who attend with the help of
financial aid, parent PLUS loans, and Pell grants,” added another. “But
as soon as those supplemental funds run out, typically in the third year or
so, they depart. And neither we nor our peers have strong work-study
programs to help them close that gap, nor have we challenged ourselves
on how we could dramatically bring costs down to make our education
more affordable. Essentially, we try to offer and match everything your


---PAGE BREAK---

standard four-year private college offers with a small fraction of the
resources. So, our costs are high while quality is compromised. It’s not
even clear that what these students need from CU to make a step change
in their lives is what your standard college offers.” Silence.
Once the discussion on the first tier wound down, and everyone felt
heard, the team leader shifted to the second tier. “Who are the refusing
noncustomers of private four-year universites?”
“This tier is huge,” noted one team member. “It’s all the students who
choose to go to state universities, over private colleges like ours.” Heads
nodded. The noncustomer demand landscape was growing.
The conversation did not stop here, however. “What about all the
students who choose to go to junior colleges?” a faculty member asked.
“That’s another large group of second-tier noncustomers. Those are
students who may want a four-year school but ultimately choose a junior
college—maybe because it’s more practical, given their professional
aspirations and personal lives, or because they have more confidence that
they can succeed in that environment, or maybe they just don’t have the
funds. Whatever the reason, it’s still a big catchment of second-tier
noncustomers.” Without any analysis or debate, everyone in the room
agreed that second-tier noncustomers represented a larger tier of
potential demand than the existing market.
The team leader then shifted the discussion to the third tier, the
noncustomers who could benefit from higher education’s ultimate
purpose, but who never thought about the industry’s offerings as an
option. “What are your ideas on who this would be?” asked the team
leader. After a little while, a sober answer came back: These
noncustomers are the peers of our students who chose another route
entirely. Many of CU’s undergraduates come from poor public school
districts where K-12 education itself is weak. Students in economically
impoverished districts typically are discouraged from considering higher
education, and those who do seldom receive the kind of counseling they
need and that is routinely provided for their peers in better-off districts.
And yet for these young people, higher education could be the most
powerful path out of poverty.
Where could these noncustomers be found? The team members were
full of ideas: “The military.” “Blue-collar work.” “Missionaries.” “Store
personnel.” “Maybe entrepreneurs?” This tier, the team agreed, was the
largest of all. “Look at our competition locally,” said the team leader.


---PAGE BREAK---

“Are they trying to understand these three tiers of noncustomers?” “No!
Not at all,” responded team members. “That’s why all colleges look the
same.” The eagerness in the room to look beyond their usual customer
base was palpable, as was the team members’ impatience to get started.
Understanding the Strategic Implications of Your Three Tiers
Before beginning to discuss the overall implications of this exercise,
have team members again collect their thoughts individually and write
down the takeaways that jump out at them. Then, as with all the steps in
the blue ocean shift process, ask each of the team members to share the
insights they recorded to ensure that all points are put on the table and to
create collective ownership of the discussion. This precludes the most
articulate from drowning out the opinions of members who may be more
reserved but no less perceptive. More than that, the simple act of having
each member record and voice their key takeaways ensures a deeper
level of internalized learning, even before you start to calibrate the points
the team has made.
In our work with teams, we find they tend to get the most out of this
discussion when you structure the group discussion via a set of
systematic questions:
• What did we learn? Who are the first-tier, second-tier, and third-
tier noncustomers of our industry or target industry?
• What is the approximate magnitude of each tier of noncustomers,
relative to the industry’s existing customer base?
• Is each of the three tiers small, suggesting scant room to create a
blue ocean? Or are one, two, or all three of the tiers noteworthy in
terms of the magnitude of their potential demand?
• Which tier, if any, has the largest group of noncustomers that could
potentially be unlocked with a reconstructed offering?
• Do we see a link between the blocks to utility revealed in the buyer
utility map and any of the three tiers?
• Might these blocks to utility be causing the noncustomer groups to
patronize another industry to fulfill their ultimate purpose?
• If yes, do we imagine that this tier of noncustomers might be


---PAGE BREAK---

unlocked by systematically exploring what it would take to convert
them into customers?
As team members review what they have discovered, they may
become eager to probe deeper into the hurdles or attitudes that are
keeping the industry’s noncustomers noncustomers: “What’s missing
from the industry’s offerings, which, if we included it, would start to
unlock new demand?” they may ask. This is a sign that they’re
intellectually engaged and eager to take their learning to the next step.
You should let them know that in the next step of the process they will
do precisely that. That said, if the energy generated by this topic is high,
allow the team to hypothesize about what could be different, while at the
same time reminding them that, right now, the points being made are just
that: hypotheses. This allows people to feel heard, while also signaling
that developing blue ocean offerings demands grounded live field
research and a structured method, not simply brainstorming in a
conference room. Team members usually respect this reminder
tremendously.
As they discuss the broad context of the industry and the available
demand opportunity, the team’s understanding of the relative proportions
of the market for existing buyers and users and the three types of
noncustomers will start to crystallize. As it does, their perception of
potential demand will shift from existing industry customers to the far
larger total demand landscape.
End Strong
At the end of this step, to ensure that everyone is on the same page, and
to create another opportunity for team members to internalize key
lessons, you should recap the steps the team has taken to date.
Specifically, you want to remind the team that, as they applied the as-is
strategy canvas tool, they became clear on the current state of play in the
industry, the factors the industry competes on, and the degree of
convergence between their organization’s current strategic profile and
that of its competitors—convergence that has likely thrown the
organization into the red ocean. The subsequent step, where they applied
the buyer utility map, revealed both the subset of utility spaces in which


---PAGE BREAK---

the industry currently competes and, at the same time, the pain points
and points of intimidation imposed by the industry that potentially limit
usage by existing customers and turn noncustomers away. By doing so,
the team has already been able to benefit by identifying low-hanging
fruit that the organization could act on and fix, even if it decided not to
go any further. Last, by applying the three-tiers framework, the team
gained a good grasp of the potential new demand that could be unlocked
with a reconstructed offering. Noncustomers who were once invisible to
the team and to the industry have now been made visible.
At this juncture, the team’s confidence and competence are usually
another notch higher. Team members start to think, “Yes, there is a way
out of the red ocean, and just maybe there are real opportunities that we
could unlock to create a blue ocean.” The team dynamic will also have
started to shift quite noticeably, as team members now begin to push to
get on to the next step, rather than wait for the team leader or top
management to push them to move forward. This is the emotional state
you want to achieve, and it brings us to the next step where the process
shifts from broadening perspectives and imagining what could be, to
generating practical, real-world, blue ocean options. Here the team will
meet the market and explore the six systematic ways to reconstruct
market boundaries to unlock new demand and create new market space.
Let’s get started.


---PAGE BREAK---

Step Four: 
Find How You Get There


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 10
Reconstructing Market Boundaries—
Systematically
HOW CAN YOU RECONSTRUCT market boundaries and change the
conversations you have about where opportunities reside so as to
conceive and open up a new value-cost frontier? Every organization,
even the most innovative, must face this question sooner or later. If you
have embarked on a blue ocean shift initiative, it is the question your
team is now primed to take on.
Through their work together, team members have come to have a
visceral understanding of how the blue ocean shift process and tools
enable them to see what they haven’t seen before, to build their
collective confidence, and to develop a new level of awareness and
openness. People feel how their participation in the process is increasing
their personal understanding of the market and, with it, their commitment
to the process. They are likely clear about the red ocean the industry is
immersed in and the need to shift out of it. They have seen how a focus
on benchmarking and beating the competition has not only blinded the
industry’s players to a wealth of unexplored opportunity spaces, but also
created pain points that limit its size. They have identified the contours
of new demand that could potentially be unlocked by thinking differently
and offering noncustomers, as well as current buyers, a leap in value.
Now they are ready for the process to shift, from broadening
perspectives and imagining what could be, to generating practical, real-
world, blue ocean options.
To this end, we developed the six paths framework to demystify and
structure the work of seeing opportunities where others see only red
oceans of competition. This stage of the process is where team members


---PAGE BREAK---

dive head-on into the market, get their hands dirty, and do the kind of
grounded, field-based research that can generate actionable insights for
changing the strategic playing field. Simply getting out into the field,
however, is not enough. If you want different answers, you need to ask
different questions and listen to different people. People are as insightful
(or not) as the questions you ask them. Ask standard questions and you’ll
get standard responses that keep you anchored in the red ocean. Ask
questions that force people to think in fresh and innovative ways, and
you’ll gain insights into new market creation. As you will see, each of
the six paths guides you to look at the market universe in a new way by
shifting the questions you ask and the people you listen to.
Imagine a one-way street you’ve gone down a thousand times in your
car and you think you know by heart. Then one day you walk up that
very same street but in the reverse direction. Suddenly you’re jolted. You
notice a house that you never observed before, or a tall tree in someone’s
yard you’d never taken notice of, or a stunning view of a distant lake that
was hidden from your sight when you traveled in the old one-way
direction. That’s what the six paths do. They show you how to travel
down roads in new ways so you see new things that were always there
but had been blocked from your view. And just as it’s awe-inspiring in
life when we see new things we hadn’t seen before that had been in front
of us all along, people feel enlightened in the process when they, with the
help of the six paths, learn to see the same reality differently and
discover blue ocean opportunities.
How was this analytic tool developed? When we analyzed strategic
moves that created commercially compelling blue oceans by
reconstructing market boundaries, we found the six systematic patterns
depicted in this framework repeated across multiple industries. Does this
mean there aren’t other ways to create new market space? Of course not.
However, in our role as advisors, working side by side with
organizations across diverse industry sectors, we have seen firsthand
how effective this framework can be.
The Six Paths Framework: How It Works to Open Up a New Value-
Cost Frontier
Most organizations follow a similar pattern in developing their
strategies: They start by analyzing their industry: Have new competitors


---PAGE BREAK---

entered? Is demand flat, rising, or declining? Have raw materials prices
gone up? Next, they focus on the players in their particular strategic
group: the companies or organizations in the industry that pursue a
similar strategy or approach to the market. Luxury hotels will tend to
assess what other luxury hotels are up to, for example, while budget
hotels will do the same versus their strategic competitors. But since they
operate in different strategic groups, neither one tends to pay much
attention to the other. Then, the strategic lens narrows once again, to
focus on current customers—their own and those of their competitors—
and how the distinctive needs of those customers can best be served. Not
surprisingly, therefore, budget hotels don’t pay much heed to the
wealthy, nor do luxury hotels focus on lower-and middle-income
individuals. Both sets of hotels will concentrate on making the best hotel
they can, however. In other words, they will define the scope of their
offering as the industry has long defined it. With this will go a focus on
features that align with their strategic group’s customary orientation. For
budget hotels, this will mean providing functional, low-priced rooms,
while luxury hotels will prioritize sophistication and refinement to
enhance their image and prestige. Finally, they will consider the impact
of external forces, such as environmental or safety concerns, which are
affecting the industry and to which they have to adapt.
In sum, executives tend to define their strategic playing field—and
limit their opportunity horizon—on the basis of six conventional
boundaries: industry, strategic group, buyer group, scope of the product
or service offering, nature of the offering’s appeal, and time. Nonprofit
leaders, government decision makers, entrepreneurs, and even one-off
Main Street storeowners and professional firms typically do the same.
Yet boundaries do not define what must be or should be. They merely
define what is. None of them is a law of nature. All of them are the
product of people’s minds, and, as such, they are open to change. But
over time this fact tends to be forgotten, and people come to take them as
eternal truths. They become a conceptual cage that organizations lock
themselves into, even though every one of these boundaries was created
by an individual organization. And just as people and individual
organizations created them, so they can change them if they are prepared
to think in a different way. The six paths framework, shown in figure 10-
1, provides six systematic ways to shift the lens you use in looking at the
market universe and open up a new value-cost frontier. Path by path, the


---PAGE BREAK---

framework explains how to uncover plausible blue ocean opportunities
by looking across an industry’s self-imposed boundaries, instead of
remaining stuck within them. It also incorporates seasoned advice on
what to look and listen for as you pursue each path. Let’s explore the six
paths in turn.
Figure 10-1
The Six Paths to Open Up a New Value-Cost Frontier
Path One: Look Across Alternative Industries
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on rivals in your industry
Look across alternative
industries
Organizations compete within their own industry and with industries
that offer alternative products or services. In making their decisions,
buyers often weigh alternative industries and make trade-offs, explicitly
or implicitly: Want to put your best foot forward with neat, wrinkle-free


---PAGE BREAK---

shirts—do you iron them at home, send them to the dry cleaner, or only
buy shirts made with wrinkle-free material? Going from New York to
Washington, D.C., do you take a plane, a train, drive your car, or take a
bus? This thought process is intuitive for consumers. Yet, the tight
strategic lens that most organizations use drives them to focus on beating
rivals within their existing industry, keeping them trapped in the red
ocean. To open up a new value-cost frontier, you have to look across
alternative industries and understand why buyers choose one over the
other.
The objective in this path is to identify the problems or needs your
offering currently solves, and then to generate a list of other solutions or
industries noncustomers use to address the same problems or satisfy the
same needs. Remember that the focus is not on alternatives within your
industry—why people choose to fly on one airline over another, for
example—but on alternative industries that serve the same function or
solve the same problem, but that have a different form. What are the
decisive sources of value and the detractors of value that make people
gravitate to and choose one alternative over another?
Although there may be several alternative industries to the industry
you’re in or targeting, you should focus on the one(s) that has (have) the
largest catchment(s) of demand. These noncustomers hold the key to the
greatest number of potential new buyers, and they are the ones you want
to interview.
Having identified the relevant alternatives, you need to ask people
why they choose one over the other. This question shifts the discussion
from all the factors an industry competes on—factors that buyers have
been trained to expect and organizations love to marginally improve on,
typically for little overall gain—to the factors that decisively create or
detract from value. By probing in this way, buyers reveal not the
branches of an industry but the fundamental trunk or basic utility that
justifies the industry’s very existence and size.
What most teams quickly discover is that, despite the wide set of
factors alternative industries compete on, one or two usually determine
whether people patronize them. For example, why do people hire
electricians instead of going to a hardware store to do it themselves, or
vice versa? More than anything else, two factors drive people to hire an
electrician—expertise and having no time to do it themselves. And only
one factor drives most people to patronize a hardware store—cost. The


---PAGE BREAK---

aim here is to drill down to the factors that cause buyers to choose other
industry offerings than yours, find a way to combine these decisive
factors, and then reduce or eliminate everything else, thereby unlocking
new market space that will be commercially viable because it focuses on
precisely what potential buyers value.
Remember, asking people why they trade across industries is not the
same as asking what makes an alternative industry different, which can
reveal a whole host of factors that may indeed be “clever” or different,
but that also may have very little value. To avoid getting distracted by
“clever ideas,” stay focused on why people choose for and against your
industry or the alternative. Their answers will signal the decisive value
factors to create and eliminate in order to develop a blue ocean offering
that is both differentiated and low cost. Exhibit 10-1 outlines the action
steps of path one.
Exhibit 10-1
Path One: Action Steps
1. Identify the major problems or needs that your industry’s
offering or your target industry’s offering solves or addresses
from the buyers’ point of view.
2. Next ask, What alternative industries solve the same problems
or address similar needs for buyers? Here we encourage people
to role-play and ask, “If I were the buyer, what other alternative
industries would I consider before even deciding to patronize
our industry?” That helps people shift from a supply to a
demand perspective.
3. Among these alternative industries, which capture the greatest
catchment of customers? Focus here. Interview buyers from
each relevant alternative industry. These are your noncustomers.
4. Probe why buyers traded across your industry or target industry
and this (these) alternative(s), including what they see as the
chief negatives of the industry they rejected and the chief
positives of the alternative industry they choose.
5. Record all the key insights gained. A recording template for
each path can be downloaded for free at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates.


---PAGE BREAK---

Path Two: Look Across Strategic Groups Within Your Industry
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on your competitive
position within a strategic group
Look across strategic groups
within your industry or target
industry
Most companies focus on outcompeting their rivals to improve their
position within their strategic group or market segment. In the hotel
industry, for example, five-star hotels tend to focus on outdoing other
five-star hotels, three-star hotels focus on outcompeting other three-star
hotels, and so on. But this only keeps them doggy-paddling in a red
ocean. The key to a blue ocean shift is to understand what factors
determine buyers’ decision to trade up or down from one strategic group
to another. This allows you to distinguish between the range of factors on
which strategic groups compete, and the decisive few that drive buyers’
decisions to choose one over the other. Again, the focus here is not on
why buyers choose one particular organization over another, but on why
they trade up or down across strategic groups. This will allow you to
understand the trade-offs the customers of a strategic group are making
when they choose across strategic groups. Understanding the factors that
are decisive for noncustomers as well as customers lets you emphasize
those factors while eliminating and reducing everything else.
Take the health management industry, a B2B industry that provides
large corporations and insurance companies with health management
services for employees’ health. HealthMedia, a player in the industry,
was on the brink of collapse in this red ocean. After being forced to take
85 employees down to 18 to stabilize the company, in 2006 its new CEO,
Ted Dacko, set the goal to grow it from US$5 million in revenues to
US$100 million in four years by using the blue ocean approach. At the
time the industry had two strategic groups—one offering telephonic
counseling, predominantly for severe medical conditions like disease
management; the other offering generic digitalized content, like
WebMD.
As HealthMedia explored why buyers traded across these strategic


---PAGE BREAK---

groups, it found that, despite all the factors players competed on, buyers
traded up to telephonic counseling for one overriding reason—high
efficacy—while they traded down to digitalized content for low cost. In
essence, companies competing in telephonic counseling were following a
classic differentiation strategy, offering high efficacy through specialized
counseling mainly for severe health challenges, but at a high cost. By
contrast, those competing in digitalized content followed a classic low-
cost strategy of offering generic health information at a low price but
with low efficacy. These trade-offs limited employees’ use of both
strategic groups’ offerings, creating an ocean of noncustomers.
The focus of telephonic counseling on severe health challenges meant
that most employees’ use for it is limited, since what the majority of
employees primarily need coaching in is their chronic health issues, like
high blood pressure, high cholesterol, stress, depression, insomnia, binge
eating, and the like. Besides, its high cost meant that companies could
not afford to offer it widely. Regarding generic digitalized content, due to
its low efficacy, it did not inspire high employee participation, either.
Instead of competing in either strategic group, HealthMedia set out to
break these trade-offs. The result was opening up a new value-cost
frontier in the industry by creating a new market space called digital
health coaching, which combined the far lower cost of digitalized
content with a leap in efficacy through interactive online questionnaires
that digitally matched people’s self-reported challenges with a health
plan that would work best for them. And the best part was that
HealthMedia offered digital health coaching for the most prevalent
health challenges people face, so the offering was relevant to nearly all
employees. The result was a leap in value for companies who could now
offer digitalized health coaching to a broad swath of employees with
high efficacy at a low price. Within just two years, HealthMedia’s blue
ocean was so compelling that Johnson & Johnson swooped in and
purchased the company for US$185 million, an amount far higher than
its already ambitious four-year revenue goal of US$100 million.
For your analysis of this path, choose the largest two strategic groups
to explore. Typically, we recommend that you zoom in on the one that
captures the largest share of customers, and the one that has the largest
share of profitable growth, if they are different. If there is a small but
very fast-growing strategic group, you should zoom in on that one as
well.


---PAGE BREAK---

As organizations start exploring this path, one of the most common
and startling realizations is how many strategic groups have emerged in
their industry in recent years, and how much the key players have tended
to focus on the old guard that once monopolized their industry. Whatever
the industry—from TV (reality programs, new producers from Netflix, to
Amazon), to publishing (self-publishing, traditional publishing houses, e-
books), the music industry (traditional labels, YouTube self-made stars,
young kids rerecording), and the auto industry (Tesla, electric cars, self-
driving cars), consumers’ options are exploding. Hence, just laying out
the strategic groups within their industry wakes people up and lifts the
scales from their eyes. Value gained already.
This path tends to be relatively easy for people to get their heads
around and apply. Organizations that are big on segmentation, however,
often have a tougher time distinguishing the forest from the trees. They
tend to list a plethora of groups based on tiny differences in competitive
offerings. They frequently fall into the segmentation trap. Should this
situation arise, you need to push the team to take a step back and look for
strategic commonalities that could enable them to cluster the long list of
groups they’ve identified. In the case of the health management industry,
for example, some telephonic counseling companies focused on
wellness, others on behavioral health, and still many others on disease
management. However, by stepping back HealthMedia saw that, at their
core, all these players shared three overriding strategic commonalities—
a focus on telephonic counseling, addressing severe—not chronic—
health conditions, at a high cost. By understanding the defining contours
that united these players that focused on different market segments,
HealthMedia did not get distracted by segmentation differences. The
point of this path, like all the others, is not to get lost in minutiae, but to
identify the decisive value and cost contours that separate distinct
strategic groups, as HealthMedia did. Exhibit 10-2 outlines the action
steps of path two.
Exhibit 10-2
Path Two: Action Steps
1. Identify the strategic groups in your industry or target industry.
2. Focus on the two largest strategic groups.
3. Interview buyers from each group. Probe why buyers traded up


---PAGE BREAK---

for one strategic group or traded down for the other. Focus on
identifying the distinguishing factor(s) that led users of each
strategic group to patronize it over the others. Ask the same
people what they saw as the dominant negative or turn-off of
the strategic group they rejected.
4. Record all the key insights gained, noting specifically the
reasons buyers offer to explain their decisions.
Path Three: Look Across the Chain of Buyers
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on better serving the
existing buyer group of the
industry
Look across the chain of buyers
and redefine the industry buyer
group
Most industries converge around a common definition of their target
customer. In reality, however, the purchasing decision usually involves,
directly or indirectly, a chain of buyers: the users of the product or
service; the purchasers who pay for it; and, in some cases, the influencers
whose opinions can make the difference in a decision to purchase—or
not. So for preteen girls’ clothing, the purchaser or payer is typically a
parent, the users are the teens themselves, and the key influence group
might be pop stars.
In thinking about who’s in the chain of buyers, it’s also worth
considering potential influencers, people who could be brought into the
decision-making process but currently aren’t. Retailers are a good
example of an often “untargeted” buyer group for complicated purchase
decisions. Just think about buying computer or stereo equipment, or wine
or major household furniture—decisions that make most of us nervous.
Many, if not most, of the companies that sell products in these categories
spend most of their effort focused on each other and the ultimate user,
the purchaser. But they have largely ignored thinking creatively about
the retailers who sell their products. One of the results is relatively
indifferent retail staff who could easily persuade many, if not most,
people to go in one direction or another, but instead offer ho-hum


---PAGE BREAK---

knowledge, little passion, and no distinctive services to buyers of one
manufacturer’s product over another. What if, instead, you offered a leap
in innovative value to retailers’ staff that made them advocates for your
products and services? Would your products start flying out the door?
While the three groups of buyers may overlap, they are often distinct,
as are their value preferences. Remember the school lunch provider we
listened in on in chapter 7? The purchaser’s primary objective was
getting the best terms and prices, whereas having the best-tasting lunch
was what the users, the students, valued most. Shifting the focus from
better serving the industry’s traditional buyer group to other groups the
industry has historically ignored can be the key to uncovering hidden
sources of utility and opening up new market space.
Think of the commercial fluorescent lighting you see in major
retailers, supermarket chains, and corporate offices. When Philips
Electronics set out to create a blue ocean, it shifted its focus from the
industry’s red ocean target—corporate purchasers—to a key influence
group, chief financial officers (CFOs). In speaking with CFOs, Philips
learned that the price of fluorescent lighting that corporate purchasers
focused on was a small fraction of the total cost. An even larger
component was the cost of disposal because of the high mercury content
in fluorescent bulbs. Corporate purchasers never saw that cost, but CFOs
did. This gave Philips the insight to create an environmentally friendly
fluorescent bulb that could eliminate 100 percent of corporate disposal
costs, because it could be thrown in the garbage, instead of having to be
carted off to a special dump site. Philips then made the case for buying
the new bulbs, which had a higher price and margin but a lower total cost
overall, to the CFOs who wielded their power to influence the purchase
decision in favor of Philips’s environmentally friendly bulbs.
When interviewing people in the “untargeted” buyer groups, conduct
the interviews in each interviewee’s natural setting. If retailers are an
untargeted buyer group, for example, conduct the interviews on the retail
floor to get a sense of the store, the layout challenges, the retail staff’s
issues, the way customers wander around and talk to sales staff, and the
speed of checkout. This gives you the benefit of seeing what the retailers
themselves may not be able to articulate or even realize. Oftentimes, an
outsider observing with fresh eyes sees the challenges, opportunities, and
potential solutions far better than the players themselves. Exhibit 10-3
outlines the action steps of path three.


---PAGE BREAK---

Exhibit 10-3
Path Three: Action Steps
1. Identify the chain of buyers—users, purchasers, and influencers
—in your industry or target industry.
2. Identify the main buyer group your industry or target industry
currently focuses on. Then shift your focus to those the industry
has largely ignored.
3. Interview buyers from the “untargeted” buyer groups. Probe for
their different definitions of value. Drill down to the biggest
blocks to utility and costs the industry currently imposes on
them.
4. Record the insights from each “untargeted” buyer group and
group like-minded responses together.
Path Four: Look Across Complementary Product and Service Offerings
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on maximizing the value
of the product or service
offering as defined by your
industry
Look across the total solution
buyers seek to understand the
complementary products and
services that enhance or detract
from your offering’s value
Few products or services are used in a vacuum; in most cases, other
products or services affect their value. But in most industries, rivals
converge within the conventional boundaries of their industry’s product
or service offering and focus their efforts solely on maximizing its value.
The key to value innovation is to define the total solution buyers seek
when they choose a product or service, and then to eliminate the pain
points and points of intimidation across the total solution. A simple way
to do this is to think about what happens before, during, and after your
product and service is used.
By broadening your understanding of the total solution buyers need


---PAGE BREAK---

or seek, you can often discover new sources of trapped value. Take the
electric kettle industry in the UK. Although the electric kettle is central
to the British public’s love of afternoon tea, the industry had become a
veritable red ocean with low profit margins and little growth. While the
industry had long competed on price and aesthetic design, Philips
Electronics shifted its focus to understanding the total buyer experience.
In the process, Philips discovered that the central challenge British tea
drinkers faced had nothing to do with the kettle itself; it was the lime
scale in municipal water. Before the tea drinkers could enjoy their freshly
brewed tea, they often had to fish out the lime scale floating in it with a
spoon. Kettle companies never thought to address the problem because it
had nothing to do with their industry’s offering. But by looking across
the buyer’s experience and thinking about the whole range of
complementary products and services buyers needed, Philips saw this
block to utility and created a teakettle with a changeable filter that
removed the scale when the tea was poured. The result: Philips’s
teakettle turned a slow-growth industry into a fast-growth one, lifted its
price point, and created a new repeat revenue stream in changeable
filters.
As this example indicates, it is critical to visit users to see firsthand
what happens before, during, and after the use of your product or service.
Why? Because only then can you experience the full context and see the
range of unvoiced steps and challenges. When people were asked what
they did with their electric teakettles, the answer was: Plug it in, turn it
on, boil water, pour, and drink. But when Philips visited people’s homes
and watched how people used their teakettles, the lime scale problem
quickly jumped out. From the users’ point of view, lime scale had
nothing to do with the kettle, so they never thought to voice the problem.
Others had become so accustomed to fishing for lime scale that they
didn’t even consciously register doing it. Lesson: When you ask people
about an offering, they tend to focus on the offering and, as a result, their
answers rarely stray far from what the industry currently does.
In visiting users, the point is not to sit in their homes, offices, or
factories and batter them with questions. It is to observe them actually
using the product or service, so the unvoiced, taken-for-granted
assumptions they make and the steps they take can be revealed. Here you
want to watch for the processes or circumstances that trigger the need or
desire to use the product or service. Are there inconveniences? Are the


---PAGE BREAK---

triggers too costly or intimidating, curbing demand for your product or
service? What happens before your customers use your product? What
happens during (or around) its use? And what happens afterward?
The buyer utility map, explored in chapter 8, provides a helpful tool
for thinking about these observations, because it provides a structure that
ensures that you, yourself, don’t remain trapped within the narrow
confines of your industry. Learning how to observe insightfully and see
unvoiced, trapped value is a nonobvious skill for many. But by thinking
in terms of the six utility levers and the six stages of the buyers’
experience cycle, you are primed to observe more broadly and
insightfully. The primary objective is to uncover all the blocks to utility,
even if those blocks are not related to your industry as it currently
defines itself—be it lime scale for electric teakettles, securing a
babysitter for parental moviegoers, getting to the airport for airlines, or
opening a ream of paper for your home copier.
You should also probe the largest tier of noncustomers. When major
television manufacturers wished to enter the South African market, for
example, discussions with rural residents revealed that the key block to
purchasing a television for them had nothing to do with the television
itself. It was the fact that only a small fraction of the population had
access to electricity. Selling car batteries with televisions unlocked an
ocean of new demand. This type of insight can only be gained by
interviewing and directly observing the challenges faced by
noncustomers. Exhibit 10-4 outlines the action steps of path four.
Exhibit 10-4
Path Four: Action Steps
1. Look at the real context in which your offering is used by
identifying what happens before, during, and after its use.
2. Observe buyers as they actually use your product or service. In
recording the insights gained, group insights you uncovered so
that patterns in the frequency or criticality of observed blocks to
utility can be discerned.
3. Use the buyer utility map and the noncustomer tool to guide
your observations.
4. Record all insights gained.


---PAGE BREAK---

Path Five: Rethink the Functional-Emotional Orientation of Your Industry
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on improving
priceperformance within the
functional-emotional orientation
of your industry
Rethink the functionalemotional
orientation of your industry or
target industry
Competition in a given industry or strategic group tends to converge,
not only around an accepted view of the scope of an offering, but also
around the bases of its appeal. Some industries and groups compete
principally on price and functionality: Their appeal is functional. Others
compete on generating positive feelings: Their appeal is emotional. A
new value-cost frontier can often be opened up by shifting the appeal of
a product or service from one basis to another, or by blending the sources
of its appeal.
To uncover these opportunities, you first need to get clear on the
orientation of your industry. Sometimes this is easy. High-end fashion,
for example, has a clear emotional orientation aimed at making people
feel both beautiful and elite. But other times industry players are so
accustomed to its orientation that they no longer “see” it; they simply
take it for granted. To get clarity, ask customers and noncustomers to
describe your industry’s offering in their words, not yours. Doing this
will give you a grounded understanding of whether it is functional or
emotional, and what those adjectives mean in a given industry context.
Take the legal industry. When we query customers, the overriding
response is that the industry has a functional orientation. It does not aim
to generate positive emotions. But what does functional mean in this
context? It gets the job done—no more, no less. For many people,
however, the way the legal industry functionally “gets the job done”
simultaneously triggers negative emotions. The top three responses that
come back repeatedly are: intimidating (Who can read legal documents
anyway?), complex, and overpriced (What industry charges by the
minute and then rounds minutes up to a quarter hour?). Now think about
the possibilities that could open up if the industry’s orientation were
shifted to a positive emotional one. How does a legal product or service


---PAGE BREAK---

that is welcoming, simple, with price based on value delivered, not
minutes spent, sound? To us, it sounds pretty great.
Or think about supermarkets. Again, the most common orientation is
functional. Three descriptors that spring to mind are nuisance, necessary
evil, and inefficient (think long checkout lines, slow service at the meat
and fish counter, etc.). What could a supermarket be if it set out to shift
this orientation to a positive emotional one instead? Think fun outing,
stylish, and super-fast. That’s the gist of this path: getting you to
reimagine your industry by shifting its orientation, which opens the
floodgates to completely reconceiving your product or service offering.
To probe customers’ and noncustomers’ overall impressions of an
industry, ask what they would say if they had to choose—functional or
emotional. Then drill down to understand what their answer means in
that context by asking for the three to five adjectives or characteristics
that come to mind to describe it. Their responses can then point you
toward the many factors that support and reinforce their impressions of
how the industry presents itself. As you flesh this out, you may find that
the way people actually see and experience how your industry competes
may be very different than the way you see your industry. Then flip the
question and probe interviewees (and your team members) on what the
opposite characteristics would look like in your industry. This will
provide insight into how to shift the appeal of an industry. Overall, this is
a path most teams have a lot of fun applying. Exhibit 10-5 outlines the
action steps of path five.
Exhibit 10-5
Path Five: Action Steps
1. Identify the industry’s current orientation. Is it predominantly
functional or emotional?
2. Listen to customers and noncustomers characterize your
industry or target industry. Probe the top characteristics that
reflect why they see it as functional or emotional.
3. Look for commonalities across their responses and group like-
minded comments.
4. Explore what the offering would look like if you flipped the
orientation.


---PAGE BREAK---

5. Record all insights gained.
Path Six: Participate in Shaping External Trends Over Time
Red Ocean Lens:
 
Blue Ocean Lens:
Focus on adapting to external
trends as they occur
Participate in shaping external
trends that decisively impact
your industry or target industry
External trends affect every industry over time. Nowadays there is
hardly a business, nonprofit, or government agency whose world is not
being reshaped by external forces. Think of the rise of social media, the
growing obesity crisis, the global environmental movement, or aging
populations in many developed countries.
Many companies try to project external trends themselves, and they
pace their actions to keep up with the trends they’re tracking, adapting to
them as events unfold. Projecting trends seldom provides insight into
opening up new value-cost frontiers, however. Looking at how a trend
will change what customers value, and how it might impact a company’s
business model over time can. As Netflix saw Internet broadband
explode, for example, it realized that fast, real-time streaming of full-
length films would soon be able to take off. That meant the possibility of
instant viewing gratification and complete viewing flexibility. You could
change what you watched on a whim. It also meant convenience and
ease. No need to preorder DVDs, wait for their arrival, and then mail
them back. In other words, no need for Netflix’s original business model.
This insight inspired Netflix to create a leap in value for buyers, via on-
demand viewing, and a new blue ocean for itself. By looking across time
—from the value a market delivers today to the value it might deliver
tomorrow—companies like Netflix can more actively shape their future
and lay claim to opening up a new value-cost frontier.
The aim of this final path is to help organizations go beyond adapting
to external trends to participating in shaping them. Learning which
trends to focus on is crucial, however. So is knowing the right questions
to ask. The first thing you need to get clear on therefore is which trends
decisively impact your industry. The fact that a trend is having a major


---PAGE BREAK---

impact on other industries or society does not mean it is necessarily
relevant to yours. In one organization, for example, the team identified
the growing power of the millennial generation with its very different
wants and needs. True, the implications of this trend are enormous for
many industries; but not, within a meaningful time frame, for theirs—
real estate for retirees. Understanding and detailing the implications of
each trend specifically on your industry, not the world in general, are
key.
Not every trend, even if it’s relevant, is one on which a blue ocean
can be built in an opportunity-maximizing, risk-minimizing way,
however. This brings us to the other two questions you need to ask: Is the
trend irreversible? And is it evolving down a clear trajectory? Oil prices
decisively impact many industries, for example, and if they have been
dropping significantly for many months that may be a seductive trend.
But if you can reasonably imagine the price going up in another 6 to 12
months, and industry experts agree with that hypothesis, building on the
trend would be unwise. Moving forward with a blue ocean initiative will
be highly risky if, as in the case of oil prices, there is a high level of
uncertainty about how the trend on which it was based is likely to
evolve, or if the trend can be easily reversed.
For trends that satisfy all three criteria, ask, If this trend were taken to
its logical conclusion, how would it impact the value we can deliver to
buyers? And what would the implications be for our industry and
organization? As Groupe SEB applied this path to electric home French
fry makers, for instance, the key trends of rising obesity and healthy
eating jumped out. The team then realized that existing customers of
electric home French fry makers had never voiced this concern in
customer surveys, as they had simply taken for granted that fresh French
fries meant high calories and high fat. With this new understanding, the
team explored the identified trends with noncustomers. This is the time
when the team could clearly see the opportunity of unlocking an ocean of
new demand by making a fryer with no frying.
Insight on how decisive trends will impact an industry can often be
found by looking at other industries that have been, or are being,
impacted by the trend. Disintermediation, deregulation, and the
emergence of two-sided markets are all examples of trends that many
industries have already been swept by. Their experiences can provide
compelling insights into what might become possible for your


---PAGE BREAK---

organization, and how you might capitalize on this trend by changing the
definition of value in your industry.
The question we hear most often about this path is: “How far into the
future should we be looking?” The relevant question back is: “How long
would it take you to tool up to produce and launch a completely new
offering that will offer buyers a leap in value?” Your answer to this
question will indicate how far forward you should be thinking if you
want to leverage a decisive trend. The period most often used is three to
five years.
The most difficult aspect of this path is getting clear about how a
particular trend will affect the value of an industry’s current offering, or
what a future offering will need to take into account. While the path
itself is easy to grasp conceptually, the solutions are not as obvious as
they are in the other paths, where the work usually yields a robust initial
list of factors that could be changed. To address this problem, the team
should consider each relevant trend in turn and ask, “If this trend
continues as it has begun, what about our current offering will no longer
make sense and might even detract from buyer value, and therefore
should be eliminated or reduced?” And “What in our offering will we
need to create or raise to deliver a leap in value to buyers?” Exhibit 10-6
outlines the action steps of path six.
Exhibit 10-6
Path Six: Action Steps
1. Identify the three to five trends that are seen as having a
decisive impact on your industry or target industry. Give people
the option of doing secondary research online to complete this.
2. Discuss and assess the relevance of these trends to your
industry. Focus on those that are commonly seen to decisively
impact your industry or target industry.
3. Discuss and assess the extent to which each trend is
irreversible.
4. Discuss and assess whether each of the trends is evolving along
a clear trajectory.
5. List the implications of all the trends that are decisive to your
industry, irreversible, and evolving in a clear direction. Detail


---PAGE BREAK---

how each will change what buyers value and how that would
impact your business model over time.
6. Record all insights gained.
Applying the Six Paths Framework
Athletes often remind themselves that there is no gain without pain. The
same is true when it comes to using the six paths framework. The results
are eye-opening and often revelatory. But be prepared: Generating those
results takes time and effort in the form of multiple one-on-one
interviews and observational fieldwork. While this is the most time-
consuming part of the blue ocean shift journey, this is work that team
members cannot delegate to anyone else—inside the organization or
outside it. There is no outsourcing the team’s ears or eyes. Because the
insights gleaned from the paths come from the team’s own fieldwork,
these insights are empowering and build conviction. So don’t be tempted
to short-circuit the process. If you do, you will undermine the initiative,
and shortcut yourself and the insights gained, as well as the potential for
successful execution, which is the aim of the entire initiative. Here is
how this step unfolds.
Start with the big picture
Begin by explaining that the objective at this stage remains the big
picture: The team is looking for insights that will provide clues as to how
they might reconstruct their industry’s boundaries and open up a new
value-cost frontier. They are not yet looking for final answers. The six
paths will guide them on the type of insights they need to search for.
This reminder is important, because if team members feel the
objective is to straight out search for solutions, many will easily be
discouraged when answers do not jump out at them and become frozen
by the sheer weight of what is being asked. Remember, this process is
very different from what most organizations do to develop strategy. If
people feel frozen or discouraged as they meet the market, they will tend
to go through the process perfunctorily, instead of being inspired and
inquisitive. So you need to make this fun, and let everyone know that


---PAGE BREAK---

now is the time to be a detective and uncover clues. Reassure them that
feeling a bit uncomfortable is to be expected and they’re not alone in
feeling that way.
Divide the team into two subteams
Exploring each path takes time. Asking the entire team to explore each
of the six paths is typically asking for a time commitment few can make
unless their schedules have been significantly cleared for this initiative.
By having each subteam explore only three paths, this step becomes
much more doable. It creates a healthy sense of competition, as to which
subteam will do the best job, which contributes to fun and the quality of
insights garnered. It also mitigates complaints that the assignment is
unfair and not feasible in light of team members’ regular responsibilities.
Explain this reasoning to the team up front, as the subteams are being set
up. That way they can appreciate that you understand what is being
asked of them; that you expect high-quality work; and that you have also
taken practical measures to make this step feasible and motivating by
creating the subteams. Silence is not golden. Explain the concept behind
the subteams.
Walk the team through the entire framework
Now walk everyone through the full framework and explain what the
subteams will be exploring along each path. It’s key for everyone to have
a good overview so that they can respond intelligently to others in the
organization who ask about what’s happening. Knowing what both
subteams are working on will short-circuit the fear and anxiety that can
easily get sparked if someone answers, “I don’t know. The team leader
hasn’t shared that with us.” Subteam members will also appreciate being
treated as equal partners whose understanding matters. The result: more
commitment, less fear, with subteam members naturally able to keep the
rest of the organization in the loop.
Explain how the process will unfold
Once everyone understands the logic of all six paths, the subteams can
get their assignments. You can make these yourself or, and this is often
preferable, you can let the teams select the paths they’ll work on


---PAGE BREAK---

randomly, via a draw. This way, they choose their own paths, and the
process feels fair. Subteam members should agree on which path they
will tackle first, and move on to the next path only after that one has
been completed.
Members of each subteam should then develop work plans for their
assigned paths, beginning with the one they will tackle first. Start by
reviewing the logic of each path and the associated action steps, as
outlined in exhibits 10-1 through 10-6. To help you effectively perform
this task, the relevant materials and templates are provided for your free
download and use at www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates. The templates
will provide direction on the right questions to probe, as the subteam
members go into the field to interview noncustomers and customers. The
templates will also help them organize the insights gained in a
meaningful way.
To explore each path, team members should begin working
individually, then come together to synthesize their insights, then work
individually again to gather a broader range of insights that they will
subsequently pull together as a team. This sequence allows for the richest
array of independent insights to emerge, via the individual work, while at
the same time enabling the members to work together to uncover key
patterns and identify interesting anomalies across their insights.
For path one, for example, subteam members will first develop their
own list of key alternative industries and only then get together as a team
to agree on the most relevant one(s) to explore, based on the criteria
given for that path. Then each of them will individually interview
customers and noncustomers, as prescribed in the path’s steps, before
coming together to compile the findings. In this way groupthink is
avoided and collective wisdom is achieved. A variation of this work
pattern applies across the other five paths as well.
As part of the work plan, subteams should get clear on which
noncustomers and customers to observe and interview in the field. You
don’t want subteam members interviewing and observing the same
people. Going back to path one, for example, suppose long-haul carriers
was the alternative industry the subteam had chosen to analyze. Then
you want to ensure that members of the subteam speak to the customers
of different carriers by deciding which members will speak to the
customers of which long-haul carrier. (These people are effectively the
noncustomers of the focal industry.) As part of the fieldwork, take


---PAGE BREAK---

photos, video what you observe, and visit shops. In other words, get real
in the field. Going back to long-haul carriers, for example, we’d
recommend going to the airport, and speaking directly to people after
they’ve checked in for long-haul flights. We’d also recommend speaking
to airport staff involved in check-in and getting their views on why
people choose to fly long haul over whatever alternative you are
comparing it to. Think of yourselves as detectives. Have fun, and stay
focused on the task at hand.
How many people should each subteam member interview per path?
Typically, the number is 10 to 12, though some subteams do as many as
15 interviews each, because they find the learning so rich and inspiring.
The first interviews for the first path a subteam tackles are usually the
toughest, as most team members will be learning a new skill set. So
remind them not to get discouraged and just to carry on. By the end of
the interview process for a given path, each member should have started
to hear some themes in people’s responses, as well as a few idiosyncratic
responses, which often prove useful as they come together to share their
results. So be sure to record these outliers and not pooh-pooh them. The
six paths interview work can make people feel awkward, or even
squeamish at first, if they’re accustomed to understanding customers via
large-scale surveys. Let them know you appreciate that, but ask them to
persevere. We have never encountered people who were not soon
rejuvenated and awed by what they learned by doing this fieldwork.
To maximize the insights gained, remind team members not to “sell.”
Observe, follow, and ask with due humility. It’s imperative that members
stay open, and not get defensive as noncustomers and customers start to
convey honest responses to their questions. If negative comments come
back, probe deeper to extract the most learning. Stress to the team that
negatives are opportunities in disguise. So they want to get super-clear
on what they are and why they arise. Remind members to record and
capture all the insights and answers for every person met, observed, and
interviewed in real time, not later, when memories can become cloudy.
The objective is to see the world with new eyes. No observation is too
small, as many seemingly small observations can later add up to the big
insight that creates a blue ocean. Think of how the small and repeated
observation of lime scale in the UK’s municipal water led Philips
Electronics to create a blue ocean by creating replaceable filters.
Paths one, two, and three indicate the relevant noncustomer groups to


---PAGE BREAK---

interview and observe—those in alternative industries, strategic groups,
or buyer groups, respectively. For paths four to six, subteams should
interview people in the largest tier or the largest two tiers of
noncustomers identified in step three of the process (see chapter 9).
Whether one or two tiers are chosen depends on the relative size of the
tiers. When one tier clearly looms far larger than the other two, we
recommend focusing on that tier alone. When that isn’t the case,
focusing on two tiers works well.
What’s Next
After completing their live-action market explorations, the subteams will
be armed with a wealth of new insights on how value can be unlocked in
innovative ways. Inspired by what they’ve learned in the field, most of
the members will also be intellectually energized by the new ways of
thinking they’ve just been exposed to. This brings us to the second part
of step four, where we’ll show you how the team will use the insights
they’ve gathered to craft concrete, alternative blue ocean moves. Here
we will introduce the eliminate-reduce-raise-create grid, which is key in
breaking the value-cost trade-off and opening up a new value-cost
frontier. Let’s keep moving.


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 11
Developing Alternative Blue Ocean
Opportunities
AFTER THEIR SIX PATH market explorations, the blue ocean
initiative team members are typically tired but on a high. Factors the
industry has long competed on have been shown to be over-delivered or
no longer relevant. Market segmentations that had long been taken for
granted have now been called into question, as powerful commonalities
that cut across strategic groups are revealed. Complementary products
and services the industry had never paid much heed to are now
recognized as potentially powerful levers for unlocking innovative value.
In sum, the team’s energy and feeling of empowerment are palpable and,
in one way or another, the rest of the organization will feel it too.
What is especially noticeable is the way people engaged in the
initiative speak. Instead of quoting reports and facts when they discuss
what the blue ocean process is revealing, they recount stories. Stories
that have color, names, and places, and draw on specific observations
that cause others in the organization to reflect on and question industry
practices and to feel viscerally connected to the findings.
Now it’s time to distill the team’s insights and observations into well-
formulated blue ocean strategic options. To this end, we introduce the
four actions framework, a tool that will enable you to translate the
findings from the team’s market exploration into concrete, actionable,
strategic options that pursue both differentiation and low cost.
The Four Actions Framework


---PAGE BREAK---

As figure 11-1 illustrates, the four actions framework is built on four key
questions. The questions help you to challenge an industry’s strategic
logic and business model to arrive at blue ocean moves that break the
trade-off between differentiation and low cost. Let’s quickly run through
them.
Which factors that the industry takes for granted should be
eliminated? This question forces you to consider eliminating factors that
the industry has long competed on, but which your team found to be
irrelevant through the six paths market exploration in the field. Even
though these factors no longer add value, or may even decrease it, they
are rarely questioned because of long-held industry practice. Other times,
organizations are so focused on benchmarking one another that they do
not act on, or even perceive fundamental changes in what buyers value.
Because these factors buttress an organization’s cost structure for little to
no gain, substantial cost savings can be made by eliminating them.
Figure 11-1
The Four Actions Framework
Which factors should be reduced well below the industry’s
standard? This question pushes you to determine whether products or


---PAGE BREAK---

services have been overdesigned in the race to match and beat the
competition. Here organizations over-serve customers, increasing their
cost structure for no gain. By reducing these factors, your costs can be
lowered further.
Which factors should be raised well above the industry’s
standard? This question pushes you to uncover and eliminate the
compromises buyers are forced to make. These compromises are usually
caused by an industry’s failure to see that buyers want more of some
factors than the standard offering provides. But because the standard is
the standard, no one thinks to challenge it.
Which factors that the industry has never offered should be
created? This last question drives you to offer entirely new kinds of
value for buyers and to create new demand by converting once
noncustomers into customers.
The first two questions of eliminate and reduce give you insight into
how to drop your cost structure vis-à-vis competitors. By contrast, the
second two questions of raise and create drive you to create a leap in
buyer value. Of particular importance here are the actions of eliminating
and creating because they push the team to go beyond traditional, value-
maximization exercises, which aim to deliver greater value mainly by
reducing and raising levels of the existing factors of competition. If
reducing and raising are all that you focus on, you may produce a higher
degree of buyer value and might even build an advantage over the
competition in your existing industry space. But you won’t make the
existing rules of competition irrelevant, because they don’t change the
key factors on which everyone else is competing. To open up a new
value-cost frontier and leave the competition behind, new kinds of buyer
value need to be offered through the elimination of existing factors and
the creation of new ones.
To ensure that blue ocean teams pursue differentiation and low cost
simultaneously, we created the eliminate-reduce-raise-create (ERRC)
grid, which complements the four actions framework. Together, these
two tools allow you to translate team members’ insights and observations
gleaned from the field into the concrete, strategic actions needed to make
a blue ocean shift. If the team is focused on only a subset of the four
actions—not on all four—the grid visually flags the issue and warns the
team by showing the blank space(s). Let’s walk through this process so
you can see how it works.


---PAGE BREAK---

How One Company Developed Its Blue Ocean Move
“If there ever were a red ocean,” observed Michael Levie, co-founder of
citizenM Hotels, “the hotel industry would be it. It’s redder than red.”
Four-star hotels offer roughly four-fifths of what five-star hotels offer.
Three-star hotels offer roughly three-quarters of what four-star hotels
provide and so on down to one-star hotels that offer roughly half of what
two-star hotels provide. That is, they all compete on essentially the same
set of factors, just more or less of them. “In this industry,” noted
Michael, “people think they’ve innovated if they change the paint color
on the walls or switch the type of chocolate on the pillow.” Against this
backdrop, Michael and Rattan Chadha, the CEO, cofounder, and lead
investor of citizenM, set out in 2007 to open up a new value-cost frontier
that would capture the growing mass of frequent travelers, mobile
citizens, whether they were traveling for business, on a weekend
shopping excursion, or to explore a new locale. As new entrants to the
hotel industry, these two entrepreneurs wanted to create a blue ocean
with a new kind of hotel chain.
When it came to mobile citizens, Rattan, Michael, and their team
noticed that many were frequenting either three-star or luxury hotels.
Having sensed that a blue ocean opportunity could exist across these two
strategic groups (path two), they wanted to understand why frequent
travelers chose luxury hotels over three-star hotels and vice versa. As
they did, a host of insights began to emerge.
Here’s a glimpse.
“Why do you choose a five-star hotel over a three-star hotel? For the
price?”
“Price? No. Who likes paying more?”
“So, is it because of the bellhops and doormen? They’re usually much
nicer at five-star hotels.”
“That may be true. But that’s not why I choose five-star hotels over
three stars. For me, bellhops tend to take too long to bring your luggage
up, and then I always feel the need to fork over a tip. Bellhops are
certainly helpful if you have a lot of luggage. But as a frequent traveler, I
travel light. For convenience and simplicity, I prefer to carry my own
bag. Same for doormen. They may be nice to have, but I don’t choose a
five-star hotel because of them.”
“So, is the front desk a factor?”


---PAGE BREAK---

“No. Even in a five-star hotel, you usually have to wait. And then,
when you do check in, you can get the feeling that the person checking
you in is sort of checking you out, judging you. I hate that.”
“What about the concierge? Does that influence your decision?”
“No. With Google maps and restaurant and travel apps, it’s usually
faster and easier for me to figure things out myself than to ask a
concierge. Besides, most concierges use these services too nowadays.”
“Is it because you prefer the restaurants in five-star hotels to those in
three-stars’?”
“No. It’s nice that they have them. But I tend to eat out, since five-
star hotels are in great locations.”
“So location matters?”
“Yes, great locations are important in my decision. Five-star hotels
usually are in prime locations, which is what I’m after.”
“Room service?”
“Room service is usually expensive and slow. I only use it when I
have to.”
“What about Internet and phone?”
“That’s a real pet peeve of mine. When you stay in a luxury hotel,
you’re already paying a lot. And then many of them take you for a ride
by charging you for Internet and phone services at sky-high rates.”
“What matters to me isn’t the size of the room. It’s a great bed, great
sheets, quietness, and a great shower. Water pressure, please!”
“What’s the biggest turnoff of three-star hotels that makes you decide
not to stay there?”
“They’re just not inspiring. They feel so institutional and mediocre.
That feeling of luxury, of beauty, of quality, is central to why I choose
five-star hotels.”
In short, despite all the factors the hotel industry competes and ranks
itself on, it turned out that only three factors stood out as decisive in
determining why frequent travelers traded up to five-star hotels over
those rated three stars: the meta-feeling of luxury and beauty they
experience there, the more luxurious sleeping environment, and the
hotels’ prime location.
Conversely, as the team probed why people choose a three-star hotel
over a five-star, price jumped out as the most common factor, followed
by one other: Five-star hotels often felt too formal and pretentious.
“They feel too uptight. Like you have to dress a certain way and act a


---PAGE BREAK---

certain way to fit in. They feel too rarified, not relaxed enough, for me.”
To turn these insights into clear actions and a concrete strategy, the
team challenged itself to translate them into specific factors to eliminate,
reduce, raise, and create. As they did, they started to realize several
interesting patterns. For example, the customers of neither five-star nor
three-star hotels saw the front desk, concierge service, bellhops, or
doormen as key to their purchase decision. The team realized that the
front desk does not bring value to customers; it exists for the benefit of
hotels to register and process people and payments. Similarly, for
frequent travelers, who almost always travel light, bellhops were also
seen as unnecessary, and often even as a nuisance. As for the concierge,
frequent travelers were for the most part tech-savvy and preferred
finding directions and locating restaurants and sights themselves.
“We could potentially eliminate these factors,” the team reasoned,
“and there would be no real impact on value for most frequent travelers
—whether they are five-star or three-star hotel goers today, while also
lowering our cost structure.”
Room size could also be reduced without a real impact on value, as
people rarely stayed in their rooms much. It didn’t escape the team that
smaller rooms also meant being able to have more rooms per square foot
of real estate space, creating greater yield. “Luxury is a great sleeping
environment not room size,” the team realized. “Given the high cost of
space, significant cost savings can be realized from building smaller
rooms. Instead, if we raise the quality of the sleeping environment by
furnishing rooms with king-size beds, fine linens, good sound insulation,
big fluffy towels, and amazing showers,” the team reckoned, “we’d
delight guests while keeping our cost per room much lower than the
industry average.”
As team members continued to work through and interpret the market
insights they’d gathered, they also recognized new kinds of value they
could create. “If we eliminate the front desk, couldn’t we adapt and use
self check-in kiosks so guests could check in with no lines? And we
could complement them by replacing scripted front desk staff with
multitasking “ambassadors,” who are ready to explain how the kiosks
work and in what ways they might be of help in a warm and friendly
way.”
“If we don’t have a front desk, concierge, or bellhop, why would we
need a traditional lobby, which is pretty much empty, wasted space?


---PAGE BREAK---

Couldn’t we create a communal living space instead, where guests can
eat, drink, meet, work, and play freely anytime they want, 24/7, as they
can at home? If the living space is comfortable and relaxed, but also
surprisingly beautiful, luxury customers’ need for beauty and inspiration
would be immediately met on entering the hotel and so would three-star
customers’ need for less formality and pretension.” Figure 11-2 shows
the results of the team’s probing.
Figure 11-2
The Eliminate-Reduce-Raise-Create (ERRC) Grid: The Case of citizenM
In 2008, with the launch of its first hotel in Amsterdam’s Schiphol
Airport, citizenM opened up a new value-cost frontier of affordable
luxury for frequent travelers. Soon after, citizenM began opening hotels
in major cities, like London, Paris, and New York. Consider these facts:
Its hotels earn the highest guest rankings in the hospitality industry,
placing them in the “fabulous” and “superb” categories, right alongside
five-star hotels. Yet, they’re priced to be affordable to three-star
customers. The result is an average occupancy rate of 90 percent across
its hotels—a whopping 80 percent higher than the industry average. As


---PAGE BREAK---

for costs, its total costs per room are roughly 40 percent lower than the
average four-star hotel’s, while its cost of staff is a staggering 50 percent
lower than the industry’s. CitizenM outperforms all traditional players,
its profitability per square meter being about twice that of comparable
upscale hotels. Today citizenM hotels are further expanding across the
major cities of the world. “Stylish, high-tech, and cheap,” “an overnight
revolution,” and “a form of religion” are among the accolades the media
has showered on citizenM’s blue ocean move.
Generating Your Blue Ocean Strategic Options
The citizenM example illustrates how the insights and observations
generated from one of the six paths, in this case path two (looking across
strategic groups), were translated into a clear and concrete set of actions
that formed the basis of its blue ocean strategic move. As citizenM was a
start-up, only a small group of people, including the two entrepreneurial
cofounders, were involved in developing its blue ocean move. For
organizations that had separate subteams doing the six paths market
exploration, only the members who did the fieldwork for a given path
should develop the corresponding move. Because the translation process
for each of the six paths is the same, we’ll continue using the citizenM
example to show how the process works for a path. As we lay out the
action steps involved in the process, for the sake of simplicity, we won’t
use the phrase the subteam and will just refer to the team. Here is how
the action steps unfold.
Extract the key insights revealed by the path
First, get clear on the key insights revealed by exploring the path. Team
members should carefully read and review the completed recording
templates with all the comments they received and observations they
made during the fieldwork. If the team has not yet grouped like-minded
comments across the completed recording sheets for a given path, now is
the time to do so.
As they work through the comments, the team should pay special
attention to the most common factors cited—both positive and negative.
Those will be their key factors. Then team members need to push
themselves to consider what each factor really means by providing a


---PAGE BREAK---

short, cogent description of the elements that make it up. In the case of
citizenM, for example, the team could see that, when it came to room
quality, the factor frequent travelers most commonly cited was the
sleeping environment. Then when they pushed themselves to identify
exactly what in the sleeping environment mattered, they were able to
define sleeping environment concretely as “bed size, quality sheets and
towels, quietness (or sound insulation), and water pressure in the
shower.” Reaching agreement on what the salient factors are and exactly
what they encompass not only puts everyone on the same page when
they talk about their results, but also forces the team to ground insights in
specific factors that can later get acted on and are relatively easy to cost.
One of the reasons the first path you work on to create a blue ocean
option is typically the hardest is that translating comments into
practically framed factors calls on people to think in a way few have ever
been asked to do. As a result, anxiety may build, and team members may
start to second-guess their ability “to do it correctly.” Reassure them that
this is natural and that as they work through the path together, and share
their results and learn from one another, they’ll find that they will do just
fine.
Drill down into which factors to eliminate, reduce, raise, and create
Next, you need to decide if the factors you’ve identified should be
eliminated, reduced, raised, or created. Use the four actions framework
and the ERRC grid to help organize your answers. These materials are
provided 
for 
your 
free 
download 
and 
use 
at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates.
To ensure that everyone fully understands how to apply the
framework and complete the grid, let’s go back to the citizenM example.
Because their prime location and more luxurious sleeping environment
were decisive in causing frequent travelers to trade up to five-star hotels,
the citizenM team deemed it essential to raise these two factors to an
unexpected height. At the same time, because people choose three-star
hotels for their lower price, the team saw the need to offer a price point
that was markedly reduced from that of luxury hotels. Since customers
of neither strategic group valued the front desk experience, the team
judged the front desk as eliminate. This, in turn, prompted the team’s
insight about creating self check-in kiosks, so that guests could access
their keys and go straight to their rooms with the same kind of time


---PAGE BREAK---

savings an ATM provides over a teller’s line at a bank. This is a glimpse
into how the process of drilling down works to arrive at a completed
ERRC grid.
In completing the ERRC grid for a given path, remember to focus on
using concrete factors that you can act on and can get a good sense of
their cost implications. For example, people often list “inconvenience” as
a key factor to eliminate. However, inconvenience is not a concrete
factor and it doesn’t indicate how it will be eliminated. So, it’s important
to push the team to get more specific by asking, “What precise actions
will be taken or things changed to eliminate buyers’ inconvenience?”
Likewise, when people list “convenience” as a key factor to create, the
word says nothing about how that will be done. So here, too, you would
need to probe for a concrete action that will create convenience for
buyers. It is critical to understand the difference between concrete factors
that describe actions and investments as opposed to desired outcomes,
which are the result of your strategic actions. Concrete factors, not
outcomes, are what you need to list in the ERRC grid. As you do, also
start to think about how you might be able to creatively deliver the
factors you raise and create so the cost of delivering them can be
lowered. You want to be thinking about lowering cost as you raise value
all along.
Occasionally, team members may want to go back to the field and
reinterview a select group of people they had previously interviewed to
seek further clarification and to test their ideas about what to eliminate,
reduce, raise, or create. If a team feels this need, you should let them.
But be sure to cap the time for doing so to a month to prevent the team
from falling into analysis paralysis.
Check that you are pursuing both differentiation and low costs
The simultaneous pursuit of differentiation and low costs via value
innovation is key to opening up a new value-cost frontier and hence
making a blue ocean shift. In practice, however, we’ve often found that
groups tasked with coming up with something new tend to focus
predominantly on raising and creating. When they do, they end up
conceiving of potentially costly offerings that reflect red ocean
differentiation, not blue ocean strategic moves. To ensure that this does
not happen, remind people that they need to put as much effort into what
to eliminate and reduce as well as what to raise and create. In practical


---PAGE BREAK---

terms, that means stressing to team members that for each path they
should aim to show concrete factors in the eliminate and reduce
quadrants of the completed ERRC grid, as well as in the raise and create
ones.
Sometimes a team will argue that there is nothing they can eliminate
or reduce. If they do, push back and ask them to think harder about
factors they may be taking for granted because that’s simply the way
things have always been done, but that no longer add value or
significantly over-deliver on what buyers need. To inspire them, point to
what citizenM eliminated and reduced that had long been sacrosanct in
the hotel industry or to what Comic Relief eliminated and reduced, like
advocacy counseling, grant solicitation, and year-round solicitations. To
spark their thinking, try flipping the question and asking, “What are the
stupidest things our industry does?” Then ask them to zoom in there.
That’s when lightbulbs often start to go off.
People can also fall into the trap of listing factors to “create” that are
new to their organization’s offering but not to the industry. Remind the
team that the only factors that qualify here are those that are largely new
to the industry or market space they are focusing on—factors that are
beyond the industry’s conventional boundaries. A team at one of the
largest European gas service station providers, for example, initially put
having clean bathrooms and the ability to purchase a fun selection of
food in their “create” quadrant. But while these two factors may have
been new to the company, which had a terrible reputation in both areas,
they were hardly new to the industry, which was light-years ahead of the
company in this regard.
Draw your blue ocean alternatives
The team is now ready to draw a “to-be” strategy canvas for the offering,
based on the completed ERRC grid for the path. The to-be strategy
canvas allows you to visualize how the blue ocean alternative for a given
path breaks away from the existing red ocean reality. To accomplish this,
the team should begin by rating the key factors in the completed ERRC
grid, just as they did when they drew the industry’s existing strategy
canvas (see chapter 7). Now, however, all the factors listed as eliminates
should get a score of 0. For the others, the team should use the same 5-
point Likert-type scale (or variant thereof) they used earlier. As before,
when it comes to price, a high price should be rated as “high” and a low


---PAGE BREAK---

price should be rated as “low.”
Next, plot all the factors along the horizontal axis. So that the
strategic profile of your proposed new move can be easily appreciated
and communicated, list price first, followed by all the factors that were
eliminated, then reduced, then raised, and finally created. That will give
you an easy-to-read strategic profile. Lastly, overlay the strategic profiles
of the competition on that of your proposed new move.
Blue ocean moves seldom involve lots of bells and whistles, nor are
the ideas usually fancy and shiny. In fact, once they’re completed, they
often look remarkably simple and clear and have the ring of common
sense. Be sure to remind the team of this, so that they don’t begin to
doubt the power of their “simple” idea and start adding extraneous or
clever factors that merely complicate it and seriously diminish its blue
ocean potential.
Figure 11-3
Strategy Canvas of citizenM at the Time of Its Launch, 2008
“Affordable Luxury for the People”
Figure 11-3 shows the strategic profile of citizenM’s blue ocean move
in contrast to those of the competition. As you can see, citizenM’s


---PAGE BREAK---

strategic profile meets the initial litmus test of a blue ocean offering in
that it diverges from the competition; it is focused; and it has a
compelling tagline that is true to the offering, namely, “affordable luxury
for the people.”
Now reflect on the strategic profile of your blue ocean option and
develop a tagline that is both true to its strategic profile and is
compelling from the buyers’ point of view. One without the other is not
sufficient. To develop the tagline, really dig into how the proposed
offering creates a leap in value for customers and how you can best
communicate that. In developing these taglines, it’s important to avoid
falling into the trap of creating catchy but meaningless phrases. Should
that happen, you need to redouble the team’s efforts to communicate the
essence of the offering in a way that will highlight its compelling benefit
and immediately speak to the market.
Outline the offerings’ economic benefits to the organization
Most industries have a fair idea of how costs generally break down
across their value chain. The airline industry, for example, has a good
understanding of the relative costs associated with airport fees, fuel,
staff, maintenance, food and beverages, marketing, loyalty programs,
and so on. Likewise, for luxury and three-star hotels, hotel industry
experts like Michael Levie have a good idea of the relative costs
associated with land, rooms, staff, full-service restaurants, and so on.
Based on these relative costs, the citizenM team developed a rough
idea of how much cost savings would be realized by eliminating and
reducing the existing features of these hotels. For those features that the
citizenM team was looking to create, but luxury and three-star hotels
didn’t offer—like self check-in kiosks or communal living space—the
team looked outside the hotel industry to get an idea of the magnitude of
cost additions. By putting cost savings and additions together, the team
was able to outline how the economics of the offering would work. The
aim here was to create a win not only for mobile citizens through a leap
in value but also for the organization through a tidy profit.
As in the case of citizenM, here teams need to provide preliminary
indicators of the economic benefits of their proposed offerings and make
their business cases, however rough they may be. The blue ocean
offering that ultimately gets selected would then have its economics
further fleshed out with all needed operational expertise available in the


---PAGE BREAK---

organization to ensure a winning business model.
The outputs of these action steps are: a to-be strategy canvas with a
compelling tagline that powerfully conveys its essence, and a completed
ERRC grid that highlights how costs will be brought down, while
differentiation will be driven up to create a leap in buyer value. With
these inputs, rough indicators of the offering’s economic benefits, like
profit and growth, are developed.
As this process gets completed for each path, what we typically find
is that two or three of the paths will yield stronger and more compelling
insights to create a new value-cost frontier than the others, while the rest
reveal a compelling factor or two to eliminate or create, but fall short of
providing enough insights to unlock a new value-cost frontier. If this
happens, do not be alarmed. It’s normal. That said, you should still go
through the entire exercise. Why? For one, it generates tremendous
learning for everyone. Moreover, some of the insights from the “weaker”
paths can become low-hanging fruit to be acted upon at a later time. So
don’t short-circuit the process and lose the learning.
Move to the Final Step
With viable alternative blue ocean opportunities created, you are now
ready to move to the final step of the blue ocean shift journey. The final
step is where you’ll learn how to select your blue ocean move, rapidly
test it in the market, and tighten and refine it to maximize its market
potential. The final step ends with formalizing a big-picture business
model for the chosen move and launching it. This ensures that the move
you roll out generates not only a leap in value for buyers but,
importantly, a tidy profit for your organization.
The team’s energy is high. Team members are proud of what they
have created, but also understandably nervous, because they are on the
cusp of hearing objective feedback and the market’s judgment on the
proposed blue ocean moves they’ve generated from their hands-on
explorations.


---PAGE BREAK---

Step Five: 
Make Your Move


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 12
Selecting Your Blue Ocean Move and
Conducting Rapid Market Tests
YOU ARE NOW READY to select your blue ocean move. The team
has developed up to six potentially viable blue ocean opportunities, each
captured on a one-page, to-be strategy canvas. It has created a
compelling tagline for each that is true to the offering and speaks to the
market. And it has completed a single-page, eliminate-reduce-raise-
create grid as well as an outline of the economic benefits offered by each
strategic option. Collectively, these materials show how each alternative
could deliver a leap in value for buyers (or donors if a nonprofit or the
public if the government) and a win for the organization.
How will you choose which strategic option to pursue? By hosting a
blue ocean fair, an eye-opening but high-pressure event. Here the
strategic options the team has developed are opened up for transparent
feedback and calibration, so that a decision can be reached on which is
the best to move forward with and what aspects of it may still need to be
refined and worked through to open up a new value-cost frontier.
In our work with organizations, we often hear complaints that senior
management is too conservative and that whatever innovative ideas do
get put forth are usually neither championed nor taken seriously.
Entrepreneurs often voice the same complaints about the investors to
whom they pitch their ideas. But when we ask people to share examples
of the innovative ideas that were rejected, we see two common problems.
On the one hand, otherwise good ideas are couched in such complex and
incoherent language that it’s impossible to judge their merits. On the
other hand, seemingly good ideas are either all about being different for
the sake of differentiation and don’t actually offer buyers a leap in value,


---PAGE BREAK---

or they lack a robust profit proposition. Understandably, investors and
executives push these ideas aside.
By contrast, we’ve never seen teams encounter these issues when
they make their presentations at a blue ocean fair. Without exception,
among the first comments we hear are how professional and easy to
grasp the strategic offerings are, and how clearly the presentations lay
out the benefits for buyers and for the organization.
Let’s look at how a blue ocean fair works.
The Dynamics of the Blue Ocean Fair
A blue ocean fair brings together the organization’s senior leadership and
all the members of the blue ocean initiative team. Who should be in the
room? In addition to the head of the focal unit, the attendees should
include his or her top team as well as the heads of marketing,
manufacturing, HR, finance, IT, and logistics. Not only are these
executives likely to be called upon to provide specialized support once
execution is underway, but they may also be asked to remove obstacles
within their functional areas as execution begins. So accord them the
intellectual and emotional respect they’re due, and make sure they
understand the full range of blue ocean options you’re presenting. By
bringing together this cross section of respected corporate community
members and influential functional heads, the blue ocean fair creates a
natural cadre of ambassadors who can speak from firsthand knowledge
about why a shift is imperative and, crucially, the merits of the move that
is ultimately chosen.
Customers are also often invited to the fair, as are the noncustomers
whom you hope will swell the ranks of your new market space. Suppose,
for example, you’re looking at options in the B2B environment for new
types of sophisticated hospital equipment. You would want to include
both your current key buyers and users (which is typically a small group
of people, as the industry is quite consolidated), and some potential
customers from smaller hospitals that don’t currently use such
equipment. Similarly, when your success is highly dependent on a
broader ecosystem, bringing in select supply chain or ecosystem partners
is wise. While these are the kinds of people the team typically met during
their six paths market exploration, they can add an additional layer of
real-time market feedback to the discussion. For the same reason, some


---PAGE BREAK---

organizations invite players, such as industry analysts, that have a
naturally broad overview of the industry’s landscape.
For start-ups or small Main Street organizations that don’t have the
breadth and depth of talent that large, established corporations do,
members of the blue ocean initiative team and their top leaders are often
the only internal participants. In that case, it is especially important to
populate the event with relevant external guests.
The fair begins with the team’s presentation of all the strategic
options they created. (From here on in, we’ll assume for the sake of
simplicity that the team has brought all six options to the fair.) Once the
presentations are over, the initiative team splits up, and its members go
to one of six stations set up around the room. Each station displays a
large, poster-sized version of one of the to-be strategy canvases, along
with the eliminate-reduce-raise-create grid and the economic benefits to
the organization. The attendees are then invited to visit the stations to ask
for further clarification, share their comments and suggestions, and raise
possible concerns. Finally, they vote for the move or moves they find
most compelling, using stickers or Post-it notes to indicate their choices.
After the voting is all done, the top team asks the attendees why they
chose for or against specific strategies, adding yet another layer of
feedback to the process. Simply seeing the accumulation of Post-it notes
or stickers on a blue ocean option—or the absence thereof—and then
hearing people’s comments firsthand, helps team members begin to let
go of ideas that lack compelling traction and rally around those that
garner strong support.
While all the attendees except the blue ocean initiative team members
get to vote, the final decision is made by the organization’s executive
team. Occasionally, the move these executives choose is not the one that
received the most votes. In that case, they absolutely must provide
explicit reasons for their choice; but it’s a wise practice to follow in any
case—even if the choice seems obvious. A clear and cogent explanation
is critical to reinforcing the fair process built into the initiative and
keeping everyone committed to the outcome.
Holding Your Blue Ocean Fair
Here are the guidelines for conducting a successful blue ocean fair.


---PAGE BREAK---

Start with an overview of your industry’s red ocean reality and the need to make a blue ocean
shift
Begin by presenting the as-is strategy canvas, which shows the red ocean
the industry is confronting and, hence, why a blue ocean shift is
imperative. Then walk through both the completed buyer utility map,
which reveals the pain points customers experience and, as a result, the
potent opportunities to unlock trapped value, and the three tiers of
noncustomers, which show the buyers the industry is currently shutting
out and who could potentially be tapped to create new demand. This
gives the attendees the background they need and helps get everyone on
the same page.
It is imperative that senior management attend the fair from start to
finish. Without their committed presence, both the blue ocean team and
everyone else will assume that they either don’t think the initiative is
important or they lack the will to see it through. And guaranteed—if
senior management skips part of the fair, the initiative team will be
demoralized. To get to this point, they have done an enormous amount of
work of which they’re rightly proud. More than anything else, this is
their moment to shine—to show what they’ve produced despite their
initial doubts and trepidation. The organization’s leaders must accord the
team members the respect they deserve; and the best way to do that is
through their eager listening presence. This also sends a strong signal
throughout the organization that the initiative is to be taken seriously,
which will reinforce everyone’s commitment to execution while
discouraging game playing. Last but not least, attending the entire fair is
the only way the top management team can learn enough to choose the
best blue ocean move to pursue.
Have the team present their blue ocean strategic options
Next, each blue ocean option should be presented by a team member
who worked on its development. Give him or her no more than five
minutes for the entire presentation. We set a tight time limit here,
because we’ve found that any strategy that takes longer than this to
communicate effectively is probably too complicated, or not well enough
thought through, or too undistinguished to be any good. Knowing they
must work within such a tight time frame helps all the blue ocean team
members really think through, sharpen, and refine the offerings and


---PAGE BREAK---

business case for each alternative as they prepare for its presentation.
It is vital for everyone on the team to use the same format for their
presentations. Otherwise, voting and comparison will become very
difficult to do well in the short time of the fair. While there are many
ways to do this, we’ve found that the following content and flow serve
this purpose well.
• Describe the offering: Start by presenting the offering’s tagline.
Follow this with a short, bullet-point description. This should be
very easy to understand, so that the attendees can immediately
grasp the gist of the offering and why it is compelling.
• Present the to-be strategy canvas: The to-be strategy canvas
should show both the strategic profile of the proposed blue ocean
offering and the as-is strategic profile of the current industry. In
this way, attendees can see for themselves precisely how the
proposed move stands apart, diverges from current industry
practices, and delivers a leap in value for buyers. It also
immediately reveals whether the offering is focused, instead of
simply offering more of everything the competition already does,
by highlighting what has been reduced and eliminated to lower the
offering’s cost as well as raised and created to offer a leap in value.
• Walk through the ERRC grid: Summarize the factors that the
blue ocean option eliminates, reduces, raises, and creates. Because
the team has already done the hard work of describing each of the
factors in concrete, actionable terms when it built the to-be strategy
canvas (see chapter 11), this summary will reaffirm how the
offering breaks from current industry practice, and how it both
creates higher value and drives down costs. In established
organizations, walking through the ERRC grid will also give
people an indication of how much of a stretch the option is likely
to require in contrast with the organization’s current business
model.
• Summarize the benefits for buyers (or donors for nonprofits or
the public for a government entity): Although the offering’s
benefits may already have become obvious, it is worth briefly
summarizing the leap in value buyers—including the


---PAGE BREAK---

noncustomers who would find the new offering compelling—will
gain. For citizenM hotels, for example, this might be, “For a price
approaching that of a three-star hotel, customers will enjoy a five-
star location, a vastly superior night’s sleep, great Wi-Fi, and an
experience that’s luxurious but not snobby.”
• Outline the economic benefits to the organization: Using the
industry’s general breakdown of relative costs across the value
chain, size up the magnitude of the cost savings from the factors
that have been eliminated and reduced. Then outline the additional
costs that will likely be incurred because of the factors you’ve
raised and created. As discussed in chapter 11, the above exercise
provides rough indicators of the option’s economic benefits to the
organization.
If the proposed move might face any potentially significant external
hurdles, like government regulations, the team should note them in their
presentation as well. With this additional input, the assessment of
alternative options can be more complete. It may also be the case that
someone at the fair will have overcome a similar challenge, or knows
someone in another industry who has. In our experience, being
forthcoming about potential difficulties is often the route to finding a
solution quickly.
Before moving on to the next presentation, give the attendees five
minutes to note their thoughts about what they’ve just heard on recording
sheets. These recording sheets, as well as a summary of the contents to
be presented at the fair, are provided for your free download and use at
www.blueoceanshift.com/ExerciseTemplates. This will allow you to
capture people’s immediate, instinctive reactions to each alternative, and
help to ensure that everyone in attendance is listening keenly.
Ask the attendees to visit all the stations and then cast their votes
Once all the presentations have been made, encourage the attendees to
circulate, think deeply about each option, ask clarifying questions, offer
suggestions, and really take in and weigh the instinctive appeal for
buyers as well as the economics of each option. One member of the team
that developed the option should be at each station to answer questions.


---PAGE BREAK---

Be sure to capture people’s feedback just as it happens.
Then give each attendee a few stickers or Post-it notes and ask them
to place from one to all of these on their preferred strategic option(s),
depending on how compelling they found it. While there is no fixed rule
on how many stickers to hand out, in our experience, distributing three to
five works well.
Alternatively, if you’re worried that attendees might influence one
another’s selections, you can provide each voter with a sheet listing the
name of each option and ask each of them to place their stickers there
instead of on the posters or flip charts. You can then collect the sheets
and transfer the votes to the displays to reveal how each of the options
did.
Probe for maximum feedback and learning
When the voting is finished, what people think becomes immediately
visible—almost like looking at a heat map. Now you want to gather even
richer feedback through a focused discussion with the attendees. While
there are many ways to go about this, we’ve found that asking people,
strategy canvas by strategy canvas, why they did or did not vote for each
blue ocean option serves this purpose well. “What specifically captured
your imagination?” “What didn’t?” “What’s a drawback?” “What in the
option’s value or profit proposition should or could be sharpened?” If
one strategy canvas received an overwhelming number of votes, ask
what about it made people so passionate. Likewise, if one canvas
received very few votes or no votes at all, ask people why they did not
vote for it. “Were others just much better, or was there something about
the option’s value to buyers, or its economic benefits, that troubled you
or turned you off?” As people recount their reasoning—the pluses, the
minuses, and their doubts—take careful notes.
Taking the time to drill down into the attendees’ responses is
invaluable, not just in deciding which option to choose, but also because
it can take a blue ocean offering up a level. Other times, you may learn
that it was the tagline more than the actual strategic profile that captured
people’s imagination. That can tell you a great deal about what the team
got right and what might need to be modified, so that the blue ocean
option walks the talk.
When external guests are present, let them know that the
organization’s leadership will be calibrating all their feedback, as they


---PAGE BREAK---

decide which strategic move to pursue, and how it should be refined.
Decide which blue ocean option to pursue
Now it’s time for the executive team to make the critical decision on
which option (or options) to move forward with. Every executive team
tends to have its own method of collective calibration and decision
making. However, we’ve found that the decision-making process tends
to work best when each member of the executive team starts by sharing
their thoughts on each option, and then the whole team debates one
another’s assessments, noting areas where further clarification or
refinement is necessary. Here are some key questions the executive team
should explore:
Given the feedback we’ve heard, should any of the factors on a to-be
strategy canvas be modified or revised?
Did the presentations or subsequent discussions reveal any missing
essential component, which, if it were included, would multiply
the offering’s appeal to buyers?
Does the offering fail to eliminate and reduce factors sufficiently to
drive lower costs and break the value-cost trade-off?
Is there a lower-cost way to deliver any of the factors proposed to be
raised or created that could strengthen the offering’s economic
benefits?
What capability gaps would need to be closed to execute this
option? And what ideas are there for how the organization could
close them effectively at low cost?
The executive team should make a short list of the strongest blue
ocean options and select the one they think holds the highest market
potential. As they do so, they should be sure they’re carefully
considering the voting and comments of all the fair’s attendees. In the
process, executives often see opportunities to merge two complementary
and overlapping offerings into a single coherent whole.
Once 
they’ve 
reached 
their 
decision, 
the 
executive 
team
communicates it to the blue ocean initiative team and the other
organizational members attending the fair, along with their guidance on
which aspects of the option need to be refined, based on their own


---PAGE BREAK---

deliberations and the comments made at the fair. We cannot
overemphasize how important it is for them to provide sound and
concrete reasoning to the team to support their decision.
Because the decision is usually very close to the voting, we have
rarely witnessed people being puzzled by an executive team’s selection.
The team may initially be surprised if the executive team suggests that
two offerings be merged into one. But once their reasoning has been
explained, and they’ve been encouraged to ask questions, the team
members soon come to understand the strategic logic the top executives
are using. Once in a while, the most popular strategy at the fair does not
make the cut. When this happens, it’s usually because it appeals to what
we call the “emotional” vote: An offering appears better than it really is
only because it’s so different. On deeper reflection, however, it becomes
apparent that the difference is grounded less in a leap in value for buyers
than in simply being original. Technology-driven companies often fall
into this trap.
Inside a Global Consumer-Goods Giant’s Blue Ocean Fair
What is a blue ocean fair really like? Let’s observe what happened when
Kimberly-Clark Brazil (KCB) set out to make a blue ocean shift in South
America’s largest market for bathroom tissue. When it comes to a highly
commoditized, hypercompetitive industry, few industries are redder than
the US$1.5 billion–plus Brazilian toilet tissue market, which numbers
more than 50 competitors and 200 brands. But what can you possibly do
with a product as simple and basic as toilet paper? KCB was about to
find out.
The entire Brazil executive team, the Latin American continental
leadership team for the bathroom tissue category, and the senior and mid-
level leaders from every KCB product line were gathering in the large,
modern, air-conditioned ballroom of a São Paulo hotel for the blue ocean
fair. The objective was not only to select the strongest blue ocean move
with the best profitable growth potential, but also to mobilize the willing
cooperation and commitment of leaders at every level of the organization
to ensure its effective implementation. Since bathroom tissue was the
focus, there was no shortage of buyer experience in the room: Everyone
was a customer. Counting the blue ocean initiative team, almost 100
people were present. Then two external board members also arrived,


---PAGE BREAK---

increasing the profile of the occasion and the nervousness of the blue
ocean initiative team.
Curiosity and expectations were both high. The initiative team sat at
the front of the ballroom. The CEO of KCB, João Damato, who was also
the category leader for bathroom tissue for the whole of Latin America,
welcomed everyone to the meeting. He briefly set the scene by
describing how highly commoditized the market was, and how difficult
it was to stand out and achieve an acceptable margin, especially given
the power retail trade could exert over commoditized products—brands
notwithstanding. He then reminded everyone about the purpose of the
initiative: to propel a leap forward in KCB’s profitable growth and
margin.
The blue ocean initiative leader then outlined the industry’s current
red ocean reality in more detail, provided an overview of the blue ocean
shift process, and recounted the chronology of the initiative, which had
kicked off only three months earlier. Murmuring broke out when the
industry’s current strategy canvas appeared across a large screen and the
pain points on the buyer utility map were revealed. A large percentage of
first-tier noncustomers expressed their frustration, which was aptly
summed up in one characteristic comment, “You need a math degree just
to select your toilet paper, the choice is so overwhelming. Yet nothing
stands out.”
The initiative team then gave a spirited and sometimes highly
amusing pitch for the blue ocean options they had developed. Each of the
six strategic options, which ranged from Just a Hug to Funny Paper,
elicited its share of “oohs,” “aahs,” and other sounds of appreciation. The
applause increased after each presentation. Throughout, all the attendees
made notes on preprepared sheets designed to gather their feedback on
what they loved and hated about each offering as well as their ideas on
how to improve each strategic alternative.
When all six options had been presented, the team leader pointed to
the six stations set up around the perimeter of the ballroom, each
displaying an offering’s to-be strategy canvas, its ERRC grid, a summary
of the benefits to buyers, and an overview of the option’s economic
benefits to KCB. The initiative team had taken it upon themselves to
create rough prototypes of each offering, too. They handed stickers to
each of the attendees, and told them they could give a maximum of two
votes to their most highly rated strategic option. With that, people got up,


---PAGE BREAK---

walked around, looked, asked questions, made recommendations, wrote
Post-its with their thoughts and stuck them onto the flip charts or simply
gave their feedback to the team at the station, voted, had coffee, came
back, and sometimes changed their votes or had another exchange with a
team member. In the space of one to two hours, all 100 attendees gave
feedback and had in-depth conversations with the team.
As the heat map of the most highly rated strategic options emerged
from the myriad of small colored stickers, team members breathlessly
compared notes:
“Hey, Claudio… Congrats, my friend! It looks like you got the most
votes.”
“Ha—thanks! Listen… I was just presenting the idea! It really
belongs to all of us, especially Mario. I got so many questions about
changes to the production line, I was delighted I could refer them to
Sergio, who gave answers that seemed to ease their doubts.”
“There’s no technical problem we can’t solve: What we’ve always
struggled with isn’t so much the engineering side as it is creating product
offerings that unlock innovative value.”
“I’ve never talked to so many leaders or received so much good
advice in the 12 years I’ve been here. It was just amazing—my best day
at work, I can honestly say!”
When all the voting was done, the flip charts were moved to a
separate room where the board members, and the executive and category
teams could deliberate. They sat around a large conference table with the
charts in front, while the initiative team sat behind them so they could
listen attentively to the deliberations, clarify points if needed, and take
notes on issues to be resolved. Everyone else went out to make calls,
check their email, and have more coffee.
Addressing the blue ocean initiative team, the CEO opened the
debate. “This is amazing. For such an apparently simple product, where
all the potential means to stand apart appear to have already been tried,
you came up with an ocean of ideas on how to make it stand apart.”
Then, addressing his fellow decision makers, he continued, “We can see
that the top two ideas received considerably more votes than the other
four. What I would like to hear, in your own words, are not only your
major takeaways but, importantly, your concerns about these two ideas
and, especially, what wisdom you can offer to ensure that we create a
leap in value for buyers, increase the rate of profit and growth, and lower


---PAGE BREAK---

our business risk. Also, if you see aspects of the other blue ocean options
that would increase the value and margins of these choices, please say
what they are.”
The discussions quickly zoomed in on Just One Hug, which had the
largest share of votes. Just One Hug took a roll of toilet paper and
significantly reduced its size—but not the amount of paper it contained
—through compression. People had only to give it a hug, and—voilà—
the compressed roll would pop back to a round toilet paper roll for easy
use. Just One Hug’s packaging also had a strong but simple plastic strap
to make carrying it even easier.
“With many Brazilians going to supermarkets via public transport or
on foot, and many traveling long distances to get to a hypermarket,
carrying toilet paper is a nightmare, which has somehow escaped the
entire industry’s radar,” observed one executive.
“What Brazilian hasn’t struggled,” another chimed in, “with a kid in
one hand, a bag of groceries in the other, and a large pack of toilet paper
tucked precariously under his or her arm? Come on. We’ve all been
there. Many Brazilians struggle with this every week. It’s a fact of life
for the bulk of the market that’s lower income, which we’ve never been
able to tap into.”
“It’s more than that,” added a category team leader. “I can tell you
from my own experience, people struggle to store toilet paper once they
get it home. We all buy these bigger packages so we don’t have to run
out to buy more every few days. But there just isn’t room for it in our
small apartments’ limited cupboard space. Just One Hug’s compressed
size addresses that problem, too. Yet the whole industry is focused on
embossing toilet paper, or adding scents, or providing low-quality, one-
ply tissue. No player addresses these very real challenges. No wonder the
vast majority of Brazilians buy toilet paper almost exclusively on price.
The industry hasn’t given people on tight budgets a compelling reason to
do otherwise.”
“What’s more,” another executive added enthusiastically, “Not only is
Just One Hug’s size markedly smaller but, with its distinctive packaging
and carrying strap, everyone can immediately see just how different it is,
allowing it to stand out easily in the sea of white paper, and saving
people time and anxiety in making their selection.”
“Last week, in one of the trade magazines, I saw that a secondhand
vacuum-packing machine was available in Italy for a really low price,”


---PAGE BREAK---

another manager added. “If we make a decision quickly, I’m sure we
could still get it. That would bring our costs down even further,
increasing our profit margins and lowering business risk.”
“Great idea,” said the legal counsel. “By the way, I’m going to check
the patent situation immediately when I get back to the office. I know the
team looked at this, but we want to make sure no one can easily imitate
our idea. It’s so simple—but it’s pure genius.… I am very excited!”
The product development executive drew the discussion back to the
other blue ocean options. “In terms of good ideas, why wouldn’t we
combine the environmentally friendly component of Ecko (the option
with the third-largest number of votes) with Just One Hug? With Just
One Hug’s packaging reduction and leap in shipping transportation
efficiency, it already has a strong inherent environmental component.
The compelling value of Just One Hug plus eco fiber should give us
much more leverage with large retailers, who are increasingly challenged
on sustainability. Its smaller size will also drop our needed shelf space
and costs.”
“You just stole my point,” laughed the supply chain director.
One by one, the decision makers voiced their concerns, insights, and
pledges of support. The team members all made notes about what was
said. After the fair, if their proposed offering was chosen, the team would
take three weeks to both test the offering on the streets of Brazil, using
the simple prototype they had created for the fair and further flesh out
the business case they had already been developing for the new offering.
After a fruitful 90 minutes of deliberation, the decision makers
stretched their legs, while the other attendees (who had used the
opportunity to organize multiple business meetings in and around the
hotel) reassembled in anticipation of the announcement. The CEO
outlined the decision taken—to pursue Just One Hug with eco fiber;
explained why it was taken; and summarized the guidance given to the
initiative team. For the next 20 minutes, many of those present offered
their personal support, expressed whatever concerns they had along with
their ideas for addressing them, and offered additional suggestions for
increasing the offering’s profit and growth potential.
As the blue ocean team members rolled up their flip chart sheets and
tucked their prototypes under their arms, the CEO huddled with them as
if they were a soccer club. He repeated his congratulations and deepest
gratitude for the outstanding job they’d done—all in a matter of less than


---PAGE BREAK---

three months—as well as for the insights into the existing market they’d
so clearly revealed and the compelling and “never a boring second” way
in which the new ideas had been presented.
Conducting Rapid Market Tests
Following the fair, the KCB blue ocean initiative team conducted 210
face-to-face interviews in which people were chosen at random on one of
São Paulo’s main streets, taken to a booth, shown the Just One Hug
prototype, and asked for their feedback. While the team had already
conducted ample market fieldwork in the process of developing their
blue ocean options, this rapid market test with an actual prototype
allowed them to confirm the strength of the offering, learn about any
needed adjustments, and assess the offering’s mass market potential,
which was considerable: 80 percent of the interviewees said they would
love to buy it. KCB followed this market test with a small-scale launch
of the actual offering in Brazil’s Northeast. This test launch was to not
only cross-check and validate the market test’s positive reaction in São
Paulo but also further evaluate the offering’s mass market potential. With
these rapid market tests, the team refined the move and sharpened the
heart of the pitch to buyers and to retailers as to why Just One Hug
opened up a new value-cost frontier in the red ocean of toilet paper.
In 2009, several months after the new packaging machine arrived
from Italy, KCB used Neve, one of its key brands, to stage a full-scale
launch of Neve Naturali Compacto, the trade name given to Just One
Hug. The pack of compressed rolls contained the same amount of toilet
paper per roll as standard ones, but its smaller size made it easier to carry
and store. It was a breeze to identify at the point of sale. And it sold at a
competitive price that drew demand across every segment of the market,
including buyers who had previously bought only from the “value” range
of the market. And since it was made with sustainable and recyclable
fibers, it was environmentally friendly to boot.
As for KCB’s costs, the compressed size led to a 15 percent drop in
transportation costs—especially significant given Brazil’s large size, a 19
percent reduction in the amount of packaging material used, and a drop
in returns due to damage, all contributing to gross margins greater than
20 percent—unheard of in the industry.
Apart from creating unbelievable value for buyers and higher margins


---PAGE BREAK---

for KCB, the product proved to be a win for retailers (in this case
Walmart), which saw a unique opportunity in being able to list Neve
Naturali Compacto as an environmentally friendly product, due to its far
lower carbon footprint as well as its reduced packaging and use of eco-
friendly fibers. Several months after the new product was introduced,
KCB was named the “Best Sustainability Supplier for Walmart,” a
deeply significant honor and achievement. (It later became the most
sustainable product in the whole of Kimberly-Clark globally.) Last but
not least, Neve Naturali Compacto’s leap in both value to buyers and
environmental sustainability increased KCB’s negotiation power with
retailers.
The new value-cost frontier the offering unlocked inspired KCB to
roll out the “Compacto” format across every one of its major brands like
Scott, providing a leap in value for its entire line of toilet paper. First
launched in 2009, the blue ocean Compacto format, born from the fair,
remains the industry standard in Brazil and a star performer for KCB,
despite the eventual entry of followers who imitated it.
Requiring your initiative team to rapidly market-test the prototype of
the selected blue ocean offering with potential buyers you want to turn
into customers—the way that KCB did—is crucial. This will not only
allow you to understand the optimal way to position the offering to
buyers and supply chain partners (or to the public or donors, where
relevant), but also to learn about any additional adjustments you might
need to make. Rapid is the operative word here. Which is to say, test
your blue ocean offering in a short, specific amount of time as soon as
possible after the fair is over. Why? The fair will have created
momentum, which you don’t want to kill by waiting too long to start
testing or by taking too long to conduct the test. The more you delay, the
more the team and your organization’s technicians will also be tempted
to build complicated, costly prototypes, which will add little to testing
the offering’s core idea and often overcomplicate it as well.
Completing the Move’s Final Act for Launch
One of the most inspiring realizations that occurs at a blue ocean fair
and, in our opinion, one of the most valuable is the profound shift in
people’s perceptions of their own and others’ creativity and worth.
Almost invariably, senior executives are taken aback by how creative the


---PAGE BREAK---

ideas put forward by their people are. It’s common to hear them saying,
under their breath to themselves, if not out loud to others, “I never knew
our people were that good.” And they mean it. Similarly, the people on
the team are almost always surprised by their own creative competence
—feelings that tend to get expressed in remarks such as “I didn’t believe
I could think beyond the industry’s boundaries,” or “I never knew I was
that creative,” or simply, “I can do it!” And with those feelings come
increased confidence, and renewed mutual respect and appreciation. It is
a watershed moment that has a profound effect on the organization’s
culture. When the team members and other attendees go back to their
departments and share what they heard, saw, and learned, the
authenticity and power of their words are palpable to others. This goes a
long way toward building everyone’s confidence in the integrity of the
process and the blue ocean shift underway, further preparing the ground
for effective execution.
Your blue ocean strategic move is almost ready to launch. The
executive team has decided which option to pursue. The initiative team
has conducted rapid market tests to confirm the market potential of the
chosen offering and further tighten and refine it. Now the team is primed
to formalize the big-picture business model of the move in a way that
will maximize return and minimize risk for launch. Let’s see how this
final step unfolds to ensure that the business model for the new offering
will not only offer a leap in value for buyers, but will also have
compelling economic benefits for your organization.


---PAGE BREAK---

CHAPTER 13
Finalizing and Launching Your Blue Ocean
Move
WITH YOUR BLUE OCEAN move chosen, and its market potential
confirmed, it’s time to formalize your business model. The aim here is
laying out the big picture: the economic logic that shows how the value
and cost sides of your move interact and come together to deliver a leap
in value for buyers in a way that generates strong, profitable growth for
you. Such a business model allows you to appreciate and see how the
individual operational tasks need to fit together to produce the bottom
line. It will serve as an excellent road map while the move is actualized
at the operational level. Once your big-picture business model is in hand,
your blue ocean move is finalized and ready for launch.
To this end, the initiative team, with the mandate of senior
management, now expands, pulling in and engaging people with the
requisite operational expertise from across the organization, and shifting
from part time to full time to ensure that team members have the
capacity they need. The guide for their work is the to-be strategy canvas,
which provides a clear picture of not only what to eliminate, reduce,
raise, and create, but also the price the organization needs to hit to open
the new value-cost frontier. It aligns people around what they will need
to deliver on and be held accountable for, and empowers them to start
thinking creatively about how that can be done with lower costs.
Fair process is just as applicable here as it has been thus far: By
providing the wider organization with updates on the key takeaways
gleaned from each step of the process, you’ve gone a long way toward
keeping everyone up to speed, and priming the pump for cooperation and
commitment. Now you need to continue to exercise fair process among


---PAGE BREAK---

all the people you’ll have to engage, whether they are part of the
expanded team or not.
Formalizing Your Big-Picture Business Model
By applying the four actions framework in creating your blue ocean
move, the initiative team has already done a large part of the legwork
needed to formalize your big-picture business model. On the one hand,
they have identified the factors the industry currently competes on and
invests in that can be eliminated or reduced, because they add little if any
value to buyers and may even decrease it. While these decisions were
based on buyer value, not on cost, in our experience most of what’s
identified for elimination or reduction typically lowers—often
significantly—an organization’s cost structure and has clear operational
implications. At the same time, they’ve also identified the factors the
industry currently under-delivers or fails to offer that should be raised or
created, because they provide a decisive leap in value from the buyers’
point of view. These factors, too, almost always have cost implications as
well as direct operational implications. Only, here, the factors to be
raised or created typically augment the organization’s cost structure.
As an example, let’s return to citizenM’s affordable luxury hotels
discussed in chapter 11. While its hotels enjoy 90 percent occupancy
rates, and earn guest rankings on par with those of five-star hotels,
citizenM’s blue ocean offering strips out a host of costly factors—such
as the front desk, a traditional lobby, bellhops, the doorman, the
concierge, room service, and even full-service restaurants—which it
didn’t find to be decisive for the mass of frequent travelers. Every one of
these factors citizenM eliminated directly cuts the number of hotel staff
required (its hotels operate with less than half the staff of comparable,
200–400-room hotels) and, with it, overall staffing costs. By eliminating
a traditional lobby and restaurant, and reducing room size by 50 percent,
the costly factor of real estate is also significantly reduced. The impact
goes well beyond the space that customers can see, because it means
citizenM can also eliminate the space for a professional kitchen as well
as all the associated costs that come with building out and maintaining a
kitchen. Moreover, by reducing the guest-room variety to one standard
format, citizenM is able to not only streamline building the rooms, which
results in efficiency gains, but also, as we’ll see below, make use of


---PAGE BREAK---

other, innovative, high-value and low-cost construction approaches.
At the same time, the citizenM team also identified three factors to
raise: the sleeping environment of its rooms (with extra-large beds, fine
linens, plush towels, quiet—or sound insulation—and strong showers); a
prime city location; and connectivity for guests (with free high-speed
WiFi and movies on demand as well as Skype phone rates, which are
much desired by guests but actually cheap to deliver). And it identified
three factors to create: simple self check-in kiosks; a unique and
compelling communal living space, with a 24/7 bar and pantry; and
multitasking ambassadors. Lastly, the team committed to deliver this
experience at a price accessible to three-star customers. The result: an
offering with the potential to attract the mass of “mobile citizens,”
regardless of whether they currently frequented three-star or luxury
hotels.
The next step in formalizing your big-picture business model is to
determine the target profit margin you want to earn to ensure a healthy
win for your organization. What works best, we’ve found, is to start with
a more aggressive profit margin than you think would be reasonable,
given existing industry practices. Then your target costs—what your
costs will ultimately need to be—can be derived by deducting this target
margin from the strategic price the team has identified.
The more aggressive the target profit margin you set, the more
aggressive your target costing will be. Challenging people to meet
aggressive profit and cost targets stretches them to think beyond their
usual practices and to search for innovations across their entire
operation. Just as industries often compete on factors that buyers no
longer value, standard industry operating practices often leave
tremendous room for fresh thinking and innovations that can lower costs.
So even though people may initially push back on aggressive profit and
cost targets, we encourage you to hold firm. With some encouragement,
they will strive to perform and deliver on their assignments in
innovative, high-value, and low-cost ways, often with surprising results.
Unlike the more familiar practice of cost-plus pricing, in which prices
are set by adding a desired profit margin to the organization’s costs,
target costing is based on price-minus costing. In our experience,
organizations that fail to apply target costing to their blue ocean moves
typically build out their business models only to find that their costs are
too high to earn a profit at the strategic price set. So, they either raise the


---PAGE BREAK---

price of the offering or cut back on the value they intend to deliver—in
both cases compromising the move and sending the organization drifting
back into the red ocean. The lesson we’ve learned: Your to-be strategy
canvas has to be nonnegotiable. What is negotiable is how your business
model delivers it.
How to Hit a Challenging Cost Target
Beyond what organizations have eliminated and reduced in their blue
ocean move to lower costs, there are several other ways organizations
can pursue to hit their challenging target cost without compromising on
their blue ocean offering to buyers. While there is no magic formula,
there are several questions teams should explore, as they formalize their
business model, to ensure the organization achieves the low costs
required to actualize their blue ocean move: “Who can we partner with?”
“How can we streamline and innovate operations?” And “How can we
multiply people’s positive energy and contributions?” Let’s probe each
of these in turn.
Who can we partner with? In bringing a new idea to market, many
organizations mistakenly try to carry out every aspect of the operation
themselves. Sometimes this is because they see the product or service as
a platform for developing new capabilities. More often, however, it’s
simply because that’s the way things have always been done, and no one
thinks to question this approach. While doing everything yourself may
give you more control, it usually takes more time and can be a lot more
costly than partnering with an organization that’s already more proficient
and efficient in an area of your business model where you’re a novice.
By leveraging other companies’ expertise and economies of scale,
partnering (including making small acquisitions when doing so is faster
and cheaper than other options) can pare costs and time, and close
capability gaps quickly.
The citizenM team, for example, identified two important areas—
food and housekeeping—where it could significantly lower its cost
structure by outsourcing them in creative ways and enhance buyer value
by benefiting from the proven expertise of others. While citizenM
decided to eliminate restaurants and room service, it still aimed to
provide healthy, fresh light bites in its communal living space. But food
is a tough business: You need fresh ingredients, which requires volume;


---PAGE BREAK---

there is spoilage and waste; you need a kitchen, a good chef, and more.
And yet, as Michael Levie observed, “Despite all that effort and cost,
few hotels make food worthy of praise.”
CitizenM got around this dilemma by partnering with local boutique
catering companies within blocks of each of its hotels. In this way,
citizenM leverages the caterers’ proven expertise and purchasing power
to ensure that only the best fresh food will be delivered and restocked in
its pantries throughout the day—think fresh sushi, salads, and tasty
healthy sandwiches—resulting in lower costs and a higher-quality
offering. CitizenM also partners with an outside company for
housekeeping and linens. But it doesn’t stop there: Its partners also order
all the guest amenities and cleaning supplies and store them on the
partners’ premises. Combined with the fact that citizenM’s blue ocean
move eliminates restaurants and room service, this affords citizenM the
unique advantage of eliminating purchasing, receiving, and storerooms
in its hotels, which simultaneously provides more space for additional
guest rooms and significantly lowers operational costs.
The US-based retail chain Wawa, which serves over 600 million
customers a year in more than 700 stores in six states, and has annual
sales approaching US$10 billion, has been similarly savvy about
partnering. Customers are so gaga about Wawa that some (like Jeremy
Plauche) have even tattooed its logo on their arms. While Wawa’s
management team considered it a blue ocean company, in 2009 Howard
Stoeckel, then its CEO, saw it drifting into the red ocean. The economy
was tough after the global financial collapse, and competitors were
catching up to Wawa. Determined to steer clear of the impending red
ocean, Howard and his top team applied the blue ocean approach to open
a new value-cost frontier. Up until then, Wawa’s blue ocean had been
created by the way it had perfected the intersection of its three businesses
—convenience store, fuel retailer, and food service—under one roof,
while delivering outstanding customer service. The perfection was
apparent in the numbers: While not a convenience store per se, Wawa’s
in-store sales are more than three times those of the average 7-Eleven
convenience store.
As Howard and the team worked with the blue ocean tools, and
created what became known as their “blue ocean strategic plan,” they
identified food service as the weakest link in the company’s overall
offering and the one with the greatest profitable growth potential. As


---PAGE BREAK---

Howard reflected, “If you sell gas, people have traditionally assumed
you can’t be a high-quality food restaurant.” As the team set out to make
a blue ocean shift, it set its sights on completely changing this
perception. It aimed to create a leap in value in the quality, freshness, and
healthfulness of the food Wawa sold at the best possible price that would
recast Wawa from a convenience store and gas station that also sells
food, to a leading quick-service restaurant that also sells gas and
convenience items. The result was a total rethinking of what food to
offer, how fresh and healthy it had to be, how to display it for it to be
inviting and appetizing, and how to make the selection process easy and
food fulfillment fast—all at the best possible price for buyers. Now
Wawa offers freshly baked breads; fresh salads like kale and quinoa;
healthy wraps and soups; made-to-order hoagies with fresher and more
innovative ingredients; hot lunch, dinner, and breakfast sandwiches; and
what is described by some as coffee nirvana. With this rethinking, food
sales skyrocketed, as did the quality of the overall Wawa experience. The
power of its blue ocean shift is reflected in the numbers: Today, Wawa’s
per-store food sales are ahead of McDonald’s per-store sales. What’s
amazing, however, is the way the team built a business model for the
new food and beverage offering, which simultaneously enabled Wawa to
earn an aggressive profit margin and hit its aggressive cost target.
Wawa eliminates a number of things that other quick-service
restaurants offer, such as in-store tables and drive-throughs. But what’s
key to its low costs and efficiency are the dramatic differences in its
behind-the-scenes operations. It not only partners with grocery logistics
leader McLane Company but also set up a daily fresh channel that allows
Wawa to outsource its entire supply chain in food. It partners with
bakeries for all its freshly baked offerings and with Taylor Farms and the
Safeway Group for all the preprepared fresh food. To get fresh food
delivered to every store, every day, Wawa partners with Penske
Corporation, which manages a cross-dock distribution facility, where the
perishable food made by Wawa’s food partners is delivered daily. And
Wawa operates none of these activities: Its involvement is limited to a
small group of employees who work with its partners on
communications and quality control to ensure reliable, high-quality
deliveries.
As Howard observed, “By applying the blue ocean approach, we
were able to identify what it would take to create a leap in the quality,


---PAGE BREAK---

value, convenience, and presentation of food for customers that would
simultaneously raise the convenience and quality experience for Wawa
overall. But we had no food preparation facilities and expertise in the
league we were aiming to deliver on—which was world-class—to be
able to make that happen. Rather than compromise our blue ocean
offering, or make a costly attempt at developing this expertise in-house,
we have partnered with the best to realize our vision fast and at low
cost.” According to Chris Gheysens, Wawa’s current CEO, “Fresh food
and beverage now account for more than 40 percent of Wawa’s
merchandise sales. We’ve grown from what had been a traditional
convenience store to a restaurant to go with fuel. It’s hard even to
categorize us.”
How can we streamline and innovate operations? Contained
within this question are multiple possibilities for lowering costs without
sacrificing buyer value. Subsequent questions teams can ask to uncover
these possibilities include: “Can we replace raw materials with
unconventional, less expensive ones?” “Can we eliminate high-cost, low-
value-added activities and facilities or replace them with low-cost,
effective ones?” “Can we shift the location of our offering to lower-cost
real estate?” “Can we truncate the number of parts or steps in the
production process?” “Can we factory-manufacture things that industry
competitors construct manually?” “Are there off-the-shelf technologies
we can use or activities we can digitize to reduce our costs?” The
National Youth Orchestra of Iraq asked this question, for example, and
answered it brilliantly by holding auditions via YouTube and using
Skype for project management. These creative innovations not only
eliminated the cost and logistical nightmare of attempting to do either
task in person in Iraq, but also allowed NYOI to build a social media
presence in the process.
Likewise, by delving into questions such as those listed above, the
citizenM team discovered an innovative way to lower its building costs
dramatically while simultaneously raising the quality of its rooms. In the
hotel industry, construction is one of the largest cost factors. Because
citizenM’s blue ocean move envisioned only one type of guest room, the
team was prompted to reflect on how other industries made standardized
products. After all, that’s what its guest rooms would be—standardized.
Framed this way, the obvious answer jumped out at them: Standardized
products are rarely made by hand; they’re factory-manufactured. This led


---PAGE BREAK---

the team to question whether they could also manufacture citizenM’s
rooms, instead of using traditional construction methods. The answer
was a resounding yes. Modular manufacturing would allow the rooms to
be built at far lower cost and with greater speed, higher quality assurance
and consistency, and, very importantly, optimized sound insulation and
wiring using value engineering. So, although citizenM builds the lower
floors of its hotels using traditional construction methods, its guestrooms
are factory-manufactured. And because its blue ocean move reduces the
size of the guestrooms significantly, they can arrive preassembled, so
they can be easily stacked and snapped together. This innovation helped
citizenM cut its room-construction costs by as much as 35 percent,
compared to the average four-star hotel, and its overall construction time
by around 35–50 percent, compared to other three-star and luxury hotels.
CitizenM also realized it could further lower costs by eliminating call
centers and phone reservations and replacing them with a simple, fast,
online reservation system. For one thing, the growing mass of mobile
citizens is tech-savvy and accustomed to doing things online. For
another, most hotels’ call centers and phone reservations are pretty
annoying—a long message detailing which button to press for what, then
pushing the right reservation button, then waiting for the next available
receptionist while ads or uninspiring music play endlessly. Who likes
that?
How can we multiply people’s positive energy and contributions?
The people who are the face of your brand, and ultimately determine a
large part of your blue ocean offering’s integrity, are the people who
interact directly with your customers if you’re a business, your donors if
you’re a nonprofit, or your citizens if you are a government entity. These
customer-facing people need to walk the talk every day to create that
tingly experience that gives their customers pause, makes them smile,
and motivates them to come back again and again. Yet these very people
are often viewed and treated as if they were the lowest level on the
hierarchical totem pole. If you’re serious about creating an offering with
integrity and lowering your business model’s costs, however, they
shouldn’t be. When the energies of the people on your front lines are
engaged and multiplied, their productivity goes up, turnover rates drop,
and their commitment to go the extra distance rises. This can be achieved
by following a process that embraces humanness in the way you treat
them. As discussed in chapter 4, such a humanistic process makes your


---PAGE BREAK---

front-line people feel recognized and appreciated for who they are as
people, not because they are brilliant and perfect, but because they have
something to contribute and want to make a difference. This humanistic
approach is a powerful lever to explore as you finalize your blue ocean
move. Let’s see how it is put into action with customer-facing
employees.
CitizenM, Wawa, and NYOI, for example, all practiced this approach
in formalizing their business models. One common denominator, which
costs nothing, is the titles they give their people, which convey a sense of
dignity. At citizenM you’re not a front-desk clerk, or a bellhop, or a
doorman, you’re an “ambassador.” At Wawa, you’re not a convenience
store cashier, or a deli worker, or a stock boy or stock girl. Every single
one of its nearly 22,000 storefront employees is an “associate.” As for
the National Youth Orchestra of Iraq, its players were not only musicians
but also “cultural diplomats” and “peace makers.” All of these titles
convey a larger sense of responsibility, grace, and purpose than merely
getting a job done. Think of the impact any one of them could have on a
person’s sense of mission and pride.
The respectful message these titles send is reinforced by the ways the
leadership sets the business model up to elevate customer-facing people
in the corporate hierarchy. At citizenM, for example, the “reverse
pyramid” is a central part of the culture, with hotel staff at the top of the
organizational pyramid and top management at the bottom. At Wawa,
every executive is expected to spend a minimum of one full day every
month typically visiting 12 to 15 stores to talk with associates and store
managers. At Christmas, it’s a long-standing tradition for executives to
spend the day visiting stores (with the majority dressed in Santa hats!),
thanking associates for outstandingly serving customers 365 days a year.
On every visit, management is there to listen, thank, learn about
associates’ concerns, and ask associates and store managers to share
ideas for improving operations and stories of customers’ delight. At
NYOI, Paul MacAlindin assembled all the orchestra members and, using
a facilitator from the Iraqi Peace Foundation who spoke both Kurdish
and Arabic, invited them to define what they wanted their orchestra to
stand for. The values, chosen by the players, were love, commitment, and
respect. We can imagine no greater way for Paul to have demonstrated
that this orchestra was about them, and that they had a mission to be a
light of hope for their country as well as musicians.


---PAGE BREAK---

Empowering customer-facing service staff and trusting them to use
their best judgment when speaking with customers, instead of giving
them scripts as though they were robots, is another powerful way to
activate commitment and energy. Consider the way citizenM and Wawa
hire, train, and reward their staff to make this possible. Both companies,
for example, hire for attitude and values and train for competence.
Among the sentiments echoed at both are “Skills we can teach. Attitude
and values are tough to alter.” And indeed, skills are taught intensively.
But far more important is imbuing staff with a deep sense of what the
brand stands for, and what its blue ocean move’s promise to the customer
is, and what their role is in making that promise a reality.
As Howard Stoeckel notes, “I tell all our associates, ‘You may brew
coffee, work the register, or make a sandwich. But your real job at Wawa
is to help people have a better day.’ There’s no higher calling than that.”
Once hired, customer-facing staff get to interpret for themselves how to
deliver on that brand promise, which is how and why they make
authentic, inspired human connections with customers. Whether that
means saying, “Hi, honey,” or helping someone with the door, or asking
a person who looks sad, “What’s wrong?” they are on the case. This
personal accountability for delivering on the brand’s promise is
reinforced and comes full circle with the bonus policies these companies
follow. At citizenM, for example, ambassadors—not executives—can
earn (or lose) a 30 percent bonus each month, based 100 percent on
customer satisfaction. CitizenM budgets for the full 30 percent. Why?
Just look to its consistently high five-star guest satisfaction ratings,
delivered by its multitasking ambassadors.
As for Wawa, it has one of the 10 largest employee stock ownership
programs in the United States, based on the number of participants.
Close to 40 percent of its private stock is owned by employees, with the
greatest share of that held not by senior management, but by associates
and store managers. With stories of dozens of associates who retired as
millionaires to motivate them, associates take their stock ownership
seriously. Meaningful performance incentives; hiring based on attitude;
training customer-facing staff both for skills and, crucially, to internalize
the brand’s promise; and then empowering them to bring that brand to
life through exceptional service—taken together, these practices multiply
people’s energy, engender a culture of strong accountability, create
genuine and memorable experiences for customers, and lower the cost of


---PAGE BREAK---

staff turnover. It’s a win all around. These organizations don’t have
customers; they have fans they delight, day in and day out.
Drawing the Big Picture
A big-picture business model shows how the value and cost sides of an
organization’s blue ocean move come together to generate strong
profitable growth at the set strategic price. Figure 13-1 depicts a big-
picture business model, in this case for citizenM, and shows how its
components interact. While the left side of the figure presents how the
cost dynamics of the organization work to achieve its target cost, the
right side shows what buyers receive to ensure they will have a
compelling reason to purchase the new offering and an ability to pay for
it. Directional arrows show how the elements on both sides of the model
interact to create a profitable business model for the company and a win
for its customers.
In the case of citizenM, through the big-picture business model
presented in the figure, one can easily understand and see how it
achieves strong profitable growth. In fact, citizenM’s profitability
outperforms all the traditional players with its profitability per square
meter being about twice that of comparable upscale hotels. This big-
picture business model allows people to grasp the economic logic of the
blue ocean move in one graphic and to appreciate how their individual
operational tasks will fit together to produce the bottom line. It provides
a road map for the organization to lay out the operational details and
actions, including key milestones of what is to happen when and the
objectives and deliverables for each function.
Figure 13-1
How citizenM’s Business Model Works


---PAGE BREAK---

Together with the to-be strategy canvas, the big-picture business
model focuses everyone on the same endpoint and prevents people from
getting distracted or sidetracked as they translate the blue ocean move
into a tangible offering. In essence, they act as an important “decision
sieve,” aligning the efforts of people across the organization, as they
work out operational details.
Launching and Rolling Out Your Blue Ocean Move
The wisest rollout strategy is to start small, then go fast and wide. We
can’t emphasize this strongly enough. Apple, for example, didn’t build
300 stores at once. They first built 2 and concentrated their efforts on
ironing out the snags that inevitably get fully revealed only when a new
offering goes live, in color. Soon thereafter, they built 25, and the rest is
history. Today Apple has more than 490 stores around the world.
Similarly, citizenM built its first hotel in 2008 in its own backyard, at
Amsterdam’s Schiphol Airport. This allowed the citizenM team to
carefully observe and analyze how the hotel was running, and to make


---PAGE BREAK---

any adjustments they found necessary to get their business model right.
Were the self check-in kiosks optimally situated when guests entered the
hotel, or should they be moved a little to the left or the right? Were the
kiosk screens as intuitive as they needed to be to ensure one-to-three-
minute check-ins, or were guests repeatedly getting confused by
something? Was having one multitasking ambassador on hand when
guests checked in sufficient to provide the warm welcome and genuine
connection their blue ocean move demanded, or were more required?
How about the factory-manufactured rooms: Did the wiring “snap
together,” as the value engineering in the factory prototypes showed, or
did adjustments need to be made? Did the sound insulation specs
actually achieve the desired level of quiet? And so on.
In this way, citizenM could quickly work out any kinks, from the way
value was delivered to guests to its behind-the-scenes operations and
business model, all the while conserving capital because the changes
needed to be done in only one hotel. With the adjustments made, and its
success clear, citizenM then launched a second hotel in the center of
Amsterdam, building on the lessons learned, and providing another
opportunity to validate its business model. With the Amsterdam citizenM
hotel a tremendous success virtually from the get-go, citizenM
management had confidence in the leap in value its hotels delivered and
proof of the strong profit engine underlying it. With that, citizenM
started to turn up the dial and roll out hotels in major cities around the
world.
Wawa uses the same smart rollout strategy when it launches a new
offering. It starts with a limited set of stores, works out the bugs, puts the
offering into a few more stores to validate its strength and the
effectiveness of its business model, and then hits the gas and rolls out
fast across all its stores. This rollout strategy has distinct advantages on
several grounds. For one, it acknowledges that there will almost always
be points of refinement and correction needed in your blue ocean
offering and business model. This helps keep people emotionally on
track in the face of issues that arise when launching. It says, “Yes, we are
aiming for the gold; but we shouldn’t get discouraged or thrown when
there are initial glitches. Rather, we should expect this, keep an open
mind, refuse to get discouraged or look for someone to blame, see this as
a valuable learning opportunity, and set about working through the bugs
as fast as possible.” This approach also minimizes financial risk,


---PAGE BREAK---

credibility risk in the market, and what we think of as demotivation risk
with your people.
We’ve also seen what happens when organizations take the opposite
approach, rolling out their moves far and fast, and then discovering the
bugs. Only then, it’s far more costly to fix the bugs and make
adjustments, which leads to frustration and, typically, finger-pointing.
And because the rollout is far and wide, the press is often fast to pick up
on it. So when something goes other than planned, they are also fast to
publish an overly negative review, which discourages people in the
organization even further. Sadly, after that, many organizations throw up
their hands, call the initiative a failure, and retreat, leaving egos bruised,
money wasted, people demotivated, and an organization fearful of trying
anything new again, when the glitches they encountered were no bigger
or worse than those that accompany any new offering. It’s just that they
were magnified exponentially by the scale of the launch.
We suggest that you think about the launch and the rollout of your
blue ocean move as though you were producing the next smash hit on
Broadway. You’ve gone through the blue ocean shift process and come
out with a compelling, original story line that everyone loves. People tell
you they can’t wait to see the play. And the people who’ve worked with
you to create it can’t wait to perform it at last. Moreover, by working
through the big-picture business model, you’ve also worked out
everything that needs to happen behind the curtain, from the stage sets,
to the lights, costumes, and sound. But does that mean you don’t need to
practice and iron out the details, so the play will sing and the story line
come alive? Of course not. To put on a smashing play, you need to first
expect glitches, and then make minor modifications to get it right. When
people say, after the first preview performance, “It still needs work,” you
need to listen carefully, take notes, eschew blame, and strive to unlock
the magic of the script. You and your people need to fully understand
that adjustments are the natural course of action for building excellence.
Now, you are ready to make your blue ocean shift. You have the tools
and the process and the mindset to make this happen from start to finish.
The world needs more blue oceans. We invite you to create yours.


---PAGE BREAK---

EPILOGUE
A National Blue Ocean Shift in Action
WITH NATIONS AROUND THE world facing tight budgets and
growing demands from their citizens, blue ocean shifts are as applicable
for governments as they are for corporations, nonprofits, or start-ups. In
this epilogue, we’ll draw on the experience of Malaysia to illustrate a
national blue ocean shift in action, discuss the issues it is addressing,
how the process works, and the far-reaching results it has produced.
In the beginning of the new millennium, Malaysia was at a
crossroads, stuck in the so-called middle-income trap. During the 1970s,
Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan had all been at a similar
level of development, but that was no longer the case. In the intervening
years, the other three countries had all become high-income nations, but
Malaysia had not managed to make the jump. The country was facing
differentiation challenges from developed nations and regions like the
United States, Europe, and Japan, which offered higher quality, and low-
cost challenges from emerging countries like China, India, Vietnam, and
Indonesia.
Malaysia’s leaders wanted to move the country out of this red ocean
trap and thought that blue ocean strategy might provide the platform for
achieving greater public well-being and higher national income. To test
and validate their reasoning, the prime minister and the deputy prime
minister invited us to engage in several rounds of discussions with
different interest groups, ranging from informal small group sessions, to
a three-day retreat with national leaders from the public and private
sectors, to an official cabinet meeting chaired by the prime minister.
After two years of exploration and probing, the government decided to
apply the theory and tools of blue ocean strategy to create blue ocean


---PAGE BREAK---

shifts in the nation’s economic and social sectors.
To this end, the government set up a nonprofit research organization,
called the Malaysia Blue Ocean Strategy Institute (MBOSI), in 2008.
The following year, it launched the National Blue Ocean Strategy
Summit, an ongoing monthly gathering of Malaysia’s top national
leaders, its highest-ranking civil servants, including those from the
nation’s security forces, and selected leaders from the private sector.
When the agenda doesn’t require the direct attention of the prime
minister or the deputy prime minister, the chief secretary to the
government chairs the Summit gatherings. To ensure that the principles
and process of blue ocean shift are properly applied, MBOSI has
supported the Summit from the start.
By January of 2013, the National Blue Ocean Strategy Summit
(hereafter referred to as the NBOS Summit) had launched more than 50
economic and social blue ocean shift initiatives. For these initiatives,
differentiation was conceptualized in terms of delivering a leap in value,
or high impact, to the country’s economy and society, while low cost was
defined in terms of the savings generated by reductions in the cost of
providing government services. Since the public sector is notoriously
slow, the speed of execution was added as the third measure of a
successful shift, making the guiding principles of every NBOS initiative
high impact, low cost, and rapid execution.
Following the successful outcomes of these initiatives and the rapid
expansion of their scale and scope, the government established the
National Strategy Unit under the Ministry of Finance to further support,
accelerate, and monitor the initiatives in close cooperation with MBOSI.
By 2017, the number of blue ocean initiatives launched at the national
level totaled over 100.
How National Blue Ocean Initiatives Are Formulated and Executed
National transformation programs often fail because government
organizations are unable to overcome deeply entrenched silos. With
government ministries, departments, and agencies typically working in
isolation, resources and information are seldom shared, and turf wars and
lack of ownership are all too common. The NBOS Summit recognized
that blue oceans could not be created unless these silos were broken
down and the boundaries separating federal, state, and local government


---PAGE BREAK---

officials were dissolved. By encouraging people in these different silos
and levels to work together and share their knowledge and resources,
based on the tools and process driving a blue ocean shift, the Summit
aims to expand national leaders’ horizons on how to create and capture
new economic and social opportunities for the public.
To this end, the NBOS Summit created two platforms to support the
transformation—the Pre-Summit and the Offsite. The process begins
with the NBOS Summit, which sets the strategic priorities for pressing
national issues that need to be resolved, and specifies in what sequence
they will be addressed. The matters the members discuss range from
safety and security issues, like rising crime and global terrorism; to
economic issues, like urban and rural development, and the need for
more innovation and entrepreneurship, stronger infrastructure, and youth
employment; to social problems and issues of public well-being, such as
women’s empowerment, inefficient government services, health care,
low-cost housing, and environmental degradation, including wild animal
poaching. Each Summit lasts three hours and ends with the
announcement of new initiatives to pursue in addition to those already
underway. The two supporting platforms then develop these initiatives in
progressively greater detail.
With macro guidance from the NBOS Summit, the Pre-Summit,
chaired by the chief secretary to the government, sets the scope, team
members, and strategic direction for the new initiatives before handing
them over to Offsite teams whom they’ve fully briefed. The Pre-Summit
is composed of leaders chosen from government ministries, departments,
and agencies who also prepare the Summit agendas and monitor the
progress of ongoing initiatives to ensure their execution and resolve any
cross-ministerial 
or 
cross-agency 
conflicts 
that 
occur 
during
implementation.
Offsite platforms are made up of working-level teams tasked with
executing the blue ocean initiatives. The leaders of these teams are also
members of the Pre-Summit, thereby ensuring that their actions will be
aligned. The teams develop detailed execution road maps, which lay out
actionable tasks with clear time lines that each member can easily carry
out and be held responsible for. Team members share their firsthand
discoveries about on-the-ground realities in meetings, and they are
empowered to adjust their execution road map accordingly, if necessary.
The chief secretary to the government and his team play a critical role


---PAGE BREAK---

across all three NBOS platforms by coordinating and orchestrating their
efforts toward the country’s goals. From the beginning, this work of
national transformation has consistently benefited from the leadership of
competent, 
determined, 
and 
devoted 
chief 
secretaries 
whose
contributions to shifting the nation from red to blue oceans cannot be
overstated.
So that everyone could follow the strategy discussions and develop a
shared understanding of the road ahead and what would need to be done,
a common language across the three NBOS platforms was essential.
Visual tools like the strategy canvas, the four actions framework, and the
eliminate-reduce-raise-create (ERRC) grid served this purpose well. For
example, by looking at a strategy canvas with a compelling tagline and
the four actions drawn on a single page, as shown in figure E-1, people at
every level of government and in all the relevant ministries and agencies
could easily see and tell if a proposed move was indeed a shift and likely
to open up a new value-cost frontier. Figure E-1 depicts the strategy
canvas of the Community Rehabilitation Program (CRP), discussed in
chapter 1, along with its tagline and four actions as presented at the
Summit. As a quick reminder, the CRP was designed to rehabilitate petty
criminals, who constitute the largest proportion of the country’s
prisoners. Since the shift, the recidivism rate has plummeted, families are
thrilled, and society is safer. As for cost, a CRP center is 85 percent
cheaper to build than a conventional prison and 58 percent cheaper to
run. Based on current numbers, CRP is projected to deliver over US$1
billion in reduced costs and social benefits in its first decade. Perhaps its
greatest gift, however, is the way CRP enables former inmates to
transform their lives by giving them hope, dignity, and the skills to
become productive members of society.
Figure E-1
Strategy Canvas of Malaysia’s Community Rehabilitation Program
“Give a Second Chance Through Rehabilitation, Not Incarceration”


---PAGE BREAK---

In formulating and executing initiatives, all NBOS platforms follow
three overarching rules. One, to be considered, any idea or proposal must
involve two or more ministries and be designed to meet the three blue
ocean criteria of high impact, low cost, and rapid execution. Two, the
principles of fair process—engagement, explanation, and clear
expectations—need to be observed in all discussions and decision
making. Three, market-creating tools like the strategy canvas, the four
actions framework, and the ERRC grid are used, as applicable, and
reflected in all discussions and reports. The Malaysia Blue Ocean
Strategy Institute and the National Strategy Unit play important
supporting roles throughout this process. The Summit takes the lead in
driving the adoption of both the humanistic approach that earns people’s
voluntary cooperation and the blue ocean tools that build their creative
competence.
How the Journey Began
Malaysia’s blue ocean journey began humbly, in 2009, with a single
initiative. Street crime was soaring. Snatch-theft was rampant, with
thieves on motorcycles using rob-and-run tactics on pedestrians, mostly
women. People wanted more police presence in the streets. While the
police were doing their best to meet this demand, they lacked enough
trained officers to staff more patrols. The police proposed building more


---PAGE BREAK---

training facilities to accelerate the number of recruits they could bring
on. But with the world economy struggling to crawl out of the 2008
global financial crisis, and a rising government budget deficit, that option
was off the table. The police were trapped in a red ocean of rising crime.
Citizens were frustrated. And the competition—the criminal element—
was winning out. The government recognized that conventional practices
would not turn the situation around. A blue ocean shift was imperative.
As the Summit discussed the issue, it became clear that the Royal
Malaysia Police couldn’t solve the problem alone. The Ministry of Home
Affairs and the Department of Public Administration had to join in. The
Summit empowered a cross-ministry team and asked them to present
their strategic action plans at the next Summit. To this end, the team ran
an initial round of Pre-Summit and Offsite meetings to deepen their
understanding of the realities on the ground and create viable blue ocean
alternative solutions.
The team found that a great many trained police officers across the
nation were doing administrative tasks, such as writing up reports,
managing inventory, and filing documents. Officers traditionally
performed these tasks, so no one had ever questioned the practice. But
why, the team wondered, couldn’t these activities be equally well
performed by nonpolice personnel, freeing up the trained police officers
for the patrols the citizens were crying out for? At the same time, by
having members of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Department of
Public Administration on the team, the NBOS team found that the civil
service had excess administrative staff on the payroll who had light
workloads. A blue ocean opportunity existed to quickly move
underleveraged, competent administrators locked in the “cold spots” of
civil service departments to the “hot spots” at police stations. The team
reckoned that such a move would allow the government to make an
initial blue ocean shift, achieving high impact at low cost with rapid
execution.
By then, the team was ready to chart specific strategies to execute the
shift. But while the fair process practiced in all the platform meetings
had aligned all the top-level people at the relevant governmental bodies,
moving people across ministries and departments wasn’t simple. It
would stir up deep turf wars, involve issues related to relocation and
incentives, and require widespread changes in people’s mindsets and
behaviors. Moreover, the Attorney General’s Chamber would need to


---PAGE BREAK---

check whether moving personnel across the legal boundary between the
police and the civil service would violate any existing rules and
regulations. And if it did, the chamber needed to figure out how to
address the problem within the bounds of national law.
Having listened to all these findings and execution challenges, the
Summit added the Attorney General’s Chamber to the team, approved
the proposed approach, and asked the newly expanded team to map out
and present an action plan with concrete milestones. At this point, the
Pre-Summit and the NBOS Offsite platforms needed to be further
mobilized to complete the task. The expanded team was also expected to
show results within six months. A challenging time line like this would
be used in all the subsequent NBOS projects, unless otherwise agreed to,
as a way of creating a sense of urgency and inspiring innovative
approaches to speed execution. Clear expectations and a sound
explanation were provided up front to all NBOS members.
The team reported their progress to the Summit monthly for
feedback. In a period of six months, over 7,400 trained police officers
who had been doing desk work were released to do street patrols, while
4,000 civil servants were placed at the police stations to take over the
officers’ administrative duties. Efficiency gains identified in the course
of the shift process accounted for the reduction in personnel and further
lowered costs. Compared with a convential red ocean approach, where
new police officer candidates were recruited, trained, and sent out on
patrols, this cross-agency and cross-departmental move saved the
government hundreds of millions of US dollars and had a rapid impact
on street security. From 2009 to the end of 2010, reported street crimes
dropped by 35 percent, and they have continued to go down since then.
Even more rewarding were the changes in people’s attitudes and
behaviors. New conversations, such as the following, began to take
place: “I became a police officer the day I turned 22,” one officer said,
turning to the civil servant who’d taken over his administrative work. “I
spent 15 years on a beat and had finally gotten a nice job sitting in a
comfortable air-conditioned office [remember, the weather in Malaysia is
hot throughout the year]. But when you came, I had to go back out on
street patrols in the hot sun, and I wasn’t happy about it.” The civil
servant looked at the officer and replied, “Oh, that’s why you were so
cold and confrontational when I started. But you’re different now.
You’ve become cooperative and supportive. Why?” The officer smiled


---PAGE BREAK---

and answered, “I saw you excel at administrative tasks, which isn’t
surprising, since it’s your thing. And I felt good about your work. More
importantly, though, once I got back in a police car, I realized I’d missed
the patrols and the fun of reconnecting with the people I protect and
serve, and monitoring the comings and goings in neighborhoods. NBOS
brought us together and made us work on things we like and are good
at.” This exchange is not unique. While room for improvement still
exists, and breaking down deeply divided silos will always take time and
patience, it is not difficult to find positive exchanges like this across the
country, as police officers and civil servants work together for the good
of their country.
Similarly, some generals had initial reservations about the military’s
involvement in the CRP initiative. They were concerned that it could
distract them from their core duty of protecting the country from external
threats or invasion. After several rounds of discussions, however, they all
agreed to give the CRP initiative a try. As we’ve seen, it has been a great
success. At a recent Summit, the chief of defense forces, the highest-
ranking general in the military, reflected on their journey, “We have
come a long way, and we now wholeheartedly embrace the change that
NBOS represents. Our duty is to serve our country, and we have found
new ways of doing so while maintaining our core focus on keeping the
country safe.” Today, under NBOS, six CRP centers have been
established and some 10,000 inmates rehabilitated.
Before NBOS the military and police almost never crossed the
boundaries that separated their two institutions. That has changed.
Multiple signs provide evidence that they now see protecting people and
nation building as a common mission. For example, they have initiated
joint patrols in crime hot spots, and the military has begun sharing their
extra training facilities with the police. This has not only allowed the
police to put trained officers on the streets more rapidly, but also resulted
in significant cost savings by negating the need to build new police
training facilities. “The police and military march at a different pace and
salute in different ways,” the inspector general of police observed at one
of the Summits. But, he suggested, together with the chief of defense
forces, “to signify the change in the way we work together for the nation,
why don’t we organize a joint graduation ceremony, so that the first
batch of police recruits trained at military facilities will graduate side-by-
side with military graduates? Such a ceremony would be a first in our


---PAGE BREAK---

history.” Over 20,000 people came to witness this historic event, and the
spirit of change was high and palpable.
The Evolution of the Journey
Since 2009, the Malaysian government has initiated more than 100 blue
ocean moves, involving over 90 ministries and agencies from finance, to
education, to rural and regional development, to agriculture, to urban
well-being, to defence, to housing and local government, to women,
family, and community development. The issues they’ve addressed range
from safety and security, to economic and social development, to the
environment and public well-being. You can learn about these blue ocean
moves at www.nbos.gov.my and www.blueoceanshift.com/malaysia-
nbos. To date, the NBOS initiatives that have generated the widest
demand among the citizenry are those focused on urban and rural well-
being, entrepreneurship, and youth volunteerism. Let’s look briefly at an
example of each.
In June 2012, NBOS established the first Urban Transformation
Center (UTC) in Melaka City, one of the country’s state capitals. Since
then, more than 20 others of varying size have been opened in main
cities across the country. The UTCs are one-stop shops, where all
government services are available under a single roof. Open seven days a
week, from 8:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., they offer everything from passport
renewals, licenses, legal permits, and registration forms to skill training
programs, health clinics, social welfare programs, and official
certificates of various kinds. The UTCs are soaringly popular—in a
country with a population of slightly over 30 million, UTCs have
counted nearly 50 million visits for government services in the first few
years alone. In addition, people can also buy groceries, enjoy
recreational facilities like fitness centers, and conduct their banking
activities at the centers. Because UTCs are located in previously idling or
underutilized government buildings, execution followed rapidly as soon
as the Summit approved the idea. The first UTC building in Melaka was
ready in just six weeks, and two weeks after that, the counters were open
for business. Because ministries and agencies no longer need their own
city offices, the UTCs will save the government billons of dollars in the
years to come, while the gains in efficiency and convenience for the
public, who no longer have to visit multiple offices, fighting city traffic


---PAGE BREAK---

all the while, are substantial. A similar model is at work in rural areas,
where the NBOS Summit has established over 200 large and small Rural
Transformation Centers (RTCs) to provide new economic, social, and
educational opportunities that result in higher incomes for rural citizens.
The Malaysian Global Innovation and Creativity Center (MaGIC) is
also a brainchild of the NBOS Summit. It brings together
businesspeople, finance providers, domain experts, universities, and
government officials to provide end-to-end support to both domestic and
international entrepreneurs. Since its launch in April 2014, by then–US
President Barack Obama and Malaysia’s Prime Minister Najib Razak,
over 15,000 start-ups have been established with its support. MaGIC not
only orchestrates the entrepreneurial ecosystem of the country but also
builds its creative competence by teaching blue ocean tools and methods
to people from all segments of the society. The MaGIC Accelerator
program, which is building a community of ASEAN (Association of
Southeast Asian Nations)-focused start-ups, has become the largest in
Southeast Asia.
The Summit’s decision to create 1Malaysia for Youth (iM4U) has had
a similarly transformative effect on youth volunteerism. Launched in
2012, the initative was designed to open up a new frontier of
volunteerism by building young people’s confidence and unlocking their
energy and talent for the good of the nation. With about 3 million
members, iM4U has become the largest youth volunteering organization
in Southeast Asia and one of the biggest in the world. Its volunteers have
carried out over 4,500 national and international projects to aid natural
disaster relief efforts, provide supplementary schoolteachers, engage in
charity work on behalf of the needy and elderly, perform local and
regional community work, and more. This new and unprecedented level
of youth volunteerism has impressed both the country’s citizens and the
regional public. As for the youth, they have seen firsthand the positive
impact they can have on the well-being of others, which increases their
confidence, their pride in their accomplishments, and their skills—all at
low cost to the government.
These initiatives are game changers, not only in the way people work
together to create new value-cost frontiers but also in how they think
about and carry out their roles and responsibilities. During one of the
Summit meetings, the secretary general of treasury said with a big smile
on his face, “I am a finance guy. Having been assigned to lead and


---PAGE BREAK---

execute initiatives like UTC and MaGIC, I learned a lot about how to
think and act in a blue ocean way. My fellow NBOS team members and I
have realized that we need to both ‘blue-ocean’ these initiatives, and
shift our mindsets. For me, this means being more than a numbers-driven
finance guy. To deliver our national budget with high impact at low cost
with rapid execution, I need to be a blue ocean strategist.”
Since 2009, when the prime minister kicked off the National
Transformation Journey where NBOS has played a pivotal role, the
country’s gross national income has grown by nearly 50 percent, and
over 2 million jobs have been created. The global community, especially
the governments of emerging and developing nations, has taken notice,
and asked the Malaysian government to share its experiences with them.
Malaysia and its leadership responded positively, and the result was an
international conference on NBOS, held on August 16–18, 2016.
The three-day conference took place in Putrajaya, the country’s
federal administrative center outside downtown Kuala Lumpur, and
attracted 5,500 attendees representing 45 countries. Among the
participants were heads of state, ministers, civil service leaders, and
representatives from the United Nations, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and member
countries of the Commonwealth Association of Public Administration
and Management.
The chief secretary to the government kicked off the conference by
providing an overview of the NBOS initiatives. The prime minister then
gave an inspiring keynote, explaining that “If we had continued with the
old policies, we would have found the government and country
swimming in an ocean of red. We knew that we had, instead, to make a
paradigm shift, and create a new economic model; one driven by
knowledge, creativity, and innovation—a ‘blue ocean’ of new
opportunities.” In the panel of heads of state that followed, the prime
minister of Thailand built on this idea, noting that “Especially in times of
economic uncertainty, countries tend to return to competition-based red
ocean strategy,” and urging the delegates to focus instead on “striving to
innovate to create blue oceans.”
After these opening events, the conference broke into sessions where
participants discussed not only how the initiatives had transformed the
formulation and execution of national policies but also how such changes
affected the mindsets and behaviors of the people involved, their ways of


---PAGE BREAK---

working together, and the economic and social landscape of the nation.
The Malaysian defence minister, who when he was home affairs
minister, led the very first NBOS initiative, shared his view that “NBOS
continuously reminds us that things have got to be shaken up from time
to time, and that we should always keep an open mind and cooperate
with each other.” Given that the beginning of any change initiative is the
most challenging period, his remarks, like his contributions, were
especially resonant.
The conference also featured NBOS exhibitions, where participants
could visit booths showcasing various initiatives and discuss what they’d
heard. During the final day, they were also given the opportunity to visit
one of the sites to experience firsthand how the initiative worked and
how it affected people’s lives. The CRP Center at Gemas was one of the
options; visitors were able to see the new, income-producing skills the
inmates were learning, and to listen as they described their work and
achievements with genuine pride.
“Transformation requires people to work together in new ways, to
think differently, and to take on new roles and responsibilities. These are
not easy things to do, but they are rewarding. Throughout our NBOS
journey, we have been creating new ways to serve people better and
deliver on the things that really matter to them. NBOS has been
transforming the entire nation. Blue oceans ahead!” said Malaysia’s
deputy prime minister in his concluding keynote address.
Today, at the Summit meetings, one can regularly hear participants
talk about “blue-oceaning” initiatives and “NBOSing” their work.
Presenting his vision for the nation at a recent Summit, the prime
minister underscored the importance of this work, saying, “We aspire to
be a top-20 nation in the world by 2050. For that, we need to persist on
our blue ocean journey.” With recharged energy, the chief secretary to
the government is vigorously orchestrating all NBOS activities,
motivating the participants and monitoring and communicating the
results. In a recent address to the civil service, he reflected, “No doubt,
change is not easy. But miracles can happen, given a positive mindset, as
we have seen through NBOS. NBOS is a pivotal pillar in our nation’s
transformation journey.” So, with renewed confidence, the blue ocean
shift continues.


---PAGE BREAK---

Acknowledgments
We have had significant help in actualizing this book. INSEAD, our
academic home, has continued to provide a unique and inspiring
environment in which to conduct our research. We have benefited greatly
from the truly global composition of our faculty, student body, and
executive education participants, as well as the crossover between theory
and practice that exists at INSEAD. Dean Ilian Mihov and Deputy Dean
Peter Zemsky of INSEAD have provided enduring encouragement and
institutional support. We would also like to acknowledge our former
Dean Frank Brown for his vision to establish the INSEAD Blue Ocean
Strategy Institute.
With our deans’ support—including that of former INSEAD
Executive Education Dean Sumitra Dutta who is now dean of Cornell SC
Johnson College of Business, we have been able to create many blue
ocean programs for INSEAD executives and MBAs that are carried out
across the globe. Special thanks to all the INSEAD MBAs who have
taken part in the Blue Ocean Study Group, the Blue Ocean Simulation
Course, and the Blue Ocean Theory Course, and to all the executives
from around the world who participated in the Blue Ocean Strategy
Open Enrolment Program or Blue Ocean Strategy corporate-specific
programs. Their challenging questions and thoughtful feedback clarified
and strengthened our ideas. Special thanks also to the Boston Consulting
Group (BCG), which has extended financial support for our research and
has proven to be a great long-term partner dating back now for more than
20 years.
We are grateful for INSEAD’s faculty who have taught blue ocean
courses in the MBA, EMBA, and executive education programs at the
school. Among the faculty are Professors Andrew Shipilov, Fares
Boulos, Peter Zemsky, Guoli Chen, Jens Meyer, Javier Gimeno, Neil
Jones, Mi Ji, James Costantini, Ben Bensaou, Michael Shiel, Narayan
Pant, Loïc Sadoulet, Matthew Lee, Lauren Mathys, and George Eapen.


---PAGE BREAK---

Not only have they provided valuable feedback and rich discussions that
have stimulated our thinking, many have importantly also become our
dear friends. Thank you to all.
Along the trajectory of our research journey, many people have
supported us at different points and we are thankful for all. However,
there are two individuals who deserve special mention: Gavin Fraser and
Marc Beauvois-Coladon. Over long years, both Gavin and Marc have
provided feedback and put our ideas in practice often before they were
even published. We are delighted and proud that two of the blue ocean
shifts discussed in this book are the direct result of their powerful
application of the ideas in practice. Gavin and Marc, thank you for your
support and insight, the intellectual integrity you bring to your work, and
importantly your friendship. Special thanks are also due to Jae Won Park,
CEO of the Malaysia Blue Ocean Strategy Institute (MBOSI); John
Riker, who skillfully led the Blue Ocean Strategy Initiative Center; and
blue ocean senior experts Jason Hunter and Ralph Trombetta, whose
experiences in applying our ideas in practice have directly contributed to
our book. The dedicated work of all the directors and fellows of MBOSI
including Jang Rae Cho, Gowrishankar Sundararajan, Lisa Carse, Tim
Polkowski, Pamela Leong, Craig Wilkie, Julie Lee, Pallav Jha, and the
rest of the MBOSI team serves as the backbone for the national blue
ocean shift we lay out in the book’s epilogue.
Thanks especially to our Blue Ocean Officer Kasia Duda and her
team at MBOSI for their enthusiastic support and dedication. Kasia,
thank you for being an unsinkable ship and great captain of the team. We
appreciate all that you do.
Special thanks are also due to CEO of the Blue Ocean Global
Network, Robert Bong, who also serves as chief advisor to MBOSI, and
his team: Chin Chin Lim, Serena George, and Gan Kah Liang. Thanks
also to the members of the Blue Ocean Global Network, a global
community of practice on the blue ocean family of concepts—especially
to those we were unable to mention here.
Warm thanks are also due to our outstanding team of executive
fellows and researchers, current and recent past, at the INSEAD Blue
Ocean Strategy Institute (IBOSI). In particular, Mi Ji, Oh Young Koo,
Michael Olenick, Mélanie Pipino, Katrina Ling, and Jee-Eun Lee.
Through the thought-provoking cases and firsthand original theory-based
videos, today blue ocean concepts are used in over 100 countries around


---PAGE BREAK---

the world. Thanks also to our IBOSI coordinator Kim Wilkinson.
Researchers beyond those already cited who deserve special mention are
Zunaira Munir, Allison Light, and Amara Buyse.
Over the decade since our first book Blue Ocean Strategy was
published, corporate executives, public officers, entrepreneurs, small-and
medium-size business owners, and even high school students and
religious organizations have set out to put our ideas and market-creating
tools and frameworks into practice to make a blue ocean shift. To all
these individuals—some of whom are contained in this book—we offer
our sincere thanks. You have inspired us, sharpened our thinking, and
greatly shaped the ideas in this book.
The Malaysian government has been applying the concept and tools
of blue ocean shift to national development through its National Blue
Ocean Strategy (NBOS) initiative. We are enormously grateful to Prime
Minister Najib Razak and former Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi for
their vision and inspiring leadership to create blue oceans for the nation.
Also, special thanks are due to Deputy Prime Minister Zahid Hamidi,
Defence and Special Function Minister Hishammuddin Hussein, and all
cabinet 
ministers 
who 
have 
spearheaded 
the 
cross-ministerial
collaboration under NBOS.
The chief secretary to the government of Malaysia, Ali Hamsa, and
the chairman of Petronas and former chief secretary to the government,
Sidek Hassan, deserve our special appreciation for their excellent work
in institutionalizing and nurturing the growth of National Blue Ocean
Strategy within the Malaysian government. Other important contributors
to NBOS include the secretary general of Treasury, Irwan Serigar;
chairman of Permodalan Nasional Berhad (PNB) and former minister in
the prime minister’s department, Wahid Omar; governor of the Central
Bank of Malaysia, Muhammad Ibrahim; director general of the Public
Service Department, Zainal Rahim; chairman of Agrobank and former
director general of the Public Service Department, Zabidi Zainal;
inspector general of the police, Khalid Abu Bakar; chief of the Defense
Forces, Raja Mohamed Affandi; former chief of the Defense Forces,
Zulkifeli Zin; CEO of Petronas, Zulkiflee Ariffin; commissioner general
of prisons, Zulkifli Omar; and director of the National Strategy Unit,
Aminuddin Hassim, along with all the secretaries general and directors
general of the Malaysian Civil Service and the leaders of the Malaysian
security forces.


---PAGE BREAK---

It would be remiss of us not to acknowledge the millions and millions
of Malaysians who have contributed, either directly or indirectly, to
creating blue oceans in Malaysia through various NBOS initiatives. We
are very grateful to the numerous civil servants, teachers, students,
generals and soldiers, police officers, professionals, businesspeople,
entrepreneurs, youth, retirees, housewives, even inmates and many more
besides, who have given their time, energy, and hearts as participants and
volunteers. While there are far too many to mention their names here, it
has been truly inspiring to witness the efforts made by citizens from all
walks of life who have supported and played a crucial role in Malaysia’s
national development through NBOS.
We’d also like to thank President Obama’s Board of Advisors on the
White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
This work provided new impetus for us to apply and expand our blue
ocean theory into the nonprofit sector.
In writing this book we have benefited from the comments of many
people. In particular, we are grateful for the thoughtful comments and
suggestions made by Nan Stone. Not only is Nan a dear friend we have
known for over 20 years, she also served as the editor-in-chief of
Harvard Business Review overseeing our initial HBR articles that are the
seeds of our research. Thanks are also due to the valuable comments and
feedback made by Andrea Ovans.
Finally, we would like to thank our publisher, Hachette Books. From
the very start the entire team, in particular Mauro DiPreta, Michelle
Aielli, and Betsy Hulsebosch, have believed in the ideas and been strong
enthusiastic supporters, providing encouragement and inspiring ideas,
and importantly, also being graciously patient as we struggled to get the
manuscript done. We appreciate the dedicated efforts of Joanna Pinsker
and David Lamb as well. Thanks also to Michael Pietsch, Hachette’s
CEO, for his full support and commitment to our book. We are grateful
to all.


---PAGE BREAK---

About the Authors
W. CHAN KIM and RENÉE MAUBORGNE are professors of
strategy at INSEAD, which is consistently ranked in the world’s top
business schools, and co-directors of the INSEAD Blue Ocean Strategy
Institute in Fontainebleau, France. They are fellows of the World
Economic Forum and were named among the world’s top five best
business school professors by MBA Rankings. Kim is an advisory
member for the European Union and serves as an advisor to several
countries. Mauborgne served on President Barack Obama’s Board of
Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) for
the president’s two terms. They advise, consult, and speak to
governments and companies worldwide, and have published numerous
bestselling articles in Harvard Business Review and Academy of
Management Journal, Management Science, Organization Science,
Strategic Management Journal, Administrative Science Quarterly,
Journal of International Business Studies, MIT Sloan Management
Review, the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times, and the Financial
Times, among others.
They are the authors of Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create
Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition Irrelevant
(Harvard Business Review Press). Blue Ocean Strategy has sold over 3.6
million copies and is recognized as one of the most iconic and impactful
strategy books ever written. It is being published in a record-breaking 44
languages and is a bestseller across five continents. Blue Ocean Strategy
has won numerous awards including “The Best Business Book of 2005”
Prize at the Frankfurt Book Fair, was selected as a “Top Ten Business
Book of 2005” by Amazon.com, and was chosen as one of the 40 most
influential books in the History of the People’s Republic of China (1949–
2009) along with Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations and Milton and
Rose Friedman’s Free to Choose.
Kim and Mauborgne are ranked in the top three management gurus in


---PAGE BREAK---

the world in the Thinkers50 global list of thought leaders and Mauborgne
is the highest placed woman ever on the list. They have received
numerous academic and management awards around the globe, including
the Carl S. Sloane Award for Excellence from the Association of
Management Consulting Firms, the Leadership Hall of Fame by Fast
Company magazine, the Nobels Colloquia Prize for Leadership on
Business and Economic Thinking, and the Eldridge Haynes Prize by the
Academy of International Business for the best original paper in the field
of international business. They are the winners of the Prix DCF 2009
(Prix des Dirigeants Commerciaux de France 2009) in the category of
“Stratégie d’entreprise.” L’Expansion also named Kim and Mauborgne
as “the number one gurus of the future.” The Sunday Times (London)
called them “two of Europe’s brightest business thinkers.” The Observer
called Kim and Mauborgne “the next big gurus to hit the business
world.” Kim and Mauborgne won several Case Centre awards including
“The Global Top 10 Bestselling Case Writers (2015/2016),” “All-Time
Top 40 Bestselling Cases” in 2014, “Best Overall Case” in 2009 across
all disciplines, and “Best Case in Strategy” in 2008.
They are the founders of the Blue Ocean Global Network (BOGN), a
global community of practice on the Blue Ocean family of concepts that
they created. BOGN embraces academics, consultants, executives, and
government officers. For more about the authors and BOGN see
www.blueoceanshift.com.


---PAGE BREAK---

Bibliography
Bain, Joe S., ed. 1959. Industrial Organization. New York: Wiley.
Bhidé, Amar. 2004. “Entrepreneurs in the 21st Century—Non-destructive
Creation: How Entrepreneurship Sustains Development.” Lecture at the
Royal Society of Arts, London, November 17.
. 2008. The Venturesome Economy: How Innovation Sustains
Prosperity in a More Connected World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Christensen, Clayton M. 1997. The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New
Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.
Foster, Richard, 1986. Innovation: The Attacker’s Advantage. New York:
Summit Books.
Global Footprint Network. “World Footprint: Do We Fit on the Planet?”
http://old.footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/page/world_footprint/
(Accessed April 3, 2017).
Heilemann, John. 2001. “Reinventing the Wheel.” Time, December 2, 76.
Hill, Charles W. L. 1988. “Differentiation versus Low Cost or
Differentiation and Low Cost.” Academy of Management Review 13,
July, 401–412.
Hubbard, Glenn. 2007. “Nondestructive Creation.” Strategy + Business 27,
Summer, 30–35.
Kim, W. Chan, and Renée Mauborgne. 1991. “Implementing Global
Strategies: The Role of Procedural Justice.” Strategic Management
Journal 12, 125–143.
. 1993. “Procedural Justice, Attitudes, and Subsidiary Top
Management Compliance with Multinationals’ Corporate Strategic
Decisions.” Academy of Management Journal 36, no. 3, 502–526.
. 1995. “A Procedural Justice Model of Strategic Decision Making.”
Organization Science 6, February, 44–61.
. 1996. “Procedural Justice and Managers’ In-role and Extra-role
Behavior.” Management Science 42, April, 499–515.


---PAGE BREAK---

. 1997a. “Value Innovation: The Strategic Logic of High Growth.”
Harvard Business Review 75, January–February, 102–112.
. 1997b. “When ‘Competitive Advantage’ Is Neither.” Wall Street
Journal, April 21.
. 1997c. “Fair Process: Managing in the Knowledge Economy.”
Harvard Business Review 75, July–August, 65–76.
. 1998. “Procedural Justice, Strategic Decision Making, and the
Knowledge Economy.” Strategic Management Journal, Editor’s
Choice, 323–338.
. 1999a. “Creating New Market Space.” Harvard Business Review 77,
January–February, 83–93.
. 1999b. “Strategy, Value Innovation, and the Knowledge Economy.”
Sloan Management Review 40, no. 3, Spring, 41–54.
. 2002a “Why Seeing Is Succeeding,” Inside Track, Viewpoint,
Financial Times, April 15.
. 2002b. “Charting Your Company’s Future.” Harvard Business
Review 80, June 2002, 76–85.
. 2003a. “Tipping Point Leadership.” Harvard Business Review 81,
April, 60–69.
. 2003b. “Think for Yourself—Stop Copying a Rival.” FT Summer
School, Financial Times, August 11.
. 2004. “Blue Ocean Strategy.” Harvard Business Review 82, October,
75–84.
. 2005. Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create Uncontested Market
Space and Make the Competition Irrelevant. Boston: Harvard Business
School Publishing.
. 2009. “How Strategy Shapes Structure.” Harvard Business Review
87, September, 72–80.
. 2015a. Blue Ocean Strategy, Expanded Edition: How to Create
Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition Irrelevant.
Boston: Harvard Business Review Press.
. 2015b. “Red Ocean Traps: Mental Models That Undermine Market-
Creating Strategies.” Harvard Business Review 93, March, 68–73.
North American Industry Classification System: United States 1997. 2002,
2017. Lanham, VA: Bernan Press.
NYOI 2009—Kickoff Year video, at 10:34. www.youtube.com/watch?
v=5DCaqw0dasU (Accessed March 30, 2017).
Porter, Michael. E. 1980. Competitive Strategy. New York: Free Press.
. 1996. “What Is Strategy?” Harvard Business Review 74, November–


---PAGE BREAK---

December, 61–78.
Prahalad, C. K. 2006. The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing.
Ries, Eric. 2011. The Lean Startup. New York: Crown Business.
Scherer, F. M. 1970. Industrial Market Structure and Economic
Performance. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New
York: Harper & Brothers.
Tellis, G., and P. Golder. 2002. Will and Vision. New York: McGraw-Hill.


---PAGE BREAK---

Notes
Chapter 1: Reach Beyond the Best
1. See NYOI 2009—Kickoff Year video, at 10:34,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=5DCaqw0dasU (accessed March 30,
2017).
2. After six extraordinary years, in 2014 ISIS invaded Iraq. The rise of
ISIS with its penetration in Iraq has endangered the country and
forced the orchestra into hiatus. Yet, its message of hope, as
documented here, can still be heard today, as even some of the
greatest musicians around the world continue to celebrate the blue
ocean it created.
3. Oprah Winfrey’s tweet on ActiFry was posted at 1:46 p.m. on
February 15, 2013. The full tweet reads: “This machine T-Fal actifry
has changed my life. And they are not paying me to say it.”
https://twitter.com/oprah/status/302534477878554624?lang=en
(accessed May 16, 2017). T-Fal refers to Groupe SEB’s brand under
which ActiFry is sold in the United States. Depending on the country,
Groupe SEB markets ActiFry under different brands including T-Fal,
Tefal, and SEB. For this reason, we simply refer to ActiFry as
Groupe SEB’s ActiFry in this book.
4. This is called environmental determinism, or the structuralist view.
Its theoretical root stems from industrial organization economics,
whose core argument can be summarized by its structure-conduct-
performance paradigm. The paradigm says that industry structure
determines organizations’ conduct or strategy, which in turn impacts
performance. See, for example, Bain (1959) and Scherer (1970).
5. This view of strategy is well articulated in the seminal work of
Michael Porter, Competitive Strategy (1980).
6. That organizations can consciously shape industry boundaries and


---PAGE BREAK---

create new market space by breaking the value-cost trade-off are
central arguments of our research on market-creating strategies.
Among our other publications, see, for example, Kim and Mauborgne
(1997a, 1999a, 2005, 2009, 2015a).
7. In his influential work, “What Is Strategy?”, Porter (1996)
formulated and used the concept of the productivity frontier to
distinguish between operational effectiveness and strategy.
8. See Porter (1980).
9. The dashed curve will eventually form a new productivity frontier
when its imitation and competition are in full swing.
10. See, for example, Kim and Mauborgne (1993, 1995, 1996, 1997a,
1998, 1999a, 2002b, 2004, 2005, 2009, 2015a), among others.
11. Since the launch of Groupe SEB’s ActiFry and its great success,
Christian Grob, who headed the initiative, unfortunately passed away.
12. See Global Footprint Network, “World Footprint: Do We Fit on the
Planet?” (accessed April 3, 2017).
Chapter 2: The Fundamentals of Market-Creating Strategy
1. See Schumpeter (1942) for his seminal discussion on creative
destruction.
2. Ibid.
3. While the intellectual origin of the concept of disruption is unclear,
Richard Foster (1986) discussed what he called “technological
discontinuities” in his book Innovation: The Attacker’s Advantage
and predicted that the phenomenon would only accelerate with
coming tides of innovation. In his book, while the term disruption per
se was not used, the phenomenon of “technological discontinuities”
he described was about the disruption where upstart competitors
abruptly overtook their well-run market leaders with new and
discontinuous technologies. His research findings echo Schumpeter’s
insight about creative destruction.
4. Clayton M. Christensen (1997) has spurred the recent popularity of
the term disruption through his influential work on disruptive
technology and innovation. See his seminal work, The Innovator’s
Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail.
5. Ibid.


---PAGE BREAK---

6. In the context of new market creation, the term disruptive creation
well captures the notion of displacement, whether it starts abruptly
and destructively, with a superior technology, or slowly and gradually
over time, with an inferior technology. Accordingly, we use the term
disruptive creation to embrace both forms of displacement so that the
process of new market creation through displacement can be fully,
not partially, explained.
7. Our book Blue Ocean Strategy (2005, Expanded Edition 2015a)
showed blue oceans of new market space were created both within
and beyond the bounds of existing industries. We found that,
compared with the blue oceans of new market space created within
existing industry boundaries, those created beyond the bounds often
generated entirely new demand and growth without disrupting
existing players and markets.
8. In a similar vein, Bhidé (2004, 2008) and Hubbard (2007) pointed
out that Schumpeter’s conception of creative destruction in economic
growth missed a critical form of innovation and argued for the
importance of what they called “nondestructive creation.” They
explained that nondestructive creation and entrepreneurship matter to
economic growth. While their conception of nondestructive creation
was in direct contrast with that of creative destruction without
explicit consideration of disruptive innovation and their focus was
more on the role of entrepreneurs and technology in the process of
innovation and growth, their conception of nondestructive creation as
a key form of innovation is insightful and is consistent with our
research findings on market-creating strategies.
9. Unlike the entrepreneurship school of thinking on innovation and
growth, the act of nondisruptive creation as defined here does not
rely on entrepreneurs as it can be performed by any person,
regardless of their entrepreneurial talent, with a systematic process.
Such difference aside, Bhidé (2008) offers penetrating insights on the
importance of nondestructive creation in explaining growth and
innovation in the US economy.
10. C. K. Prahalad (2006) formulated the notion of “the bottom of the
pyramid.” There you can find more on why the “bottom of the
pyramid” offers organizations ample brand-new opportunities as well
as brand-new problems to solve.


---PAGE BREAK---

11. For more on how technology innovation differs from value
innovation, which is fundamental to an organization’s ability to
unlock commercially compelling new markets, as well as why value
innovation is a distinctive concept from value creation, see Kim and
Mauborgne (1999b, 2005, 2015a).
12. See, for example, Tellis and Golder (2002).
13. See Kim and Mauborgne (1999b, 2005, 2015a, 2015b).
14. See Heilemann (2001).
15. To get a free downloadable copy of our quiz, “Are you true blue or
bloody red?” go to www.blueoceanshift.com/truebluequiz
16. See, for example, Kim and Mauborgne (2005) and the work of Ries
(2011).
Chapter 3: The Mind of a Blue Ocean Strategist
1. The theory of industrial organization economics proposes a structure-
conduct-performance paradigm, which suggests a causal flow from
market structure to conduct (strategy) and performance. See, for
example, Bain (1959) and Scherer (1970). Under this structuralist
view of strategy, executives typically begin with industry and
competitive analyses and then set out to carve a distinctive strategic
position in the existing industry space, whereby their organization
can outperform rivals by building a competitive advantage. The
underlying logic here is that a company’s strategic options are
circumscribed by the market environment. In other words, structure
shapes strategy. The seminal work on this is Porter (1980).
2. That industry boundaries are not fixed and that individual firms can
create and re-create industries based on their conscious efforts is our
central and long-standing argument. See, for example, Kim and
Mauborgne (1997a, 1999a, 2005, 2009, 2015a).
3. Steve Jobs at NeXT Computer, Redwood City, California, 1995,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kYfNvmF0Bqw (accessed April
3, 2017).
4. Our 1997a Harvard Business Review article, “Value Innovation: The
Strategic Logic of High Growth,” first introduced the concept of the
trap of competing. Our long line of research has since consistently
argued that a focus on beating the competition and aiming to build


---PAGE BREAK---

competitive advantages frequently leads to imitative, not innovative,
approaches to the market. For a quick summary of this argument see
Kim and Mauborgne (1997b, 2003b).
5. See, for example, Kim and Mauborgne (1997a, 1997b, 2005, 2015a).
6. The central importance of noncustomers as a way to not only gain
keen insight on how to create and re-create markets but also generate
new growth has been a consistent finding of our research. See, for
example, Kim and Mauborgne (1997a, 2005, 2015a, 2015b).
7. See Kim and Mauborgne (2015b).
8. See Kim and Mauborgne (1997a, 2004, 2005, 2015a, 2015b). See
also Hill (1988).
Chapter 4: Humanness, Confidence, and Creative Competence
1. The concept we call atomization was first introduced in our article
“Tipping Point Leadership” (2003a). Our follow-up research on it
since then showed that atomization has a significant positive effect
on people’s motivation to take action, as it makes big challenges—
like making a blue ocean shift—attainable to people. See, for
example, Kim and Mauborgne (2005, 2015a).
2. Our research has consistently argued for the importance of firsthand
discovery—not “outsourcing your eyes”—and conducting live
market research via “visual exploration.” See, for example, Kim and
Mauborgne (2002a, 2002b, 2005, 2015a).
3. Our research on fair process has demonstrated the critical role
exercising fair process plays in strategy and management. We
developed a model of fair process showing how it builds people’s
trust, commitment, and voluntary cooperation. See, for example, Kim
and Mauborgne (1991, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1997c, 1998).
4. For a managerial summary of our fair process research see Kim and
Mauborgne (1997c).
5. In Kim and Mauborgne (1998), we developed intellectual and
emotional recognition theory. Our research found that the respect for
people’s intellectual and emotional worth that fair process engenders
via engagement, explanation, and clear expectations triggers
something at the core of the human spirit that builds our trust,
commitment, and voluntary cooperation. It makes us want to “go the


---PAGE BREAK---

extra mile.” The theory posits that, through fair process, people feel
intellectually and emotionally recognized and valued and, in
response, they mirror that recognition back to the organization and
their colleagues.


---PAGE BREAK---

Thank you for buying this ebook, published by Hachette
Digital.
To receive special offers, bonus content, and news about our latest
ebooks and apps, sign up for our newsletters.
Sign Up
Or visit us at hachettebookgroup.com/newsletters


---PAGE BREAK---

