# Introduction to the Paperback Edition: The Strategic Conversation—Broadening the Long View

is the point to find the most probable future and adapt to it or “bet
the company” on it. Rather, the point is to make strategic decisions
that will be sound for all plausible futures. No matter what future
takes place, you are much more likely to be ready for it—and
influential in it—if you have thought seriously about scenarios.
This book will take you through the scenario process from
beginning to end. We’ll begin by learning how to articulate and
isolate key decisions, those most relevant to your company. We’ll
then look at timing—Are your concerns likely to be illuminated by
scenarios set five years into the future? Or ten years, and even
more? The next step is in-depth research, including research in
places you might not ordinarily think of looking (such as “fringe”
publications, 
conversations 
with 
“remarkable 
people,” 
and
challenging environments). We will then look closely at driving
forces, key factors that will determine (or “drive”) the outcome of
the stories you are building. Some of these forces, you will decide,
are predetermined: you already know how they will play out in your
chosen time frame. Other forces are critical uncertainties, pivotal
elements that will act unpredictably, and thus might influence your
future. You will learn that as you talk, in depth, about the
significance of each of the driving forces, plots develop into stories,
and scenarios take shape. The most essential step in the process
comes at the end: Rehearsing the implications. Act out your options
in each of the future worlds and refine your understanding of all of
them.
The scenario process provides a context for thinking clearly about
the impossibly complex array of factors that affect any decision. It
gives managers a common language for talking about these factors,
starting with a series of “what-if” stories, each with a different
name. Then it encourages participants to think about each of them
as if it had already come to pass. “What if our worst nightmare took
place, and our primary business became obsolete?” Or, “What if our
most desired future came to pass? What unexpected challenges
would it present to us?” Or, “What if a completely unexpected series
of events changed the structure of our industry? Would we be
overwhelmed, or would we see the opportunities?” In the early


1980s oil companies ought to have asked themselves, “What if the
price of oil collapses?” While movie studios ought to have asked
themselves, “What if the VCR creates new video-rental markets
rather than killing off the movie theater [as they feared]?”
Thinking through these stories, and talking in depth about their
implications, brings each person’s unspoken assumptions about the
future to the surface. Scenarios are thus the most powerful vehicles I
know for challenging our “mental models” about the world, and
lifting the “blinders” that limit our creativity and resourcefulness.
Organizations that have instilled the scenario practice into their
deliberations—including the Royal Dutch/Shell Group, Pacific Gas
and Electric, Motorola, and my own company, Global Business
Network—have 
managed 
to 
anticipate 
difficult 
times 
and
opportunities that have caught managers of other organizations
unawares.
In the chapters that lie ahead, you will find detailed discussions of
these uses of the scenario method. Now that five years have passed
since publication of The Art of the Long View, I realize that the
scenario method also does much more. It can be used as a building
block for designing strategic conversations—conversations that, in
themselves, lead to continuous organizational learning about key
decisions and priorities.
Thus, when Doubleday’s editors asked me to create a “User’s
Guide” for the paperback edition, I saw that invitation as an
opportunity to expand “the art of the long view” to include the
practice of strategic conversation. You’ll learn how to use the
scenario method in the main text of the book, and you’ll find more
information on the strategic conversation—and practical guidelines
for starting a conversation—in the Afterword and User’s Guide.
Once you understand the value of the strategic conversation’s
balance between formality and informality, your scenario work will
take on another dimension. It will no longer be project-specific,
oriented to particular events. It will be part of an ongoing
organizational learning process, robust and flexible enough to keep
the organization from being blindsided by unexpected events, but
intimately interwoven with the organization’s existing practices and


relationships. Experience has shown that looking into the future is
most useful when it is the beginning, not the end, of a significant
conversation. The most successful managers, I believe, are those
who will see their fundamental work not as making decisions, but as
making mutual understanding.
OceanofPDF.com


All the notions we thought solid, all the values of civilized life, all that
made for stability in international relations, all that made for regularity
in the economy  …  in a word, all that tended happily to limit the
uncertainty of the morrow, all that gave nations and individuals some
confidence in the morrow … all this seems badly compromised. I have
consulted all the augurs I could find, of every species, and I have heard
only vague words, contradictory prophecies, curiously feeble assurances.
Never has humanity combined so much power with so much disorder, so
much anxiety with so many playthings, so much knowledge with so much
uncertainty.
—Paul Valéry, “Historical Fact” (1932)
OceanofPDF.com


THE PATHFINDER’S TALE
            This book is about freedom. In western societies, people
are ostensibly free, but they feel constrained by the unpredictability
of events. Every year, every decade, we are surprised by social or
technological upheavals that appear suddenly, surprisingly. How
can people, businesses, and institutions plan for the future when
they do not know what tomorrow will bring? A deep and realistic
confidence is built on insight into the possible outcomes of our
choices. In this unpredictable context, freedom is the ability to act
both with confidence and a full knowledge of uncertainty.
To act with confidence, one must be willing to look ahead and
consider uncertainties: “What challenges could the world present
me? How might others respond to my actions?” Rather than asking
such questions, too many people react to uncertainty with denial.
They take an unconsciously deterministic view of events. They take
it for granted that some things just can’t and won’t happen; for
example, “oil prices won’t collapse,” or “the Cold War can’t ever
end.” Not having tried to foresee surprising events, they are at a loss
for ways to act when upheaval continues. They create blind spots
for themselves.
Scenarios are a tool for helping us to take a long view in a world
of great uncertainty. The name comes from the theatrical term
“scenario”—the script for a film or play. Scenarios are stories about
the way the world might turn out tomorrow, stories that can help us
recognize and adapt to changing aspects of our present
environment. They form a method for articulating the different
pathways that might exist for you tomorrow, and finding your
appropriate movements down each of those possible paths. Scenario
planning is about making choices today with an understanding of
how they might turn out.
