# The Pathfinder’s Tale

In this context the precise definition of “scenario” is: a tool for
ordering one’s perceptions about alternative future environments in
which one’s decisions might be played out. Alternatively: a set of
organized ways for us to dream effectively about our own future.
Concretely, they resemble a set of stories, either written out or often
spoken. However, these stories are built around carefully
constructed “plots” that make the significant elements of the world
scene stand out boldly. This approach is more a disciplined way of
thinking than a formal methodology.
I’ve used scenarios with some of the world’s largest businesses
and government institutions, in starting a small business, and I’ve
used them to make personal decisions about my diet and health.
You could use scenarios to plan a small business, to choose an
education, to look for a job, to judge an investment, or even to
contemplate marriage. Often, scenarios can help people make better
decisions—usually difficult decisions—that they would otherwise
miss or deny.
Consider, for example, the crisis overtaking the advertising
industry. Beginning in the early 1980s, anyone could have looked
ahead and seen the growing popularity of new communication
technologies: cable TV, videocassettes, and computer-based media
such as electronic mail and the Internet. This technological change
was an irrevocable force, certain to shock the media industries by
draining audiences—and then ad revenues—from traditional
network television. No one could say exactly when the shock would
come, or how it would play out, but it was clear that, within a
matter of years, ad agencies would find their business either
radically changed, or severely diminished—as had the U.S. steel
industry in the early eighties, for example.
While the changes were certain, their exact form was unclear.
How strong would be the influence of companies such as Disney,
which refused to allow advertising on prerecorded video tapes?
Which consumers would be most willing to use new forms of media
first? What regulatory pressures would prevent telephone companies
from entering the business of distributing film and television by
wire? What forms could advertising take ten years hence, and how


could agencies make money at it? What would be the effect of
suddenly popular new communications media, such as fax
machines? A set of scenarios would have described the range of
worlds that might emerge by looking carefully at important
elements of the world in the early 1980s.
In 1987, the shock began to hit. Ad agency profits began to
decline, people found themselves laid off, and more and more
agencies had to haggle over fees with their clients. Most ad people
assumed the crisis was temporary; that it would be followed by a
new status quo. Today, ad agencies are in yet deeper economic
trouble, still hoping for a turnaround, and still refusing to look at
the opportunities—as well as the pitfalls—in the rise of new
technology. I know this because, along with several other people, I
began work in the late 1980s on a set of scenarios about the effects
of new technologies on the media business. We found clients from
every conceivable segment: a broadcast network, a telephone
company, a movie production studio, and a consumer products
company that places major advertisements. All but one of the
advertising agencies we invited to join us in this study of its own
future weren’t interested. To judge from our conversations with
them, they are afraid of what they might learn, as if the cost of
ignorance were smaller.
Scenarios are not predictions. It is simply not possible to predict
the future with certainty. An old Arab proverb says that, “he who
predicts the future lies even if he tells the truth.” Rather, scenarios
are vehicles for helping people learn. Unlike traditional business
forecasting or market research, they present alternative images of
the future; they do not merely extrapolate the trends of the present.
One common trend, for instance, is the U.S. birthrate. In the early
1970s, it hovered around 3 million births per year; forecasters at the
U.S. Census Bureau projected that this “trend” would continue
forever. Schools, which had been rushed into construction during
the baby boom of the fifties and early sixties, were now closed down
and sold. Policymakers did not consider that the birthrate might rise
again suddenly. But a scenario might have considered the likelihood
that original baby boom children, reaching their late thirties, would


suddenly have children of their own. In 1979, the U.S. birthrate
began to rise; it is now over the 4 million per annum of the fifties.
Demographers also failed to anticipate that immigration would
accelerate. To keep up with demand, the state of California (which
had been closing schools in the late 1970s) must build a classroom
every day for the next seven years.
Often, managers prefer the illusion of certainty to understanding
risks and realities. If the forecaster fails in his task, how can the
manager be blamed? But in the long run, this denial of uncertainty
sets the stage for surprises, shattering the manager’s confidence in
his or her ability to look ahead. Scenarios allow a manager to say, “I
am prepared for whatever happens.” It is this ability to act with a
knowledgeable sense of risk and reward that separates both the business
executive and the wise individual from a bureaucrat or a gambler.
The Explorations of Pierre Wack
Scenarios first emerged following World War II, as a method for
military planning. The U.S. Air Force tried to imagine what its
opponents might do, and to prepare alternative strategies. In the
1960s, Herman Kahn, who had been part of the Air Force effort,
refined scenarios as a tool for business prognostication. He became
America’s top futurist, predicting the inevitability of growth and
prosperity. But scenarios reached a new dimension in the early
1970s, with the work of Pierre Wack, who was a planner in the
London offices of Royal Dutch/Shell, the international oil enterprise,
in a newly formed department called Group Planning.
Pierre and other planners at Royal Dutch/Shell (notably his
colleague Ted Newland) were looking for events that might affect
the price of oil, which had been more or less steady since World
War II. Oil was, in fact, seen as a strategic commodity; consuming
nations would do what they could to keep the price low, since the
prosperity of their economies depended on oil. But there were


several significant events in the air. First, the United States was
beginning to exhaust its oil reserves. Meanwhile, American demand
for oil was steadily rising. And the emerging Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries was showing signs of flexing its
political muscle. Most of these countries were Islamic, and they
bitterly resented Western support of Israel after the 1967 six-day
Arab-Israeli war.
Looking closely at the situation, Pierre and Ted realized that
Arabs could demand much higher prices for their oil. There was
every reason that they would. The only uncertainty was when. One
could not know for sure, but it seemed likely to happen before 1975,
when old oil price agreements were due to be renegotiated. They
wrote up two sets of scenarios—each a complete set of stories about
the future, with tables of projected price figures. One story
presented the conventional wisdom at Royal Dutch/Shell: somehow,
the oil price would stay stable. In order for that to happen, a miracle
would have to occur; new oil fields, for instance, might have to
appear in non-Arab countries. The second scenario looked at the
more plausible future—an oil price crisis sparked by OPEC. Shell’s
directors listened carefully as Pierre presented these two scenarios.
The directors understood the implications: they realized that they
might have to change their business drastically.
Pierre waited for a change in behavior at Royal Dutch/Shell; but
no change in behavior came. That’s when he developed his
breakthrough: scenarios, as he later put it, should be “more than
water on a stone.” To be truly effective, they had to “change our
managers’ view of reality.”
In this new type of scenario, there were no more simple tales of
possible futures. Instead, Pierre described the full ramifications of
possible oil price shocks. He tried to make people feel those shocks.
“Prepare!” he told oil refiners and marketers. “You are about to
become a low-growth industry.” He warned the drillers and
explorers who sought new oil to get ready for the possibility that
OPEC countries would take over their oil fields. Most importantly,
Pierre vividly pointed to the forces in the world, and what sorts of


influences those forces had to have. He helped managers imagine
the decisions they might have to make as a result.
And he was just in time. In October 1973, after the “Yom Kippur”
war in the Middle East, there was an oil price shock. The “energy
crisis” burst upon the world. Of the major oil companies, only Shell
was prepared emotionally for the change. The company’s executives
responded quickly. During the following years, Shell’s fortunes rose.
From one of the weaker of the “Seven Sisters,” the seven largest
global oil companies, it became one of the two largest and,
arguably, the most profitable. Pierre was no longer concerned with
prognostication; his concern was the mind-set of decision-makers. It
was no accident that his 1985 articles on scenarios in the Harvard
Business Review were titled, “The Gentle Art of Reperceiving,” rather
than “How to Predict the Future.” To operate in an uncertain world,
people needed to be able to reperceive—to question their
assumptions about the way the world works, so that they could see
the world more clearly. The purpose of scenarios is to help yourself
change your view of reality—to match it up more closely with
reality as it is, and reality as it is going to be.
The end result, however, is not an accurate picture of tomorrow, but
better decisions about the future. The planner and the executive are
partners in taking a long view. Thus, while Pierre Wack’s seminal
role is at the heart of this story, it is thoughtful and farsighted Shell
executives who invited him into that role in the first place, provided
him with the resources he needed, and paid him the compliment of
listening to him and taking him seriously. Surrounding Pierre was
an exceptionally able team, including Ted Newland and Napier
Collyns, who were critical to the success of the scenario process. In
this book I will focus more on the role of those whose day-to-day
activities lead them to spend time taking a long view. The real value
comes from the interaction with those who must decide and act.
Pierre Wack was not interested in predicting the future. His goal
was the liberation of people’s insights. His methods were the
inspiration for the art of the long view.


The Personal Future
I have been a professional builder and user of scenarios since the
early 1970s, when I began working as a futurist for a California
think tank called Stanford Research Institute (now called SRI
International). When Pierre Wack first came to visit SRI in 1975, I
was a practitioner of the “Herman Kahn” school. I had not yet
thought about changing mind-sets or reperceiving the world.
Nonetheless, I knew Pierre by reputation: he was the man who had
anticipated the oil price crisis, when apparently nobody else had. He
was in charge of thinking about the future at one of the largest
companies in the world.
At Shell, Pierre had come to believe that if you wanted to see the
future you could not go to conventional sources of information.
Everyone else would know them as well and thus you would have
no unique advantage. You had to seek out truly unusual people who
had their finger on the pulse of change, who could see significant
but surprising forces for change. These people would be found in
very different walks of life, all over the world. He had come to SRI
at the invitation of two such “remarkable” people—Willis Harman,
who had started the futures group at SRI and had been pioneering
more intuitive approaches to thinking ahead, and Arnold Mitchell,
who was in the process of developing the SRI Values and Lifestyles
Program, a project for classifying segments of the public according
to deeper characteristics than simply age and location.
Pierre came into my office after Willis mentioned a study we had
done for the Environmental Protection Agency—on the future of
environmental issues. Pierre was a mysterious, elusive Frenchman,
almost oriental in appearance. I talked with him for about twenty
minutes, describing my work with scenarios; we were still just
describing possible futures and had not made the leap to influencing
decision-makers’ mind-sets. Nonetheless, a few days later, I received
a telex from London: “Would you leave SRI for two years and join
our team at Shell?” I demurred—one of the few decisions in my life


that I’ve regretted. But I gradually began to work with him,
performing studies for Shell, learning the art and method of Pierre’s
approach.
In 1982, I was offered another opportunity to join Royal
Dutch/Shell’s Group Planning—this time, as Pierre’s replacement.
He was retiring. I would be working instead with Arie de Geus, the
coordinator of Group Planning, who was pursuing his own set of
ideas about organizational learning. I spent five years at Shell; then,
in 1987, I took the plunge as an entrepreneur starting, with a few
friends, a new style of organization called Global Business Network,
which brings together people from many different fields to help
companies gain insight into the future. This book is based upon
what I learned along the way about how to take the long view.
In the early 1970s, the most significant question a futurist could
answer (I felt) involved a political vision: “What is a realistic goal
for a better future?” The conventional political answers to this
question when I first asked it, in the early 1970s, seemed
implausible or undesirable. The right offered wealth at a high social
price; a small proportion of the population could live at a very high
standard, while the rest of the world’s environment deteriorated.
The left promised a future of forced equality, planned and managed
by “experts.” But even before communism collapsed in Eastern
Europe, it was possible to see that central planning would fail to
meet human spiritual and psychological needs, let alone physical
needs.
There is a hunger for another set of visions of a possible society.
We know that prosperity is not inevitable: the economic mistakes of
the late sixties and seventies led to the slow growth and volatility
that followed. Moreover, as environmental problems have grown in
seriousness, people have also become increasingly aware of the
long-term costs of short-term wealth. Concerns about drugs and
crime are the inevitable outcome of failing to meet the needs of
society’s most desperate people. The celebrated collapse of
communism and the end of the post-war political order have left a
void which could be filled, perhaps, by a major war.


I know many people who are deeply pessimistic about the future;
even people who are well known and financially secure, people with
loving families, people who live in the wealthiest countries in the
world. To them, the future of the world has taken the image of
Manila, a truly unlivable city today: crowded, poor, rife with crime
and abandoned hope. But I am personally optimistic: I believe that a
better political vision is emerging. Scenarios help make that
possible; for one thing, they help people keep their visions of the
future realistic. For another, they permit everyone to envision his or
her own. I will not describe my future to you in this book; I will
show you how to see yours.
For in the end, every scenario is personal. I have been mulling
over the findings about a “human growth hormone”—a drug which,
as reported in the New York Times on July 7, 1990, appears to
reverse the effects of aging in people past middle age. The following
day, the Times ran an editorial: “This is not the fountain of youth,” it
said, in effect. “It’s not that big a deal.” The Times had written a
similar editorial back in October 1903, criticizing early efforts to
build heavier-than-air flying machines. The technology, they said,
was theoretically impossible. Two months later, the Wright Brothers
launched their plane at Kitty Hawk.
If this growth hormone works without major side effects, it could
have 
dramatic 
global 
effects. 
Consider, 
for 
instance, 
the
demographic effect: suppose the average United States life span
changes from 72 to 100. We have already seen that amount of life
span increase—30 years—since the turn of the twentieth century.
Now the life span ceiling might rise to 150. There would be large
numbers of people at 110, fewer at 120, and an equivalent number
of 100-year-olds to those who are 70 today.
It sounds like science fiction, but I take the idea of the growth
hormone seriously because I have followed news about genetic
engineering since the early 1980s; this news report fits well with
early intimations I saw that such a hormone could exist.
Nonetheless, I do not say, even to myself, that such a hormone will
exist. I am willing to admit only that it could—and that it would be
wise to think about its ramifications in advance. The implications


are profound. Population forecasts would be immediately made
wrong; demographic projections depend on the birthrate and on
average life spans (the death rate). If those assumptions are off by
30 percent, it could mean a population growth curve rising
exponentially from previous projections. If the hormone extends the
childbearing age for women, it could dramatically increase the
birthrate as well.
If the hormone appears first in wealthy countries, those that use
more natural resources, it could accelerate environmental disaster.
Conversely, it could increase pressure for environmental quality.
The long-term consequences of the greenhouse effect would be a
problem not just for the next generation, but for ourselves. We
would be our own posterity. People will want better health, because
the hormone does not eliminate vulnerability to disease, and they
will now care about making their livers, their lungs, and their hearts
last longer. Few will want to spend their last fifty years in a
wheelchair. Pressure to cure Alzheimer’s disease will increase. The
existence of the growth hormone will spur some people to
investigate long-term health insurance; they’ll need to know where
to get it if the drug becomes available.
But the most important effects of the growth hormone, for me,
concern my own life. My wife Cathleen and I, both in our forties,
recently had our first child. Amid our joy, there’s a small sadness:
“When my son is 15, I’ll be 59; when he’s 20, I’ll be 64.” But if I
knew I would live to 120, being 60 would seem comparatively
young. “When my son’s 60, I’ll be 104. Big deal!”
Many policymakers would dismiss the growth hormone as a
source of idle speculation. They could easily be caught unawares by
its effects, as they were by the danger of global warming, which was
first brought to public attention in the early 1970s. Global warming
is another issue that takes its meaning from the context of your own
life. If you’re the president of an automobile or energy company, it
might mean dramatic extra expenses, and equally dramatic
marketing and research opportunities. If you’re a student, it could
mean different choices in what form of education to pursue. If


you’re starting a family, it could mean choosing a different
community to live in.
I don’t mean to suggest that you spend all your waking hours
considering arcane possibilities. The trick is finding those
possibilities to consider which are significant. As Paul Valéry
suggested (in a 1944 essay), the unpredictability of the world has
made this sort of practice an imperative, even in daily life:
Unpredictability in every field is the result of the conquest of the
whole of the present world by scientific power. This invasion by
active knowledge tends to transform man’s environment and man
himself—to what extent, with what risks, what deviations from the
basic conditions of existence and of the preservation of life we
simply do not know. Life has become, in short, the object of an
experiment of which we can say only one thing—that it tends to
estrange us more and more from what we were, or what we think
we are, and that it is leading us … we do not know, and can by no
means imagine, where.
Not just our livelihoods, but our souls are endangered—unless we
learn to distinguish the significant aspects of the future. The
scenario method works in this respect. It is specifically based on our
own personal urgencies (or on a company’s institutional urgencies).
It uses our individual needs as a filter. But unlike Valéry my
experience says that it is possible to study and imagine where we
may be headed. By imagining where we are going, we reduce this
complexity, this unpredictability which (as Valéry saw) encroaches
upon our lives.
OceanofPDF.com


THE SMITH & HAWKEN STORY: THE PROCESS OF
SCENARIO-BUILDING
            Starting a small business, particularly an innovative one,
involves most of the same critical long-term questions as starting a
new venture in a large company. Though scenarios have been used
mostly by huge companies such as Shell and AT&T, small businesses
are even more vulnerable to the kinds of surprises and uncertainties
that often overwhelm the plans of giants. What will future
customers want? What will happen to costs, to technology, to
distribution systems, and so on. Beginning in 1977 I was involved
with a few friends who were starting a small business. Working
together as a team we used scenarios to think about how the
business environment might develop for a fledgling mail-order
garden tool company such as Smith & Hawken.
The business began with a real need: better garden tools. The
company actually had its roots in a nonprofit organization, Ecology
Action, led by John Jeavons. In the United States, they were actively
promoting an old European method of organic gardening called the
French Intensive Method. This method involved deep and hard
digging, but poorly made American tools tended to break easily
under the stress. Fortunately, Allen Chadwicke, the Englishman who
had introduced the method to Ecology Action, also knew that in his
home country, a land of serious gardeners, you could find good tools
from a well-established toolmaker known as Bulldog Tools. But how
should they make them available in the United States? Ecology
Action, as a nonprofit organization, was not set up to become a
garden tool importer and retailer. An earlier commercial venture in
Ohio with Bulldog Tools had already failed.
Fortunately, a close friend, Paul Hawken, was on the board of
Ecology Action. He agreed, somewhat reluctantly, to start a business
