# The Smith & Hawken Story: The Process of Scenario-Building

to import and sell the tools in the United States. Paul quickly drew
in our friend Dave Smith, the manager of a local food cooperative in
Menlo Park, California. Paul had a varied background: he had
founded the Erewhon natural foods distribution company, and
subsequently written a best-selling book, The Magic of Findhorn,
about a remarkable commune in the north of Scotland. Paul and I
were on the board of the Portola Institute together, where he had
helped another nonprofit with a successful business. Paul had also
worked with us at SRI International, helping to write scenarios.
A small group of us added our money to the money Paul invested
and I went off to England with a $25,000 check. Claringdon Forge,
which made tools for Bulldog, is located in Wigan, one of the old
British industrial centers. I toured the place. The fellow who made
the forks was working on the same forge his father had worked, as
had his grandfather before him, during the Industrial Revolution.
The fellow who selected the wood for the handles hit the white
American ash rods on a block of wood and listened to the sound. He
had been doing that for nearly fifty years. He had been breaking in
his successor for the past ten years. I went to the head of their
export business, put our check on the table, and said we were
willing to pay in advance and that if we could sell the first
shipment, we wanted the North American rights. He told me that
two other people had tried the same scheme and failed because they
did not know how to market such high-priced products in the
United States, but neither of them had offered to pay in advance. So
he took us up on the offer.
Smith & Hawken received the first container of tools, drew up a
modest catalogue, and sold most everything. The second catalogue
was bigger and more beautiful; the third won design awards. And
the company took off. Smith & Hawken sold two hundred thousand
dollars the first year, reached a million dollars in annual sales
within three years, and grew to 10 million dollars annually within
five years.
During the formative stages of Smith & Hawken, Paul and I were
engaged in an intensive discussion on what the scenarios we were
developing might tell us about the future of a small mail-order high-


quality garden tool business. In the late seventies, a time of great
economic turbulence, we were seeing a very high level of
uncertainty. What would make sense for Smith & Hawken in any of
the wide range of possibilities five or ten years in the future? Having
begun the business it now became incumbent upon us to think more
deeply about where we were really headed.
We had one main thing to investigate: the likeliest human needs
during the 1980s and 1990s. Just gathering the background data for
such a question would have required exhaustive amounts of reading:
everything from economic market projections to daily newspaper
reports. Fortunately, I had asked some of the same questions a few
years earlier, in scenarios for the Weyerhaeuser lumber company.
They, too, were thinking about entering potential new businesses.
We had noticed several intriguing trends: for one thing, more
consumers were demanding higher-quality goods and services.
Products with planned obsolescence built in—American-made
appliances, for instance—were suffering from rapidly dropping
sales.
These new customers were, by and large, baby boom customers—
Americans who had come of age in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
In the mid-seventies Paul and I could be sure of their numbers
because all the adults of the eighties and nineties had already been
born (allowing for some uncertainty due to immigration). We, of
course, were members of the same group. We had an intuitive feel
for their needs and desires. We assumed that the uniqueness of that
group’s tastes would remain, only grow and mature. It would be the
major factor behind the success of any business we started. But
there were many things we couldn’t know for sure. For instance, we
did not know what policies a Republican presidential administration
would institute. Nor did we know the future of the global economy.
The Smith & Hawken Scenarios


Scenarios often (but not always) seem to fall into three groups:
more of the same, but better; worse (decay and depression); and
different but better (fundamental change). The Weyerhaeuser
scenarios had fit that pattern. There were three very different
possible images of the American economy in the 1980s:
•  One image was a world of high economic growth and increasing
wealth, in which young people (the maturing baby boom) made a
lot of money, bought houses, and spent money on those houses. It
was a world in which consumption and materialism were driving
forces. Social problems would emerge, but governments and
businesses would always be able to hire experts with the right
technologies to solve them; meanwhile, individuals would act
primarily for themselves. We called this the “Official Future.”
Instinctively, we felt it was unlikely. Back then, our friends assumed
that some form of collapse was imminent. They saw Volkswagen
Beetles as the cars of the immediate future—not BMWs.
Nonetheless, we considered this future carefully, because one
always has to ask the question: “What if the mainstream
assumptions and plans turn out to be correct?”
•  In the depression scenarios, the economy went down instead of
up. This world would be marked by a continuation of the serious
economic troubles of the 1970s—and worse. We imagined an
underlying plot in which the 1970s were symptomatic of a far
greater period of decay. Prosperity would gradually decline,
evolving into poverty. Growth would be very low or negative.
Famine would develop in the Third World. Environmental crises
would loom. Oil prices would rise endlessly. Natural resources, such
as minerals and forests, would become scarce as the planet reached
and surpassed its natural limits to human population and
consumption. Thus, we used the depression scenario as a tool for
thinking about surviving in hard times.
•    The third scenario was built around the idea of a fundamental
social change—a shift in values that would amount to a profound


transformation of Western culture. Ideas had begun to circulate
about living more simply and environmentally benignly, about
holistic medicine and natural foods, about pursuing inner growth
rather than material possessions, and about striving for some kind of
planetary consciousness. Although what we called the “inner-
directed” portion of the population was small, its values appeared to
have potential for spreading quickly through the wider public—
especially the second half of the baby boom, which was just then
coming of age. In this scenario, economic growth would not be as
dynamic as that of the Official Future, but it would not matter.
Quality of life, not quantity of goods, would be emphasized. “Right
livelihood” would be more important than status symbols.
It was essential to look at the hypothetical worlds described by
these scenarios from as many angles as possible. If the BMW was the
car of the Official Future, and VW bugs (or old Chevy vans)
represented depression transportation, then the transformation car
would be a Honda. A Honda isn’t cheap; it’s even luxurious in some
ways. But it is small, benign, efficient, and affordable, especially if
you plan on keeping the car for a decade or more. In the depression
scenario, used-car lots and do-it-yourself car repair would be good
businesses. In the official scenario, it would be wise to invest in
Mercedes dealerships. In the transformation scenario, for which
Berkeley and Cambridge were more accurate models than Wall
Street, high-quality car maintenance was a logical thing to sell. So
was the kind of top-notch backpacking and mountaineering
equipment made by North Face and Patagonia.
We also saw that the differences between the scenarios made it
very easy to pick the wrong business. In the prosperity scenario, the
market for inexpensive, durable sandals would expand far less
rapidly than in the transformation scenario. Macy’s—the high
middle—would be hurt in the depression scenario, but Nordstrom,
Neiman-Marcus, and Wal-Mart would do well. (There would still be
enough rich people to support a select group of high-end stores.) In
the transformation scenario, traditional marketing and distribution
services might find themselves pinched as people (and businesses)


sought alternatives. For instance, a bank that required people to
shuffle through its bureaucratic forms too much would suffer.
In those days, you could go into a local hardware store and buy a
shovel or garden fork for ten or fifteen dollars. Bulldog Tools, when
you factored in shipping and retailing costs, would have to sell for
two or three times as much. They would, however, last much longer
under heavy use than an ordinary implement. Another critical
question to ask was whether there would be a large enough number
of people willing to pay that much for a product that was not a
fancy power tool.
It was clear right away that in all three scenarios the baby boom
was more of a factor than ever. A large number of people were
entering the right age group to buy homes and set up households.
Many would become amateur gardeners. We also began to realize
that the other significant age group, those people reaching
retirement age, would be natural customers for such a product,
because gardening has traditionally been a popular retirement
activity. Their numbers, like those of the baby boom members, were
predetermined. We knew they would be plentiful.
In the first scenario—a prosperous economy—many people in the
baby boom would indeed have the money. But would they buy
houses? We guessed that life in the city would become increasingly
difficult, businesses might leave urban areas, a second wave of
babies would begin, and many people would be likely to buy
suburban, semi-urban, or small-town property—the kinds of places
where people have gardens. Even if the prosperity remained urban,
its beneficiaries would be able to afford second homes in the
country. All of which suggested a substantial increase in gardening,
especially status gardening—having a beautiful garden to go along
with a beautiful home. This phenomenon resonated with a trend we
had been tracking, and which Paul would later describe in his book
The Next Economy: the Europeanization of the American consumer.
Paul meant that as the American economy developed and became
more affluent the tastes of customers would become more
sophisticated and demanding. Indeed the economy as a whole was
moving from a grounding in massive industry and energy to a basis


in information, skills, and efficiency; people would buy fewer
things, but of higher quality.
In the depression scenario, in a world where there were a lot of
potential customers who were not making much money, it was
reasonable to expect many of them to practice a more serious kind
of gardening. They would garden to escape from a dreary world. If
they used Jeavons’s double-digging methods, they could produce
very high yields in their backyards. Their gardens would recall
Depression homesteads and the Victory gardens of World War II.
Flannel shirts, overalls, and workboots rather than designer jeans
characterized the market in this world.
But why would people buy expensive tools in hard times? We
reached the conclusion that they could not afford the luxury of bad
tools. A carpenter can’t afford a shoddy hammer; a high-quality drill
is no longer a luxury, but a necessity. If you are trying to bring a
crop in, you don’t want to go out and buy a new shovel every
couple of months when the old one breaks. The imported garden
tool business, while it would not do as well as it would under a
prosperity scenario, was robust enough to survive even in a
depression.
In the social transformation scenario, the society would not be
fabulously wealthy, but a large number of people would be fairly
well off. It would become important to find pastimes which were
pleasant and contributed to a better world. People would literally
seek to “cultivate their gardens,” as Voltaire’s Candide had put it. In
this more contemplative world, gardening would again be an
important activity. It would be an act of contemplation and healing.
The garden would be a place for meditation, and a potential source
of healthy food. Many people would grow their own produce
because of concern about pesticides and they would use such
organic methods as French Intensive. Again, good tools would be in
order.
The new business would prosper the most, we felt, in the Official
Future scenario. But in all the scenarios we could think of, it was
likely to survive and even succeed. And it fit other important
criteria. Smith & Hawken should be a socially responsible business,


one that contributed something useful and valuable to the world as
well as generating profits. At the worst, it was clear that there
wasn’t much harm in it.
But there were more useful questions. The importance of one
factor emerged from our scenario process: the U.S. balance of
payments. Because we were contemplating an import business, the
strength of the dollar was crucial. It was, in fact, directly linked to
our profit margins. We looked at our scenarios again and asked
whether a three- or four-dollar pound, which would wipe out our
profits, was likely in any of them. We concluded that even a
depression scenario would affect the United Kingdom, most likely,
as much as the United States. An extremely weak dollar was
unlikely; when the world is in trouble the dollar seems more secure
to most countries than their own currency.
The next key question concerned the approach for selling the
tools. Retail and direct mail were the only two serious options.
When we looked at the retail business through the lens of the
scenarios, we saw that it could mean serious problems. If oil prices
went up even more (as we thought they would in the Official
Future), it would affect the suburbs. Shopping malls would be
awkward places. Overhead would be killing. In the depression
scenario, the deterioration of cities could turn out to be a problem.
And selling garden tools in the city didn’t make a lot of sense.
Though retail was seriously considered, the most important concern
was the earlier failures in selling expensive garden tools, which led
Smith & Hawken to believe that the ability to target possible
customers via mail order was an important advantage.
But in all three scenarios, there were good reasons why mail order
would do well. In the prosperous world, people would be very busy
and under enormous time pressure; mail order is a quick and easy
way to shop. In the depression scenario, capital- and inventory-
intensive retail operations would have a hard time surviving. And in
the social transformation model, mail order makes more sense for
the Whole Earth Catalogue community.


The Results
Reality turned out to be a combination of all three scenarios. On
the surface, the 1980s played out fairly close to our prosperity
future. The lifestyles of growth and wealth we imagined were very
similar to the “yuppie” lifestyle of the 1980s. However, the Reagan
era was also a time of large-scale homelessness, a deteriorating
natural environment, and widespread social problems. Although the
quest for financial security and material possessions became a
dominant value, the quest for meaning did not disappear—and the
need for some constraints on industrial excesses in response to ever-
worsening environmental crises seemed to be growing. There were
three scenarios because there were, in effect, three Americas. Smith
& Hawken sold little to the depression America (if it had been more
dominant, we might have sold more to it), but sold very well to the
other two cultures.
As it turned out, over-the-counter retail business has done better
than expected (though the experiences of such companies as The
Sharper Image and Banana Republic suggest the serious pitfalls on
that path). Smith & Hawken now has a small retail business which
does very well in northern California. However, the company was
not hurt by the mail-order decision; indeed, focusing on mail order
allowed Smith & Hawken to grow in a coherent fashion. The future
of the dollar, on the other hand, did follow the expected path;
during the 1980s, it strengthened substantially. Even now, the
“weak” dollar is still stronger than most global currencies. Had we
been wrong about the dollar, it would have hurt the business
dramatically—but the scenario process had provided the means for
testing our assumptions about it.
The Process of Scenarios


There is a wonderful book by novelist John Gardner called The Art
of Fiction, in which he never describes exactly how to write a story.
Rather, he says, here are some of the techniques you can use, some
of the helpful things you can think about while writing, and some of
the methods by which you can practice writing. But there is no
prescription for an effective story. Scenarios are much the same.
Nonetheless, a scenario has a recognizable process. For the origins
of Smith & Hawken the process went something like the following:
we started by isolating the decision we wanted to make: “There was
a clear need to meet, but what would lead to a successful business,
where others had failed?” To investigate that issue required an
investment in time and research, revisiting our earlier work, and our
on-going scenario development work. As thinking and exploration
continued, the questions were constantly refined. “What might
happen to future customers and suppliers? How much could they
afford and what would tools cost?”
In the meantime, we thought about the key factors that would
affect decisions. Some of these were what scenario-planners call
“predetermined elements,” factors we could count on. The size of
the baby boom population was certain. Much more uncertain was
their range of economic opportunity: whether they could afford to
buy houses and what kinds of homes they would want. Paul and I
spent most of our time thinking about such factors, and trying to
decide which factors were critical. Consumers’ values were deeply
important, for example. While potential crime rates would have
mattered more if we were considering careers in law enforcement,
as prospective garden tool retailers, Smith & Hawken could afford
mostly to ignore them except as they affected the quality of urban
life.
Most significant was the future of the economy, so the focus was
on that. And it was clear, from experience studying history, that
several types of “plots” were possible. (Chapter 8 of this book
describes those plot lines in detail, and how to apply them to
specific situations.) Three emerged—the Official Future, the
Depression, and the Transformative Economy.


All that, in a sense, was preparation. The true work took place in
the last step, rehearsing the implications. How would such a
business fare in each of the three worlds? That is also the most
interesting part of the scenario process, the part that yields the most
surprises. Is the balance of payments a real worry? Were there other
aspects to the decision which, for one reason or another, had not
been seen until now? Often, this step reveals interconnections that
were not apparent before. Questions about the relative strength of
the dollar and the pound are typical. You start looking at a small
garden tool business and realize you have to care about what is
happening in the global economy.
Scenario thinking is an art, not a science. But the basic steps are
the same—whether for a small business, an individual, or a large
corporation. Typically, you will find yourself moving through the
scenario process several times—refining a decision, performing
more research, seeking out more key elements, trying on new plots,
and rehearsing the implications yet again. The order of the steps
may be muddled; in some cases, you may start with a plot line first
and ask yourself, “If this plot is to take place, what decisions am I
likely to want to make?” Or you could start with a new finding
based on research, as I did in the last chapter with the human
growth hormone: “If this possibility becomes a fact, what scenarios
could it set in motion?”
Scenarios are not conceived of one at a time. You develop a range
of two or three potential futures, allowing you to address an array of
possibilities and rehearse your responses to each of them. At the
same time, more than four scenarios tend to be too complex; you
cannot keep track of their ramifications in your mind. Using
scenarios is not a matter of memorizing “Plan A” and “Plan B,”
because in the real world, A and B overlap and recombine in
unexpected ways. It is a matter of training yourself to think through
how things might happen that you might otherwise dismiss—to get
to know the shape of unfolding reality. To have at hand the answer
to the question, “What if …?”
You cannot create scenarios from recipes—but you can practice
creating scenarios. As with any art, some people have a knack for it,


but anyone can learn the basic practice, and improve. Helping you
do so is the purpose of this book.
OceanofPDF.com


THE SCENARIO-BUILDING ANIMAL
            People have an innate ability to build scenarios, and to
foresee the future. This has been suggested in the work of two well-
respected neurobiologists, Dr. William Calvin and Dr. David Ingvar.
According to their theories, our drive to tell ourselves stories about
the future may well be “hardwired” into the human brain—closely
linked to our abilities to speak and construct language. Planning
ahead in other animals is a hormonal process, in which hoarding
behaviors are triggered by, for example, shortening daylight hours.
But we humans are capable of planning decades ahead, able to take
account of extraordinary contingencies far more irregular than the
seasons.
Dr. William Calvin, author of The Cerebral Symphony and The
Ascent of Mind, offers a compelling explanation. The part of the
human brain that controls speech, he says, is also the part involved
with ballistics. Ballistic prowess—the ability to hit animals with
thrown rocks—was apparently an important survival skill for early
humans. Calvin posits that the abilities to think ahead and to make
small talk are side-benefits of marksmanship. Anyone who has ever
fired an arrow or spoken before a large group will confirm that a
key aspect of both ballistics and language is preplanning—
performing enough of a mental “dry run” in order to line up all the
sequences of fine muscle movements required to perform the
activity.
Calvin’s hypothesis makes intuitive sense to me. I have always
marveled at the sight of a great quarterback such as Joe Montana,
dropping back, looking across the field forty yards away, seeing the
opposing linemen closing in on him, and two or three receivers
running downfield amid a dozen or so other people. The
quarterback picks one of the receivers; while running himself, he
