# The Scenario-Building Animal

lofts a spiraling pass and drops it into the receiver’s arms.
Essentially, Montana has made a prediction about where he and his
receiver would be several highly unpredictable seconds later. The
equivalent problem in military ballistics—designing a machine to
hurl a long-distance projectile from a moving source to a moving
target—is so difficult that it took the first real computers to produce
radar-guided anti-aircraft guns during World War II. With all the
advances in robotics and computer control systems in the last
twenty years, no human-designed system can yet duplicate the feats
of Joe Montana.
To 
achieve 
those 
feats, 
Montana’s 
mind—conscious 
and
unconscious—must have an extraordinary ability to look ahead. We
may not all have his level of skill, but each of us has the same
neurological connection—between the ballistic-calculating abilities
of the human brain and such other capabilities as imagination and
foresight. This is closely tied to (or may, as Calvin suggests, have
helped bring about) our capacity for self-awareness. We human
beings can run through a motion in our minds alone, with our
muscles detached from the circuit, and then run through it again for
real, with the muscles actually carrying out the commands. We can
simulate the past and future in our minds, practicing different acts
and judging which is best. While hiking, for instance, we may hear a
climber above us. It is part of our nature to imagine an accidental
rockfall loosed by his or her boots, and therefore to stay out of the
fall line.
It takes more effort, perhaps, to string these small intimations into
scenarios. But we do it. For instance, we don’t merely foresee the
words we are about to speak. We construct sentences in our head,
and often practice them inwardly, before uttering them. In dreams,
Calvin asserts, we spin entire scenes in our sleep—in a sense, a
dream is our unconscious rehearsal of a possible future. If this book
seems to present a formal, overly explicit methodology for
constructing scenarios, please remember that these techniques are
an extension of a skill which people are extremely well equipped to
exercise. Once you get used to the idea of scenarios, using them
comes more easily.


Some people are immediately great at building scenarios. Others
need more practice. But this difference in proficiency has nothing to
do with peoples’ character. It’s the result of differences in training,
experience, and intuition. Social scientists often have a hard time;
they have been trained to stay away from “What if?” questions and
concentrate on “What was?” Accountants and engineers typically
have a hard time because their training is deterministic. An
accountant’s columns and rows must add up to a single answer for
any accountant who tries it, or the work is “wrong.”
In contrast, a cultural anthropologist knows clearly that what he
or she sees in a particular village will be different from what
another cultural anthropologist sees. The anthropologist is more
attuned to uncertainty and multiple points of view, and can more
easily accept the practice of scenarios. The same is true for
historians. In business, the most attuned practitioners are people
who have made mistakes—people who have gotten it wrong, and
want to find other ways of dealing with their problems. Older
business people are often more sensitive to the process.
Anyone can create scenarios, however; but it will be much easier
if you are willing to encourage your own imagination, novelty, and
even sense of the absurd—as well as your sense of realism.
Memories of the Future
The stories we tell ourselves are powerful. David Ingvar, a
Swedish neurobiologist, has written of scenarios as “memories of the
future.” Ingvar studied the behavior of alcoholics, trying to
understand the biochemical and psychophysiological processes
operating in alcoholism. He concluded, as had William Calvin, that
the mind constantly tells itself stories of the future. Sometimes these
are stories about the next few seconds. At other times, they are
stories about the next hours or weeks, from walking across the room
to get a cup of coffee to paying the rent. Many of these are


subconscious or at the edge of awareness; sometimes they bubble up
and we remember something we had planned to do. In his earlier
work with brain-damaged patients he had observed that their
inability to perceive the flow and interconnection of events was a
function of their inability to imagine these micro-scenarios of the
future. They could not understand the meaning of events. They had
a hard time making choices and, as a result, acting.
To Ingvar, alcoholics suffer, in part, because their scenario-
spinning processes break down. Because of a neurophysiological
reaction to the drink, they lose their connection between
imagination and action. Since they no longer use their imagination
as much to look ahead, they lose their sense of the continuity of
time. They become disoriented. The alcohol then helps them to feel
comfortable in their disorientation. Thus, we often hear people say
of an alcoholic, “He [or she] has lost touch with reality.”
Consider the plight of someone close to an alcoholic (or an addict,
or anyone who has lost touch in that way). It does no good to plead,
preach, or nag; the other person may be trusted, but the alcoholic
has no mental picture of tomorrow. Ingvar argues that alcoholics are
literally unable to recognize the future as it unfolds in front of them.
They cannot easily imagine what might happen to them under
different situations: “What would happen if you could no longer buy
alcohol? Or if you could no longer perform your job? Or if your
body began to deteriorate?”
We all, of course, share that same blindness to reality as well. Arie
de Geus, a pioneer in thinking about organizational learning, tells
the story of a tribesman who was transported from a remote
mountain wilderness (a society that had not yet discovered the
wheel) to a large city. When he returned, he reported that the most
significant thing he saw was somebody using a wheelbarrow to
carry more bananas than he had ever thought possible. He literally
did not see the significance of automobiles and skyscrapers. He was
not prepared to see them, any more than an alcoholic is prepared to
take note of the damage done by the addiction. But the tribesman
was well prepared to see an unprecedented load of bananas.


Historian Barbara Tuchman puts it this way: “Men will not believe
what does not fit in with their plans or suit their prearrangements.”
What sorts of things are reasonably healthy Westerners—
presumably the readers of this book—unprepared to see? It varies
from individual to individual, but there is no shortage of examples.
In 1975, I led a team at SRI looking at potential future crises for the
office of the White House science adviser. Our results were to be
presented to the President’s Science Advisory Council, a group of
highly distinguished scientists and businessmen. They were led by
Dr. William Baker, then head of Bell Labs, and Simon Ramo, the
founder of TRW; nuclear physicist Edward Teller; Edwin Land of
Polaroid; Charles Townes, the inventor of the laser; Donald
Kennedy, later president of Stanford University; and Carl Djerassi,
an eminent pharmaceutical entrepreneur, inventor of the “pill.” The
White House did not want America to be taken by surprise again, as
the country had been by the oil price crisis.
So our team looked at a number of potential scenarios. Among the
problems we anticipated, for example, was a much more stressful
society. All of the scenarios led to much higher stress in the social
environment—from crime, unemployment, inflation, psychological
instability, or even the stress that comes from too much success. We
plotted how these types of stress would probably lead to second-
level unwanted effects: drug abuse, alcohol abuse, cancer and other
health problems, homelessness, and social violence. We painted a
picture, for instance, of street criminals with increasingly high-
powered weapons, leading to the equivalent of armed forces in our
cities by the 1980s.
The study was a miserable failure. The distinguished panel of
scientists attacked each problem, one by one. “It’s impossible,” they
said each time. “We won’t let those problems come up.” They meant
both “we” as a people and “we” as a government. Today, crack
dealers routinely patrol inner-city neighborhoods with Uzis.
We also did scenarios for the Department of Transportation,
which ended in even bigger disaster. What might happen, we asked,
if they didn’t build enough highways or public transportation? They
could end up with massive gridlock in urban areas. Our project was


singled out by Senator William Proxmire for one of his “Golden
Fleece” awards because no one would be stupid enough to do that
he said. He ridiculed the process of considering these “implausible”
possibilities. 
I 
concluded 
that 
the 
federal 
government 
in
Washington, D.C., was systematically unable to think about the
future. By definition all of their policies must be successful and they
have foreseen every problem. To think about any other possibility is
to imply the impossible, that they are less than all-knowing and
powerful.
You can see the results of a similar resistance among American
military leaders. I will show in Chapter 5 that it was possible to
foresee perestroika and glasnost in the early 1980s, and, indeed,
American intelligence and military agencies heard the prediction at
least several times. But their leaders could not accept it. They had
imagined every conceivable scenario about the Cold War—gradual
arms buildup, new technologies, a freeze imposed by one or more
nations, broken arms agreements, even the Armageddon of nuclear
war. But they never asked themselves: “What if we won?”
After America did win the Cold War (or, at least, our purported
enemies lost it) the U.S. military leaders had no idea of what to do.
They had prepared no strategy for success. Thus, they now find
themselves foundering, trying desperately to find new enemies.
Some suggest fighting the drug lords, or turning the troops loose to
“battle” environmental problems. (Never mind the fact that
environmental problems can’t be “solved” through military
methods.) As I write this in August 1990 the military is rapidly
building a new presence in Saudi Arabia, but is unable to implement
the President’s goal of driving the Iraqis out of Kuwait. The new
military to cope with the Saddam Husseins of today and tomorrow
will be very different from the military needed to contain a hostile
superpower.
But the Pentagon brass are not the only group refusing to see
reality; people who talk about the “peace dividend” have not
considered whether bringing thousands of newly unemployed
soldiers back to the United States would create any social problems.
It’s not clear whether there will be social problems as a result. One


plausible scenario suggests a severe skilled labor shortage in the
United States during the 1990s, which many returning servicemen
could help fill if other conditions are right. What’s important is that
people are refusing to think about the possibilities.
Chains of Perception
Scenarios are not about predicting the future, rather they are
about perceiving futures in the present. In contemporary psychology
one finds different theories describing how and why people deceive
themselves about reality. Denial, for example, is the first of the
psychological stages that we undergo to protect ourselves from bad
news, such as the death of someone close to us. To Elisabeth Kübler-
Ross, author of On Death and Dying, denial was the first stage of
reaction, followed by anger, bargaining, despair, and ultimately
acceptance.
When decision-makers begin to look at the future, denial acts as
an automatic shut-off valve: “I can’t consider that.” With his book
On Thermonuclear War: Thinking About the Unthinkable, Herman
Kahn made his early reputation as a futurist through his public
willingness to consider what most people were denying in the early
1960s: that nuclear war might actually take place between the
United States and the Soviets. By raising the possibility publicly, he
helped people see realistically what they had at stake, and arguably
inspired many of the most successful disarmament initiatives.
William Proxmire’s ridicule was another example of denial. Too
often, he fought not to cut unnecessary spending, but to deny
unconventional thinking.
Stories can be a powerful way of avoiding the dangers of denial.
In theater, the “willing suspension of disbelief” is what the play
prompts from an audience. Everyone in the theater knows that he is
seeing actors before a painted backdrop, but—for the purposes of
emotion and understanding—the viewers react as if they are seeing


the real world. A good scenario, similarly, asks people to suspend
their disbelief in its stories long enough to appreciate their impact.
You know that a scenario is effective when someone, pondering an
issue that has been taboo or unthinkable before, says, “Yes. I can see
how that might happen. And what I might do as a result.”
“Scenarios deal with two worlds,” wrote Pierre Wack. “The world
of facts and the world of perceptions. They explore for facts but they
aim at perceptions inside the heads of decision-makers. Their
purpose is to gather and transform information of strategic
significance into fresh perceptions. This transformation process is
not trivial—more often than not it does not happen. When it works,
it is a creative experience that generates a heartfelt ‘Aha!’ from your
managers and leads to strategic insights beyond the mind’s previous
reach.”
Tell Me a Story; the Power of Narrative
Anthropologist Mary Catherine Bateson offers the story of her
father, philosopher Gregory Bateson, who used to tell a joke about a
man who asked a computer, “Do you compute that you will ever
think like a human being?” After assorted bleeps and blinks, the
answer appeared: “That reminds me of a story.”
It is a common belief that serious information should appear in
tables, graphs, numbers, or at least sober scholarly language. But
important questions about the future are usually too complex or
imprecise for the conventional languages of business and science.
Instead, we use the language of stories and myths. Stories have a
psychological impact that graphs and equations lack. Stories are
about meaning; they help explain why things could happen in a
certain way. They give order and meaning to events—a crucial
aspect of understanding future possibilities.
Stories are an old way of organizing knowledge, but their place in
the world has been less visible since the rise of scientific philosophy


during the Enlightenment. Theories about, for example, the way
gases respond to heat and pressure were provable, always correct,
and often simple. Even outside the sciences, the paradigm for truth
was that it should be law-like, preferably reduced to the form of a
solvable equation. However, since complexity has emerged as a
driving force in the way the world works, the dominant belief in a
deterministic and reliably quantifiable truth has begun to yield.
There are now many ways of knowing. Our need for realism and
proof is as strong, but we can find and express that in this different
way. If the planners of Three Mile Island had written a story about
how things could go wrong, instead of a numeric analysis of
possible fault sequences, they would have been better prepared for
the surprise they actually encountered when their complex machine
went astray.
Stories have many advantages. They open people to multiple
perspectives, because they allow them to describe how different
characters see in events the meaning of those events. Moreover,
stories help people cope with complexity. In a famous essay called
The Hedgehog and the Fox, historical philosopher Isaiah Berlin
compared Tolstoy’s War and Peace with conventional “scientific”
histories of the Napoleonic invasion of Russia. Those histories
presented only a succession of events. Tolstoy, by contrast, wrote
history as a novel, using story-telling to arrange the facts in a way
which gave them meaning.
Scenarios are stories that give meaning to events. This does not
mean that they contain fictional characters, although sometimes we
write scenarios with fictional characters to experiment with the
ambience of the settings we are trying to imagine. “Isao Okimura
was just about to board the new hypersonic Orient Express on his
way from Tokyo to San Francisco,” began one such scenario I wrote,
about the possibilities of future widespread mergers between
Japanese and American corporations. But inventing characters is
neither necessary nor, in many cases, helpful: the point is to imagine
attitudes of key players who will affect future events.


Scenarios Are Myths of the Future
Often, these key players are large collections of individuals in the
form of institutions. The attitudes they embody are themselves
stories—or, more precisely, myths. Indeed, histories with meaning
that are shared very widely are often expressed as myths. The
phrase “American Dream,” for example, is a myth of our time. It
embodies a mesh of feelings and beliefs, some of them
contradictory, well known to Americans and to everyone else in the
world. This myth influences goals in business and daily life (for
instance, a decision to emigrate to the United States), and values
passed on to our children. The “Myth of the Melting Pot” is one part
of the American Dream, symbolized by the Statue of Liberty.
Capitalism and democracy are other aspects, embodied in Horatio
Alger and the Constitution. Values such as individualism and
materialism are woven into the fabric of the mythos. What is the
U.S. Constitution but the formal story of the political utopia the
founding fathers designed?
The Japanese also have a national myth—based on resilience and
self-reliance. Few Americans have paid enough attention to Japan to
see it. In American business and government circles, the Japanese
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) is seen as a
masterful organizing force that mobilizes Japanese scientific and
engineering enterprise in a way unmatched by other countries. It is
a conspiratorial kind of mythology—unseen forces moving beneath
the surface of events.
That’s wrong. MITI is more of an expression of the underlying
myth of Japan, a story that includes its history of rebounding back
after repeated crises have struck its islands. The “four devils” that
the nation has faced are earthquakes, great fires, hurricanes, and
unwise leaders—cataclysms outside the population’s control that
often flattened them temporarily. A history of doing what is
necessary to survive, even after extensive damage, is deep in the
Japanese culture. People in Japan save money not because they are


trying to take over the world, but because they know they might
have to rebuild after disasters. They value education as a form of
cultural continuity and defense against future threats. All these
cultural norms emerged over Japan’s long history; they can be
understood only as part of a story about Japan, just as the American
Dream is part of a story about the United States.
How do these two national myths affect behavior? Consider the
oil price crisis of 1973, in which a sudden jump in oil prices affected
both nations dramatically. The Japanese reacted with their myth of
resilience. Realizing that they were no longer living in a world of
cheap energy, their leaders (with the support of their people)
quickly understood that they would always depend on others for
their energy lifeline. So the Japanese made themselves the most
energy-efficient industrial economy on the planet in less than three
years. That meant a severe recession in the Japanese economy while
they rebuilt the capital structure. By 1976, their energy-efficiency
had improved enormously.
The United States reacted differently. Politically, American
leaders fought to preserve the country’s “manifest destiny.”
Corporate leaders refused to believe that this would be any more
than a temporary setback in the “Land of Opportunity.” Individuals
reacted, at first, with anger (at gas lines, at the Arabs, at the oil
companies). Then, each according to his or her means and
inclinations, we separately set about making our lives more energy-
efficient—or not. The United States remains more vulnerable to oil
crises than Japan despite the fact that Japan imports all of the oil it
needs. The American myth was not “worse” than the Japanese;
arguably, our attitudes about melting pots and individual fulfillment
will serve us well in the years to come. But in this instance, the
Japanese myth led to more economic success. The trick, in a
situation like that, is to recognize the various myths in play.
Myths are a particular type of story. James Robertson, author of
American Myth, American Reality, offers the best definition I’ve seen:
Myths are “the way things are” as people in a particular society
believe them to be; and they are the models people refer to when


they try to understand their world and its behavior. Myths are the
patterns—of behavior, of belief, and of perception—which people
have in common. Myths are not deliberately, or necessarily
consciously, fictitious.
The sources of myths are not easy to recognize in their own times.
Indeed, the notion of studying myths through analytical means is a
product of the modern era. The ancient Greeks probably did not
think of their stories of Zeus and Hermes as myths. No one in 400
B.C. Athens would have said, “That’s a very nice way to explain the
prevalence of thunderstorms.” Few probably realized that the stories
of Zeus’s many wives originated as cultural “glue”; when the horse-
riding, war-making, worshipers of the patriarchal thunder god, Zeus,
invaded the Peloponnesian peninsula, they conquered countless
isolated valleys, home to matriarchal, agricultural worshipers of
various earth goddesses. So Zeus simply married the local goddesses
via mythical tales, and the conquered cultures joined the cultural
family.
As James Robertson points out, American myths have similar
roots. The story of George Washington and the cherry tree, for
instance, solves a contradiction deep in the American character: the
conflict between rebellion and innocence. A culture based on
revolution must condone certain acts of violence. Yet America is
also the land of the new, the young, and the innocent. The cherry
tree story—violence against the father’s possession followed by
honest admission and the father’s praise—fulfills the wish of every
rebellious child that rebellion and independence will be met with
approval and will result in being once again enfolded in the arms of
the father. The literal truth of any of these stories—whether, for
instance, George Washington really chopped down that tree—is far
less important than its insight into the way Americans see their role
in a moral universe. Years later, American movies such as The Wild
One, Rebel Without a Cause, The Graduate, Beverly Hills Cop, and even
the Star Wars trilogy played out the same theme, as did American
behavior in the energy crisis.


Organizations have myths too—universally believed stories about
their past and future. AT&T’s view of “universal service” is an
example. Beginning with that great servant to humanity Theodore
Vail (goes the story), AT&T developed an overriding vision to reach
out and touch everyone—to provide the same telephone service to all
Americans even in the most remote locations. This gave AT&T a
kind of organizing myth similar to the American folktale of Johnny
Appleseed; telephone people were not just operators or technicians,
but people working to plant the seeds of communication. When you
look at AT&T’s challenges today, it becomes clear that they are
losing their old myth. The old goal of universal service clashes with
the world after the breakup of AT&T and the need to become a
competitive, high-technology company. Now people at AT&T find
they don’t all share a clear myth for the future. They are in the
process of trying to rediscover their vision. Any scenario about the
future of AT&T should help people understand the likely results of
this clash of mythologies.
Thus, in writing scenarios, we spin myths—old and new—that
will be important in the future. The “global teenager” of Chapter 7,
for instance, is a mythic figure, representing no individual teenager
in the world today, but symbolizing almost 2 billion of them. These
myths in scenarios help us come to grips with forces and feelings
that would not otherwise exist in concrete form. They help us
describe them, envision them, bring them to life—in a way that
helps us make use of them. Story-telling in the form of myths can
reveal something about what we feel, hope, expect, fear for the
future.
OceanofPDF.com


UNCOVERING THE DECISION
            In 1983 I proposed to my superiors at Shell that we
undertake a study of the future of the Soviet Union. They questioned
its relevance. “The Soviets are a minor factor in our business,” they
said. “They export a little oil and gas, but we need to pay attention
to much bigger competitors. They’re not on the agenda.”
“They will be on the agenda,” I insisted. “Their oil and gas
reserves are among the largest in the world, rivaled only by Saudi
Arabia. With the international oil industry facing fewer and fewer
opportunities for large profitable oil and gas finds outside the
Middle East, the possibility that the Soviet Union might invite
foreign firms to participate in their oil industry could [and did]
become a significant possibility. Furthermore, in a few years, you
are going to have to make a big decision about whether to go ahead
with the Troll gas field.” The Troll gas field was a deposit of natural
gas under water one thousand feet deep, in the North Sea off the
coast of Norway, which Shell had found and was trying to decide
how to develop.
“It is going to take a platform fifteen hundred feet high to get that
gas out,” I said, reminding them of what they already knew but,
perhaps, had never heard put quite this way before. “That platform
and its satellite wells are going to cost 6 billion dollars. It will be the
biggest moving object ever built, the single most expensive machine
ever built. The field will furnish natural gas to sell to Europe. The
other supplier of natural gas to Europe is the Soviet Union. And the
Soviet gas is much cheaper than any gas we can provide from Troll.
However, for obvious political reasons, the Europeans have made an
informal agreement that no more than 35 percent of their markets
will be available to the Soviet Union.”
