# Uncovering the Decision

The Troll project would be hurt if cheaper gas from the U.S.S.R.
were allowed to capture a larger share of the European market.
Thus, I asked myself under what plausible circumstances might that
limit cease to exist? Under what conditions might the Soviet Union
open its most treasured resources for development by such
multinational giants as Shell and Chevron. It could happen only if
somehow political relations between the Soviets and the NATO
nations changed for the better. The possibilities seemed remote
indeed, but I knew I had to consider them—because now it was a
potentially 
important 
factor 
in 
multibillion-dollar 
decisions
regarding such projects as the Troll gas field and the long-term
exploration program.
An end to the Cold War was an unthinkable idea in 1983 during
the height of “Evil Empire” rhetoric from Ronald Reagan and (more
significantly for London-based Royal Dutch/Shell) Margaret
Thatcher. Yuri Andropov, former head of the KGB, had just come to
power. The words glasnost and perestroika were unknown in the
West. Mikhail Gorbachev was an obscure official in the Communist
party. Yet we were fortunate at Royal Dutch/Shell. We had evolved
a discipline that allowed us to examine our old mind-sets so that we
could bring forth our prejudices and assumptions—and think
carefully about whether those mind-sets would keep us from seeing
the right future. But what helped focus our attention on useful
subjects was paying attention to those situations that made us
uncomfortable or which we did not really understand.
For each of us, decisions loom in the near or immediate future.
Your responses to them will shape your life and business, possibly
for years to come. Consider for a moment: what are your
equivalents of the Shell Troll platform? What decisions await you
about jobs, relationships, business, investments, finance, new
products, markets, R&D strategy, or simply living? And then—what
hidden questions should you be asking to help you make those
decisions?


The Large Shadow of a Small Decision
For decisions to take on meaning it helps for them to become
tangible. It is easier for a distant general to send his forces into
battle than one who has to look them in the eye. My experiences in
Shell helped me make the nature of our decisions tangible for me.
The consequences of our decisions are important, but until I worked
for Royal Dutch/Shell, I never realized how big the consequences of
a single decision could be. Everything at Shell seemed created by a
race of giants. The cost of everything, life and machines, verged on
the extreme. After I had been at Shell for seven months, I was
invited out to an existing drilling platform on the North Sea. This
one produced mainly oil, but it was an example of the type of
platform that we were considering building for natural gas.
I traveled by plane to Aberdeen, a small city of gray granite and
red roses on the northern coast of Scotland. Aberdeen is Shell’s
control center for its North Sea operations, and the control room is
as complex and high tech as the NASA manned space flight center in
Houston. On the wall, you see electronic charts of a vast maze of
pipelines across the bottom of the North Sea. There are dozens of
platforms displayed on the screen, and indicators demonstrating the
flow of oil and natural gas through the network. I was taken out to
the airport and before boarding a helicopter I was handed a bright
orange survival suit. Insulated and sealed, bulky and uncomfortable,
it covered all of me but my face. The water in the North Sea is
unbearably cold; if anyone without a suit falls in, he is dead within
twenty minutes. And because choppers do go down, the suit is a
necessity.
After more than two hours of skimming over the choppy North
Sea, we saw the platform from the chopper windows; it seemed to
me to be a few miles away. It looked about the size of an apartment
building. As we kept moving closer, the building kept looming
larger  …  but it still seemed to hover a few miles away from us.
Eventually, we began to glimpse its true size; the size of a small city.
Finally, we landed on a helicopter pad, on top of the platform, and


took off our survival suits. As we looked out we saw four similar
platforms across the sea. “How far away do you think those are?”
our guide asked us. I guessed a mile. “The closest one,” he said, “is
ten miles away.”
Several hundred people live on an offshore platform at any given
moment. They typically stay two weeks. There are dormitories,
racquetball courts, and hospital wards on every platform. To ferry
people and materials back and forth, there are more helicopter
flights every day over the North Sea than flights in and out of
London’s Heathrow Airport. Boats circle each platform constantly,
twenty-four hours per day. Their only purpose is to pick up people
who fall overboard. And people do fall.
A single platform takes years to build, years to plan before that,
and years before that to confirm the discovery of oil or gas. Yet
every one of these sites, having cost literally hundreds of millions
and now billions of dollars—not to mention the lives of people who
work there—can be made absolutely worthless by a collapse in the
price of oil! It put tremendous pressure on the decisions made about
those platforms, decisions made by a group of six to eight people
who comprised the Managing Directors of the Royal Dutch/Shell
group of companies. Their decisions influenced the production of
about 8 percent of the world’s production of oil. These men (so far,
in Shell’s history, they have been men), in turn, used scenarios as a
tool to help them articulate exactly what those decisions should be
—and then to make them. What my colleagues and I did together at
Shell thus had enormous consequences—not just for the platform,
but for the world.
Kees van der Heijden, a tough-minded, creative Dutchman, was a
close collaborator and friend of mine at Shell. He had an exceptional
ability to understand the minds of Shell’s managers. He led the team
that developed a set of scenarios in 1989 that were a profound
expression of the concerns and aspirations of Shell’s top
management. Their vision of a “sustainable world” scenario for how
the planet might learn to live within the limits of ecosystems proved
pioneering.


It was a privileged position to be in. Seeing one decision writ
large made me see the importance of all decisions. The choice of a
career, a spouse, a place to live; we make them casually, at times,
because we do not know how to articulate the choices. Suppose, for
example, you or perhaps your children want to pursue a career in
science, and have been drawn to the promise of biotechnology. How
would you learn whether or not that would be a viable field in the
future? You might seek out one or two knowledgeable people to ask
their advice; you might try some background reading. Ultimately,
you would guess. The results of your decision would be chancy.
I believe that people often persuade themselves that their
decisions do not matter, because they feel powerless to make the
best decision. Some of us feel that, no matter what we do, our
decisions won’t matter much. We don’t plot the course of North Sea
oil development—only our own lives. The world is too big, and we
are too small. But I believe that we know at heart that decisions do
matter. I am not the first to suggest that we ourselves are arguably
the sum total of the decisions we have made. That sum, in turn,
gives us whatever power we have to affect the world. Journalist
Michael Ventura puts it this way:
If you look at your life on the level of historical time, as a tiny but
influential part of a century-long process, then at least you can
begin to know your own address. You can begin to sense the
greater pattern, and feel where you are within it, and your acts
take on meaning.
In order to make effective decisions, you must articulate them to
begin with. Consider, for example, the choice of a career in
biotechnology. A scenario-planner would tackle the decision
differently. It depends, he or she might argue, on another set of
questions: What is the future of the biotechnology industry? (That in
turn depends on:) What is the path of development of the biotech
industry? (Moreover:) What skills will have enduring value? (And:)
Where will be a good place to begin? The hardest questions will be
the most important. What is it that interests you about


biotechnology in the first place? What sorts of things about yourself
might lead you to make a decision with poor results? What could
lead you to change your mind?
Articulating Your Mind-set
People often do not realize that their decision agendas are usually
unconscious. Thus, the first step of the scenario process is making it
conscious. Each of us responds, not to the world, but to our image of
the world. This “mind-set” includes attitudes about every situation
in our lives and every person we come across. In many cases, these
mind-sets have been built up, slowly, from childhood and may not
have much to do with actual reality. A bigot, for instance, has a
derogatory mind-set about a certain ethnic group of people. The
mind-set is so powerful, as we saw in the last chapter, that it can
actually influence people to ignore reality. Bigots have been known
to “forget,” for example, that someone they knew was of the
offending race or culture, and let a slur slip out. “Sorry; I didn’t
mean you.”
Mind-sets tend to keep us from seeing the appropriate questions
to ask about a decision. Thus, every scenario effort begins by
looking inward. You begin by examining the mind-sets which you
personally use—consciously or unconsciously—to make judgments
about the future. Think of this process as a form of research. Instead
of gathering information out in the world (which we’ll discuss in the
next chapter), you gather information from within yourself.
The French poet and philosopher Paul Valéry wanted to learn
how to think clearly about the future, and took the matter of
examining his own mind-set very seriously. His method, which I
recommend as a potentially fruitful exercise, was to awaken every
morning before dawn and to write down the first things that came
into his mind. Like Freud, who was to pioneer the similar
psychotherapeutic technique of “free association,” Valéry recognized


that these spontaneous, often nonsensical-seeming ramblings offered
clues to his habitual mind-sets.
I use an exercise which helps me consider all my possible mental
models relating to a particular decision. I view my decisions through
very different lenses. We think of “optimist” and “pessimist” as
descriptions of people, but they are actually popular labels for well-
known, radically different attitudes about the future. We all
recognize the “Dr. Pangloss” for whom the world is the best it can
be and can only get better, for whom every decision will pay off.
And we remember times in which we based our own decisions,
correctly or not, on our convictions that the market would respond
favorably, the harvest would be rich, or the mother lode would be
found. We also recognize the “Cassandra” for whom the world is
always on the brink of disaster, who sees the future as the source of
inevitable payments due. There is, finally, the “status quo”
mentality—a belief that tomorrow will be more or less the same as
today. Nothing is really new, nothing much changes. They’ve seen it
all before.
I find it useful to view the decision I am making from all three
points of view. What I am really after is compensation—a way for
the optimist within myself temporarily to set aside the rose-colored
glasses and look carefully at the traps on the path to success.
Conversely, the pessimist within me needs a way to look for
unexpected breakthroughs and triumphs that might occur. And the
status quo mentality needs to prepare itself to recognize change
when it does occur, and not just assume its insignificance.
It is worthwhile sometimes to designate an hour or an entire day
for self-observation regarding your attitudes toward the future.
Whenever you think about the possibility of borrowing, based on
your confidence about your ability to pay back the debt later, when
“circumstances improve,” note that optimistic tendency. It may or
may not be grounded in reality; but you should consider the
possibility that it is not. Whenever you decide not to take a chance
because of your fear of obstacles, visible and unforeseen, note that
pessimistic tendency. The object is to make your stance to the future


—which may change from moment to moment, situation to
situation—visible to you.
Having determined your outlook, deliberately examine the
possibilities of other outlooks. The key is to examine the pitfalls and
opportunities made visible by each viewpoint. Consider population:
most people think of the staggering growth of world population
with foreboding—as the source of what Paul Ehrlich now calls the
population explosion. When starting a scenario process about
population, however, you would consider: “Is there any optimistic
aspect to this problem?” One serious thinker, Julian Simon, did
exactly that; his book The Ultimate Resource is a compelling
argument that the population explosion, if handled wisely, could be
an enormous boon. More people means more intelligence and more
productive energy.
You cannot just examine your view of the world once and leave it
at that. Our mind-sets change, without us hardly noticing. And our
attitudes about each new problem are different. In fact, one effective
approach is to compare your mind-set today with attitudes you had
last year—or last decade. “I used to think small cars were ugly,”
many Americans said in the late 1970s. Automakers produce better-
looking small cars today.
Finally, in an organization, you may want to do what my
colleagues at Shell have done: to articulate and discuss their mind-
sets overtly. The phrase they use is “mental models.” One planner
may say, for instance, “I have a mental model of the United States
Government as a timid, bureaucratic entity, unwilling to commit
itself to any policy, and I expect it to act that way in the future.”
Another planner may reply, “I don’t agree. I think the government is
acting with consistent judgment.” Both will then try to spell out the
events that lead them to perceive the U.S. Government as they do,
and 
hopefully, 
between 
them, 
to 
reach 
a 
new, 
clearer
understanding. This attention to the mind-set of the decision-maker
points to another important quality about Shell. While the scenario
method was an important tool, the real key to success was the
quality of the people in Shell who used that tool. It was their ability
to rediscover the world that gave scenarios value.


Decision-Articulation on a Global Scale: Royal Dutch/Shell in
the 1980s
This Troll platform decision was only one of many on the Shell
agenda in the mid-1980s. All of them provoked us to examine our
assumptions about the world. Oil prices had been high for nearly
ten years, and especially high since the late 1970s. Oil-producing
fields were a valuable asset. Thus, this was a period of “drilling on
Wall Street,” when many firms bought oil companies at high prices
to gain their oil fields. Chevron bought Gulf; U.S. Steel bought
Marathon; and Mobil bought Superior Oil. Should we participate?
Simultaneously, Shell was developing oil and natural gas fields in
the North Sea, at a high cost to us. The Troll platform was just one
such project, albeit the most expensive. Conventional wisdom
suggested moving full-steam ahead. But would we be wise to follow
an exploration and development program based on a path of
inevitably rising prices?
Articulating the decisions meant looking at the assumptions
inbred in our organization. I already described one such assumption
—that the European 35 percent limit on buying Soviet natural gas
would continue. Another assumption was that the Arab-dominated
OPEC consortium would continue to act as a unified block of
nations, keeping the price of crude oil from their fields high. That
would justify any investment we chose to make in drilling for oil.
Since many of our most influential top executives were involved in
exploration and production, they unconsciously wanted the price of
oil to remain high because they wanted to keep on drilling. Their
enthusiasm for the adventure of big oil made them innately
optimistic about new projects. Therefore, we set about looking at
the downside of our assumptions. Was it conceivable that the price
could fall? What events might trigger the price fall?
Our answers surprised us. After conducting our research on both
oil-producing nations and the Soviet Union we discovered that there
was a plausible way in which the prices of oil and gas could fall.


OPEC’s unity could well collapse, and demand for oil, in an age of
increasing conservation and energy-efficiency, could dwindle. That
could cause the price to collapse.
Similarly, a small team asked what could make the Soviet Union
dramatically change its policies. The answer was clear: a failing
economy might simply make it impossible for the Soviet Union to
afford its rigid system. We saw that the Soviet economy was facing a
major crisis: its productivity was declining, and its birthrate had
declined twenty years before. Thus, its population was aging
rapidly; its labor force was dwindling. To continue to keep any
semblance of a standard of living, the Soviet Union had only two
alternatives: either muddle through, or open up.
In 1983, we presented the Royal Dutch/Shell managing directors
with two scenarios: one called Incrementalism, and the other called
the Greening of Russia. By that time, we knew enough about the
Soviet Government to say that if a virtually unknown man named
Gorbachev came to power, you’d see massive economic and political
restructuring; an opening of the West; arms control; declining
tensions in the West; and major shifts in international relationships.
It was not that Gorbachev, as an individual, would cause the
changes. Rather, his arrival in power would be a symptom of the
same underlying causes.
Shell has a habit of presenting its global scenarios to government
agencies, in part to glean their reactions. Every Soviet expert but
one told us we were crazy. The exception was Heinrich Vogel of
Germany. The CIA said, “You really don’t know what you’re talking
about. You just don’t have the facts.” In retrospect, people have
credited our research, but the CIA certainly had access to all the
data we did. Our insight came solely from asking the right
questions; from having to consider more than one scenario. If we
had to pick only one, we might have been just as wrong as the CIA.
We ourselves did not know for certain that things were moving
toward our “Greening” scenario until Gorbachev was elected. But
having more than one scenario allowed us to anticipate his arrival
and understand its significance when he ascended to the leadership.


Within Shell, these scenarios brought to managers’ attention the
potential indicators that could signal a change in political climate.
When the possibility of Soviet competition in the gas market became
real, it was already in Shell’s decision-making process. Today it
looks as if the 35 percent limit will indeed be a thing of the past by
the time the Troll gas fields come onstream. Among Shell
management’s responses was an extra effort to bring down the costs
of the project. We also avoided overinvesting in new oil fields, or in
purchasing other companies at premium prices. When the oil price
fell, in 1986, Shell was able to buy oil reserves at half the price that
we would have had to pay six months before.
Most importantly, Shell continued to ask the right questions about
its decisions. We focused on questions that challenged the company
mind-sets. The price of oil had not risen and fallen so dramatically
since before World War II. If it could do so now, did that mean that
oil and gasoline would become commodities on world markets? If
so, how could that affect our business? For one thing, it would mean
that there would be a good business in trading oil, in the fashion of
commodities investors. Designing a trading system can take years,
but the scenario had allowed us to see that such a system might be
necessary. By the time the price of oil collapsed Shell had designed
such a system, and was trading two and a half million barrels a day.
Since most oil is equivalent, no matter what the brand, a price
collapse also meant we would have to sell it for less—unless we
could find a unique way to enhance ours. This led to other questions
about what we could offer uniquely. Shell began early to research
an environmentally clean, high-performance gasoline, with the
intention of selling it more profitably at a higher price.
Refining the Focus
You may have noticed that our decision-making at Shell moved
constantly between narrow questions, related to specific situations


(“Should we invest in a new offshore platform?”), and broad ones,
related to the world at large (“What is going to happen to the Soviet
Union?”). This is typical. Scenario-builders should consider both
types of questions: otherwise, it’s easy to lose sight of issues that
could be important.
Broader scenarios are similar for many companies; narrow
scenario questions are specific to each situation. Narrow scenarios
are usually the place where valuable insights regarding particular
organizations and missions can be found. For example, at SRI
International during the 1970s, my colleagues and I produced a set
of scenarios for a paper company that was considering building a
new paper mill for coated papers—the kind that national weekly
news magazines are printed on. We wanted to know whether or not
there would be increasing demand for such magazines. What
production capacity would they need to meet that future demand?
We asked broad questions: would consumer income rise? Would
consumers spend more of that income on reading? How quickly
could we expect to see new computer printing and communication
technologies, and what effect would those technologies have? After
we did broad, global scenarios about those kinds of questions, then
we concentrated on more highly focused scenarios about the
publishing world. We looked at high-end magazines versus low-end
magazines, the volume of paper used by new printing and
distribution technologies, and the rapidity of development of
competing electronic media.
Frequently, people develop scenarios for a small, focused situation
and discover that it is affected by much larger issues. Worse still,
they may not see those larger ramifications. Many people foresaw
the emergence of synthetic fuels in the late 1970s as an energy
source. It was thought that America might begin running out of oil
by the mid-1990s. There was enormous investment; companies
opened for business in the Rocky Mountains. The scenarists got all
the small questions right: would these new companies be able to
begin research? Would they produce viable energy? But the
scenarists failed to anticipate that the global context of the energy
industry would be upset. When the price of oil fell, there was little


market for expensive, environmentally problematic synthetic fuels,
and the industry collapsed. They had looked too narrowly, and
didn’t see that the industry was changing from scarcity to
oversupply; from a sellers’ market to buyers’ market. This made
their narrower questions irrelevant.
Small businesses must pay particular attention to broad questions.
Smith & Hawken, you may recall, asked its narrow focus questions
(“Mail order or retail?”), but some of its key questions were broad:
“Where will the economy of the United States be in ten years?”
However, it would be a misperception to say that a small business—
even my own business, Global Business Network—should think
about large-scale problems the way that Shell management thinks
about it. A large publishing company such as Doubleday, for
example, must think about its suppliers—not just paper companies,
but also authors. It must also plan for changes in distribution—if
chain bookstores dominate the market, that will mean one type of
book will succeed, while neighborhood bookstores would suggest a
different type. And they must also concern themselves with readers
—with literacy rates, for example. Theoretically, a small book
publisher, such as North Point Press in Albany, California (with a
staff of twenty-five people), should concern itself about the same
things. But I can assure you that the people at North Point do not
spend much time on these questions. They are more concerned
about the problems of the here and now.
Like the founders of Smith & Hawken, it is indeed useful for a few
people at North Point to be aware of larger uncertainties and plan
for them. But it is unlikely that they will need to plan for them
formally, with the responsibility for planning shared among dozens
of people, in the manner of Doubleday, Shell, Volvo, or Inland Steel.
Large corporations need a way of articulating these things so a
number of people can talk about them together. By contrast, North
Point’s editor-in-chief can work with his gut feeling. For individuals
and small businesses, scenarios are a way to help develop their own
gut feeling and assure that they have been comprehensive, both
realistic and imaginative, in covering all the important bases.


In small businesses, most issues—even if they touch global
concerns—are expressed locally. But they do need to understand
their social context. A mom and pop grocery store had better be
prepared for the arrival of a 7-Eleven chain store next door, but
their concern should be next door—not, “What will we do if 7-
Elevens emerge all over America?” With small businesses, there is
often another factor—the will of the business person. Sometimes,
the appropriate question is: “If this business changes in such and
such a way, do I want to be in this business any more?” Articulating
the decision should also focus on events where you have no control.
“What if I choose to quit my job?” is not an appropriate question for
a scenario. You can change the scenario simply by changing your
decision. You could ask, instead, “What events would plausibly
happen that might influence me to quit?” Or, “Under what
circumstances might I lose my job?”
It’s all part of a process of self-reflection: understanding yourself
and your biases, identifying what matters to you, and perceiving
where to put your attention. It takes persistent work and honesty to
penetrate our internal mental defenses. To ensure the success of our
efforts, we need a clear understanding of the relationship between
our own concerns and the wider world around us. To achieve that,
it helps to have a constant stream of rich, diverse, and thought-
provoking information. The ways and means of finding those
information treasures is the focus of the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com


INFORMATION-HUNTING AND -GATHERING
            Why do scenarios work? Because people recognize the
truth in a description of future events. The story resonates in some
ways with what they already know, and then leads them from that
resonance to reperceive the world. Observations from the real world
must be built into the story. The only way they can emerge there is
for the storyteller to sample evidence from the world before
spinning the tale.
The scenario process thus involves research—skilled hunting and
gathering of information. This is practiced both narrowly—to pursue
facts needed for a specific scenario—and broadly—to educate
yourself, so that you will be able to pose more significant questions.
Investigation is not just a useful tool for gathering facts. It hones
your ability to perceive. Even your specific purpose in any particular
research project is tagged to your inbred assumptions. You seek out
those facts and perceptions which challenge those assumptions. You
look for disconfirming evidence.
I described in the last chapter how Shell’s decision about the
North Sea Troll platform led us to wonder whether the Cold War
might thaw. We therefore sought out facts which might disconfirm
the conventional bias that the U.S.S.R. could never change. We
began looking for evidence of new political ideologies in Russia, and
found none. Instead, we found obscure essays published in 1983 by
the Institute of Economics of Novosibersk, describing the economic
dangers facing the Soviet system. Abel Agenbegyan of the same
institute was one of the principal architects of perestroika. His
information was new to me, but it had the ring of authority. It
resonated with other signals that my colleagues and I at Shell had
begun to pick up. Once we had seen the article, we picked up more
—because we were better attuned to find them.
