# Information-Hunting and -Gathering

Flexibility of perspective is critical. You simultaneously focus on
questions that matter to you, and keep your awareness open for the
unexpected. Like a hunter, alerted to the presence of prey by the
snap of a broken twig, you learn to pick out a key piece of vital
information in the dizzying flood of words, images, sounds, and
numbers that most of us swim in. Most of us have built up a set of
strict filters to keep from drowning. We pay attention only to what
we think we need to know. Being a scenario-planner, therefore,
means becoming aware of one’s filter and continually readjusting it
to let in more data about the world, but without becoming
overwhelmed.
Futurists sometimes talk about having their “radar” out. The
metaphor is striking: a radar device sends out a high-frequency
signal and waits for objects to bounce the signal back. When
something unusual shows up on the display screen, you pay closer
attention. In information-gathering, you take a similarly active role:
sending out signals to see what comes back. But you also do more. I
regularly try on different “frequency” settings. “If I were a Soviet
economist,” I ask myself, or “If I were a teenager in the world
today,” or “a computer designer”—what information would I be
paying attention to? Then I look for it. I might search for news
about the greenhouse effect, for example, with the mind-set of a
scientist; then search for news on the same subject with the needs of
a politician in mind; and finally look again as if I were an
environmental activist.
You may wonder how I keep track of all the material I gather. I
have no elaborate filing system; no data base, for instance, and no
millions of articles in folders with tags recording their location. I
used to maintain such a system, and found that I never used it. I
hardly ever went back to the files. Instead, I concentrate on
educating myself; on passing information through my mind so it
affects my outlook: on tuning my attention as if it were an
instrument. Sometimes, admittedly, I let articles and reports pile up
in stacks; then I sift through the stacks to find what I need. And
sometimes I must go back and re-create all the research I did several
years before. But that, in itself, is valuable, because in the fields I


care about, the facts have changed since I last went to look for
them. Don’t worry about your files; worry about your perceptions.
Targets: What to Look For
Every scenario requires specific research. Some subjects, however,
emerge again and again in your work. These are topics to which I
pay constant attention.
•  Science and Technology: This force (for science and technology
really comprise a single force) is one of the most important drivers
of future events. It literally shapes the future. Politics can change,
but a scientific innovation, once released into the world, cannot be
taken back. Nor can its impact be legislated away or forbidden by
the chairman of the board. Thus, keeping track of new
developments in physics, biotechnology, computer science, ecology,
microbiology, engineering, and other key areas is a special duty.
In 1984, I saw references to studies that revealed a variety of
metals had shorter lives than previously expected. Being an
aeronautical engineer by training I realized that this could make a
big difference in the aircraft industry. Airplanes experience great
stress on their materials. We immediately contacted friends at
Boeing to find out if the news applied. It was very significant for
them: as airlines discovered they had to turn over their fleets sooner,
sales of airplanes would climb dramatically. But it would also be
significant for us: one of Shell’s big markets is airline fuel. The
newer the airplane, the more efficient it is; the less fuel it requires.
A newer global fleet would mean a significant change in fuel
demand. We needed to know how rapidly the fleet would turn over.
There were, of course, other effects we could foresee—more
efficient, better-designed, quieter airplanes. Airfares would not rise
much, because of the exigencies of airline financing. There could be
danger, however, in airlines that did not modernize their fleet soon


enough, and learned the hard way—by having planes fall out of the
sky.
I pay particular attention to new technologies that could change
lives and spur businesses—such as the growth hormone described in
Chapter 1. Another example is the computer interface called “virtual
reality,” which has been brewing for years outside the mainstream.
People can wear clothing with built-in sensors, and computer-
display eyeglasses, to create the illusion of being inside a computer-
created world. They can see, touch, and even manipulate surreal
objects that feel as tangible as real objects, but exist only as bits
inside a computer program. This technology is headed for center
stage in the design and entertainment industries, and portends
changes in the way science practice is conducted. The very meaning
of reality itself will begin to change. What can be imagined will be
experienced. Putting people inside artificial worlds tends to
profoundly affect their sense of “reality,” which can be a
psychologically turbulent process—just as the advent of television
was forty years ago.
Science news researchers gradually learn to know when new
technologies seem credible, and when they’re overhyped. Previous
failures in a field such as cold fusion should make you justifiably
suspicious of new developments, but should not close your mind
entirely to the possibility of a breakthrough yet happening.
Fortunately, there are many credible sources of science news that a
lay person can follow. I describe the ones I use later in this chapter.
•    Perception-Shaping Events: Rising levels of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere have been detectable since the early 1970s. But they
were ignored—until one day, in the unusually hot summer of 1988,
James Hanson, a NASA meteorologist, testified before Congress on
long-term climate changes as the result of pollution. It was a slow
news day and his presentation was widely reported. Suddenly, the
prospect of global warming was debated by millions, placed on
national magazine covers, and began dramatically to influence
policy. Margaret Thatcher’s recognition and acceptance of the global
warming problem, for instance, inspired dozens of British companies


to begin changing their pollution policies. Global warming was a
problem before 1988, but it was not a public issue; now it was an
issue because it was perceived to be a problem.
I am always interested in public perceptions—particularly in signs
that public perception is changing. Changing public beliefs can pivot
the direction of history more swiftly and irrevocably than money or
military power. Consider, for example, the perception by Americans
during the 1970s and 1980s that we were an overtaxed nation. The
reality—that our government was not so much overtaxing as
mismanaging—had less effect on events than the perception of
excessive taxation, which was one of the direct causes of the deficit
problem facing the American economy in the early 1990s.
Perception-shaping events can also have powerfully subtle effects.
In the early 1970s, Richard Nixon suspended U.S. exports of
soybeans to Japan as part of a process of trade retaliation. Few
Americans were aware of the “soy shock” that followed in Japan.
But for a people who used soybeans as key ingredients in their diet,
the loss of a major supplier precipitated a sense of crisis and injury.
The Japanese felt they could no longer trust the United States. They
set up their own farms in Brazil so they would no longer depend
upon such an unreliable source. They could not understand why the
United States had done them such harm. And now we have a hard
time understanding why they are slow to take us on as trusted
industrial suppliers.
While I don’t regard television network news as a great source of
information about events, I tune in to TV regularly as a source about
what people believe is happening. Television images not only reflect
those beliefs, but help shape them. TV’s snapshot images are shared
by millions of people worldwide. They provide a window on the
public agenda. That’s not just true of news. In the early 1970s, “All
in the Family” showed that mainstream culture was ready to deal
with socially relevant issues. Before that, the most relevant program
was “The Mod Squad.” Another interesting social indicator on TV is
“America’s Funniest Home Videos.” It shows not just what people
are perceiving, but what they’re producing. One recent segment had
an Irish couple, the Houlihans, performing a Yiddish routine in a


vaudeville sketch. Not only did it show the ham in Americans
coming out, but it indicated the fruits—and the limits—of the
“melting pot” myth in the 1990s.
I look at poll data as well. Some of it is the expensive, privately
commissioned kind. Much of it comes from the newspaper. For
example, after the Valdez oil spill the San Francisco Chronicle
reported a field poll showing a 30 percent jump in opposition to
offshore drilling. But was this evidence of a dramatic change of
perception or a brief blip?
And I talk to people about perceptions. In recent years, I have
encountered many corporate executives who were personally
convinced by evidence about global warming. Exxon’s very public
catastrophe at Valdez also shocked them; Exxon had always been
perceived as one of the most respectable, best-managed companies.
Suddenly, managers at nearly every company I visit believe that
there are real environmental problems, and that their companies
must respond to them. In turn, they want to know about public
perception. “What does it mean to be a good environmental
citizen?” they ask. “What does the public really want? How would
anyone know if a company were a good corporate citizen or not?
What is proper corporate behavior?” The answers are not obvious,
but 
public 
perception 
of 
corporate 
environmentalism 
will
dramatically affect company policies during the years to come.
How do you know in advance when something is going to be a
perception-shaping event? By watching the first reactions of the
broader society. Does it touch a responsive chord? When the
response is particularly deep and wide, a more profound paradigm
shift can occur—a deep change in belief systems. The shift from
public belief in divine creation to public belief in evolution took
place exactly that way. At the beginning of this century, anyone
interested in the future of education would have wanted to keep
track of that shift.
•    Music: If television suggests what people are perceiving, music
shows what they are feeling. It is a window onto freedom in the
future. Anyone who had listened to Bob Dylan’s music in 1964 could


have seen the early signs of the political events of 1968 coming.
Before that, as Michael Ventura has pointed out, the debut of Elvis
Presley in 1956 foretold the emergence of an international
community of youth, with its drive to influence attitudes about war,
civil rights, ecology, feminism, and higher consciousness. “The
thread that ran through all those movements of the sixties,” writes
Ventura, “is a fundamental challenge to the old Western split
between the mind and the body.” Ventura traces the roots of
Presley’s music (the “long snake,” as he calls it) back to nineteenth-
century voodoo, when slave Irish and slave African culture melted
together in the hot Caribbean. And he traces it forward to today’s
rock-and-roll—a music that emerged from our own most subjugated
subcultures and is still subverting our loftiest institutions.
You may think that popular music affects only kids. But those kids
are all over the planet, and the effects last their entire lives. I once
went to a Paul McCartney concert that was, in effect, one big Beatles
sing-along full of people in their forties. The psychedelic mind-set of
“Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds,” and the delicious view of the
world in “Here Comes the Sun” deeply affected the culture.
Today, I pay attention to rap music and world music—the fusion
of ethnic threads from all over the equatorial world. I don’t for a
moment think that business people will have to start putting “rap-
speak” on their employment applications, but rap music will
dramatically affect business nonetheless. These are not love songs;
they are songs of anger. That rage may begin to surface, with some
still unknown racial event as the final trigger. (This book was
written several years before the Rodney King riots in L.A. that gave
expression to that anger.)
At the same time, there is more acceptance of ethnic music by
white media than ever before. An interesting example of World
Music is the sort gathered by Peter Gabriel on his Passion Sources
recording—a collection of songs that inspired his soundtrack for the
film The Last Temptation of Christ. It includes music from Egypt,
Ethiopia, Senegal, Morocco, Guinea, Armenia, Iran, Turkey,
Pakistan, and India. Even though some of these countries have
warred bitterly, the music presents a different feeling: mutual


respect, serenity, and enthusiasm. The use of state-of-the-art
recording studios and telecommunications made the album possible;
it suggests that a remarkable transformation is taking place.
Historic, indigenous cultures could become elements in a new type
of global culture, not dependent on Western values, but available to
worldwide audiences through Western and Japanese technology.
If rap music suggests a growing schism, world music suggests an
emerging unity. They point out the angry and hopeful emotions of
the future. Listening to the music sensitizes you to recognize those
emotions when they surface in later events. These contradictory
threads are always present but the tapestry of real life takes its
varying hue from the dominance of one or another of these threads
at any moment in time.
•  Fringes: Not long ago in a conversation, Pierre Wack described
going to Tsukuba, the Japanese science city outside of Tokyo, and
seeing an exhibit in which videoscreens simulated seeing the world
as different animals saw it. Through a “bee’s eye” you saw hundreds
of tiny images. As a “frog,” you saw movement only across your
field of vision; the eye had no depth perception. Most interesting
was the horse. Since the eyes are mounted on the side of a horse’s
head, the sharpness in the video screens was exactly opposite that of
a human being. Humans see peripheral objects, at the corners of our
eyes, as blurred and distorted; but we see the center in sharp focus.
Horses, at least according to this Japanese representation, see the
peripheral as sharp. When they look at the center, the place where
their eyes meet, the image is distorted and elongated.
As Pierre said, the horse has a built-in width of vision that we
lack. Even though it moves forward its attention is toward the side.
Scenario researchers train themselves to look at the world as horses
do; because new knowledge develops at the fringes.
People 
and 
organizations 
often 
organize 
knowledge
concentrically, with the most cherished, vital beliefs at the protected
center. At the outer edge are the ideas which the majority rejects. A
little closer to the center are the fringes—areas not yet legitimized
but not utterly rejected by the center either. Innovation is the


center’s weakness. The structure, the power, and the institutional
inertia all tend to inhibit innovative thinkers and drive them to the
fringes. At the social and intellectual fringes, thinkers are freer to let
their imaginations roam, but are still constrained by a sense of
current reality. The great innovators start at the fringes: Albert
Einstein was a patent clerk in Geneva who couldn’t get a university
teaching job. Ho Chi Minh toiled in Paris. The two “Steves” who
founded Apple Computer had roots, respectively, in Eastern
mysticism and the “hacker” outlaw computer subculture.
To see the direction that future Einsteins, Hos, Jobses, and
Wozniaks might take fifteen years from now, you must pursue the
fringes today. The danger in some of this exploration—nosing
around the docks of Shanghai or the crack houses of Manhattan—is
very real. But it risks only your time and your sensibilities to attend
an off-off-Broadway performance, a rap music concert, an outlaw
scientists’ conference, or a lecture by an unconventional thinker.
It risks even less, and in some ways is as valuable, to read about
fringes. If you read the CoEvolution Quarterly magazine in the mid-
1970s, you encountered a new idea called “the Gaia hypothesis.”
Two scientists well known within their fields for being at the fringes
—atmospheric scientist James Lovelock and microbiologist Lynn
Margulis—proposed that the earth was a single, vast, self-regulating
organism. The idea has recently emerged as an increasingly useful
way of thinking about the global greenhouse effect.
Having encountered an idea early at the fringes, you can
recognize it and use it better—if it finally emerges from obscurity.
Amory Lovins argued in the mid-seventies that improved technology
could reduce energy consumption even while the economy
expanded. The energy industry saw him as an extremist; it saw no
further than its image of him as a hippie conservationist who
tinkered with solar power in Colorado. But Shell paid attention to
his ideas as early as 1973, and pressed him to push the ideas
further. Amory’s insights helped us anticipate that oil demand might
not come back, even after the economy bounced back in 1982. The
reason was energy-efficiency; people had more money, but spent
less of it on oil. This knowledge from the fringe was one of the


sources of insight that led to Shell being one of the few energy
companies to foresee that OPEC would face an oil price collapse as a
result.
Today, one of the most useful fringe areas is “nanotechnology”—
the self-reproducing machinery, no larger than molecules, but with
enormous power to (for example) transform all industrial processes;
imagine making goods from the atom up out of materials we have
specially designed for operation at the molecular scale. Eric
Drexler’s book about nanotechnology, Engines of Creation, originated
far from orthodox science, but has already influenced what many
scientists believe will be possible soon. Whether or not they believe
nanotechnology is possible (opinion is divided), they now realize
that machines operating far beyond direct human control are not
just possible, but probably inevitable. Drexler’s book raises cogent
questions about the ethics and values in a world of such machines,
and by watching out for signs of nanotechnology, you could be
witness to the birth of a powerful new discipline.
Is it possible to create an atlas of the fringe? Alas, the fringe
changes and even varies depending on the situation. Few people
would consider management consultant and Harvard Business
School professor Michael Porter “fringe”—his book The Competitive
Advantage of Nations has influenced governments. Yet to traditional
economists, he’s dangerously outside their main stream. The Sierra
Club may still be “fringe” to a few, but many environmentalists see
it as a conservative center. And it’s the fringe environmentalist
groups, such as Earth First, which are redefining the political
landscape. Even traditional institutions have fringes: NASA had a
group of weirdos in the 1960s who all went away into small
computer companies. Xerox had its Palo Alto Research Center, from
where the Macintosh was born. The Office of Naval Research used
to sponsor regular interdisciplinary conferences where, for example,
I first heard molecular engineering mentioned.
It’s difficult to predict which fringe elements will remain in
obscurity, and which will change the world. During my years at SRI,
I was not the only futurist who watched UFO enthusiast groups.
Ultimately, they offered no insight about the future. Meanwhile,


Michael Murphy, the founder of the Esalen Center in Big Sur,
California, was quietly paving the way for glasnost. As the gathering
point for many “New Age” therapies, Esalen is about as fringy as
you can get. Michael himself was not interested in politics but,
beginning in the 1970s, he traveled through Russia investigating
experiments in superhuman bodily feats, which is the subject of
serious research there. Along the way, he realized that he was
building a channel for what he called “citizen diplomacy,” through
which individual Americans and Soviets could meet. Many of those
meetings, in turn, influenced some of the Soviets who began to
transform their country.
Gradually, as you investigate the fringes, you develop a sense
about which people are intellectual pathfinders and which are
crackpots. You can sometimes recognize the pathfinders by their
energy and humor. In the early 1970s, fringe political group leaders
began to bemoan the sudden “apathy” among the teenagers who
followed them. Meanwhile, telephone network “phone phreaks”
were surreptitiously exploring the ins and outs of the country’s
communications system. As personal computers emerged, the
numbers of these electronics enthusiasts exploded. They joined
small groups with such names as the People’s Computer Company
and the Homebrew Computer Club. Steve Wozniak, of Apple, and
Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft, both began as phone “phreaking”
teenagers.
When you look at fringes, don’t let your preconceived notions
keep you from the right information. The spiritual descendants of
the early “phone phreaks” were a group of teenagers called the
“Legion of Doom,” who took their name from characters in Marvel
comic books. The Secret Service began to seize their personal
computers and floppy disks, implying that they were sponsored by
Communists and threatening national security. The raid was
instigated by BellSouth, one of the largest local telephone
companies in America. The Secret Service was asking, in effect, the
wrong scenario question: “How can we prevent this information
from leaking out?” By seizing those disks, the Secret Service agents
thought they had something of value; but the same files were


already endlessly circulating in hundreds of other computers around
the country, having been exchanged through telephone lines.
The best question to ask would be: “What can we learn from the
experiences of these teenagers about the changing nature of the
phone network, and about the real dangers facing it?” That doesn’t
necessarily mean letting kids go “scot-free” after committing crimes
(although none of these kids tampered with the phone network or
let a virus into it; rather, they explored its hidden features).
Ironically, the day the New York Times broke the story of the Secret
Service raid, it also reported that the U.S. Army was recruiting
hackers for electronic warfare.
Tactics: Where to Look
Everyone’s list of research tactics is personal and probably
different. This is mine, refined over twenty-five years of practice.
•  Remarkable People: In 1984, a Royal Dutch/Shell study on the
future of Japan brought me to that nation for several weeks, to visit
a series of Japanese intellectuals and planners. My Japanese staff
members and I quickly perceived a uniformity of view in these
people. They came from different segments of life, but they shared a
common perception about the near future—that Japan, despite its
prosperity of recent years, had many serious problems that would
weigh heavily on it. The values of Japanese youth appeared to be in
serious decline; the society was aging rapidly; they were paying the
price of rising protectionism; and they had no clear sense of how to
cope with their new global economic role. They expressed fear of a
slow-growth economy and decline in international influence.
The last man we talked to was Kishida Junnosuke—chairman of
the editorial board of the Asahi Shinbun, the biggest Japanese
newspaper. I told him about the list of problems that we had heard


over and over. “That sounds right,” he said. “Those are indeed
critical problems.”
“Then are you pessimistic about Japan’s future?” I asked.
“I am optimistic—of course.” That jarred me; he was obviously
sincere. Seeing my confusion, he told me that the Japanese had two
words for optimism. “Rakutenteki describes the feeling you in the
West call ‘optimism,’ which in Japan is thought of as the optimism a
young man feels looking toward old age. When you are very young
you have no responsibilities, and when you are old you have no
responsibilities. But in between, there are sixteen different words for
‘duty.’ This is a Utopian kind of optimism, a faith in a world of the
future in which all problems are solved, taken care of.” The message
was not lost on me so far: he was implying, quite politely, that many
Japanese see this naive optimism in Americans.
“Our second word for optimism is Rakkanteki,” Mr. Kishida
continued. “It means having enough challenges to give life meaning.
In that sense, I am very optimistic about Japan’s future.” In Japan, I
came to realize, people accepted their problems as challenges to be
met. Through meeting them, people would grow and improve. I
thought of the infrastructure problem in the United States, which
most governments have ignored, hoping it would go away. Yet our
highways and roads are literally disintegrating, and it will take
hundreds of billions of dollars to repair the damage. We don’t see
that as a challenge to be overcome, as we did the space race, but as
an ugly unsolvable problem to be denied.
When the yen went up in 1985 and Japanese industry found itself
in an adverse position, many observers feared that their economy
might collapse. But the country quickly adapted to a high-yen
world, in part because they saw it as a challenge to be overcome. At
Shell, though we recognized the pitfalls that faced Japan, our
scenario for its future was optimistic. We used the concept behind
Rakkanteki in our presentations to explain why we felt the
challenges the Japanese faced were likely to be met successfully.
People, especially unconventional thinkers, are a key source of
information. You may remember from Chapter 1 that Pierre Wack,
who first led the scenario-planning team for Shell, felt that, to see


the future, he had to go out and talk to what he called “remarkable
people” with their fingers on the pulse of change. These are not
usually the conventional thinkers you read about in the New York
Times. Unconventional people often are found in unconventional
locations and roles. In my life they have included a neurobiologist
from Santiago, a computer scientist in Boston, an economist in Paris,
a rock star in a studio in the English countryside, and an ecologist at
an advanced high-technology research project in the Arizona desert.
These are not necessarily bohemian or esoteric individuals. They
may have quite conventional lives. But their thinking is unorthodox.
I warmly remember a bureaucrat, enmeshed in the organization of
the European Community, who taught me to see the EEC as not just
another government agency, but a bold redefinition of the idea of
what Europe, and governments, should be. It was the European
alternative to the massive wars it had fought over the past two
centuries, where conflicts could be dealt with by dialogue and
procedure rather than the battlefield.
Some of the thinkers are luminaries whom I have sought
specifically for their “official” insights, and learned that their
“unofficial” ideas were just as valuable. In 1987, for a project on the
future of the stock market for the London Stock Exchange, I
interviewed Peter Drucker, the well-known writer and authority on
business management and the future. He was then in his late
seventies. He has a gravelly voice and an Austrian accent, and is a
wonderful 
storyteller. 
We 
talked 
about 
the 
technological
transformation of securities trading from face-to-face encounters on
trading floors to electronic transactions on computer display
screens. I was intrigued to hear Drucker say that he had started his
own career, in the early 1930s, as a stockbroker in London. “The
market is really about relationships,” he remarked. “It’s about
people coming together, getting to know and trust one another.”
We had been concerned about planning for new electronic
systems and the rules of the new electronic marketplace. Drucker
was telling us also to pay attention to maintaining the underlying
network of personal relationships, which the London Stock
Exchange directors and I might have taken for granted. This turned


out to be a key insight. We began planning how to re-create that
fabric of relationships that would be disrupted when the web of
trading floor, hallway, and lunch conversations were replaced by
computer terminals in offices scattered around the world. The
honesty of the market had been assured less by the rule books and
more by people’s knowledge of each other born of the web of
relationships built up in trading on the floor of the exchange.
Meanwhile, around the same time, my colleagues and I were
starting our own consulting company, Global Business Network.
Drucker’s remarks clarified, for me, the importance of maintaining
our network of relationships. Without them a cumbersome
regulatory process was almost inevitable. Indeed in recent years the
London financial community has been struggling to unburden itself
of the complex tangle of rules born of the Financial Services Act,
which had been intended to diminish regulation.
Sometimes a remarkable person is a specialist whose insight
illuminates vistas outside his specialty. At Shell, we received a key
insight about planning from Professor Alan Wilson, a paleontologist
at the University of California at Berkeley. On a visit to the campus
my colleagues and I looked him up and he helped us understand the
role of intelligence and learning in the evolutionary processes. The
role of communication played by gregarious songbirds as compared
with loners turned out to furnish a useful way of thinking and
talking about the ways planning works as a process of learning.
If you are a mid-level manager, an entrepreneur, or a small
business owner, however, how do you gain contact with the unusual
thinkers who are capable of sparking insights? How do you find
people who challenge your preconceptions? Fundamentally, you use
the same methods we used at Shell. You read and contact (usually
by writing) the authors of challenging articles or books. You seek
contacts through friends. You use computer networks (which I’ll
describe later in this chapter). You take courses—especially on
interdisciplinary 
subjects—and 
you 
attend 
meetings 
and
conferences. I have sometimes met valuable people by attending
book-signing parties, and striking up a conversation afterward.


An individual or small business person has several advantages
which we at Shell did not. Since we represented a multinational
corporation, many people expected us to pay for their information.
The same person will often talk for free to a courteous, considerate,
well-informed individual; especially to someone who can ask smart
questions. An individual can also focus questions onto narrower,
more local topics, and can seek out remarkable people nearby whom
larger corporations would probably miss.
Most importantly, you have something to offer in return. The
most remarkable people understand that their ability to be
remarkable depends on their skill at listening to others. A few years
ago writer Art Kleiner interviewed the late W. Edwards Deming,
founder of the “quality movement” first in Japan and then in the
United States. What was the greatest pleasure he took in his work?
“Learning!” the ninety-two-year-old Deming thundered, and steered
the conversation to what his interviewer could tell him.
The scenario process itself gives you something to bargain with.
At Shell, we often used our scenarios to communicate a new view of
the world to outsiders and customers. I would give talks to airlines,
for instance, about our scenarios on airline fuel and the future of the
fleet. These insights were something we could easily trade for
information. A small business or individual can do exactly the same
thing. Thus, when contacting someone for a conversation, it is often
useful to put a hint of your own work and insights into the letter.
To some readers, this emphasis on personal relationships may
seem contrary to their normal business practice. Normal business is
about products, services, and the exchange of cash. But in an
economy where knowledge and information directly improve the
bottom line, personal relationships become much more important.
They are the source not just of facts, but of judgment. Don’t
evaluate such people by how often they are right, but by how often
they nudge you to look at something in a new way. Cultivate
people, for instance, with whom you disagree deeply but can talk
amicably. You’re looking for people whose remarks will catalyze
your better understanding, as Kishida’s and Drucker’s remarks did
for me.


•    Sources of Surprise: Make the time to read outside your
immediate specialty—if necessary, taking time from more “active”
tasks. Stick bookmarks in promising places, then graze the marked
passages later. Allow yourself to become enthralled once in a while.
Almost anyone’s reading habits can be broadened. Over the years,
as a scenario-planner, I have made deliberate attempts to broaden
my own, reading across as many disciplines, subjects, and social
strata as possible, seeking out things that would not ordinarily be
my idea of interesting reading matter. I can’t visit all the fringes, but
I can read about all of them. I buy books even if there is a remote
chance they will be useful. Which means that I skim many more
books than I read. I rummage through my stacks of new books often,
looking for things that draw my attention. And when I find
something that does appeal to me, I make sure to read it thoroughly.
I also make semi-regular pilgrimages to my local branch of the U.S.
Government Printing Office, where by browsing the shelves I have
found little gems such as the Insider’s Guide to Demographic Know
How.
What I look for in my book reading is surprises—perceptions that
are new to me, and then become part of my own perception.
Popular science books can be invaluable this way: The Cerebral
Symphony by William Calvin (about the biological origins of
consciousness); The Dreams of Reason by Heinz Pagels (about the
role of computers and complexity in the modern world); and Chaos
by James Gleick (about a recent paradigm shift that cuts across all
the sciences). Occasionally I get a jump on the popular books: the
role of chaos in complex systems was already visible in the mid-
1970s in the writings of an obscure Belgian mathematician named
René Thom. Another important book for me, Terry Eagleton’s
Literary Theory, led me to understand the value of looking at how
people extract meaning from information.
I read some fiction avidly—novels by Robertson Davies, for
example—but do not find most novels, even science fiction novels,
useful in scenario research. The ideas are not surprising enough.
Occasionally there is an exception. Neuromancer by William Gibson,
with its dark and pragmatic vision of a “cyberpunk” society,


influenced my thinking about the social ramifications of new
communication technologies. The nihilistic future culture which
Gibson described—of people fighting underworld guerilla wars by
“jacking in” to intricate computer networks—gave me standards for
judging the potential underside of the computer revolution. That, in
turn, helped me realize that the phone companies had more to gain
from cultivating the insights of young “hackers” (as described
earlier in this chapter) than from shutting them out.
As important as reading books is knowing what books have been
published, if only to get a feeling for the intellectual current of the
day. I haunt bookstores and read book reviews—if nowhere else, in
the weekly New York Times Book Review. I usually peruse the three
or four pages which Publishers Weekly devotes to new nonfiction. I
chose to live and start my business in Berkeley in part because of
the great bookstores.
I also depend upon people as pointers to books. Michael Ventura,
whose essays I’ve quoted in this chapter, came to my attention at
the suggestion of a friend, Jon McIntire, until recently the manager
of the rock band the Grateful Dead. Jon literally walked up to me
and said, “Hey, you’ve got to read this book.” Published in 1985, it
was already going out of print. The last essay was particularly
excruciating, in the “I wish I’d written that” sense; called “The Next
200 Years,” it was the best writing I’d read about the future in a
long time.
•  Filters: Every good magazine editor is a clarifier—someone who
wades into a muck of new ideas and fringe suggestions and reshapes
it in a coherent form, filtered for readers to use. My opinion of a
magazine rises or falls with my opinion of the quality of the editor’s
filter. In the best magazines, the material is still somewhat raw and
unpolished, but digested enough not to waste my time.
You don’t need to subscribe to a magazine to benefit from it. A
visit to any decent public library can enable you to sample dozens of
very different views of the world in the space of an hour. Obscure
scholarly journals are less interesting than the cornucopia of
specialized publications. Routinely pick up a dozen magazines from


a newstand and scan them. Include magazines you would not
otherwise read: an audiophile magazine, a literary journal, a
gardening magazine, a car magazine, a political magazine opposing
your own opinions, a magazine about a hobby you don’t have, a
fashion magazine. Don’t be afraid to throw in a random-impulse
purchase: odd magazines could turn out to be the most cost-effective
research dollars you spend.
I don’t normally look at Metropolitan Home, for example, but I
picked it up to browse last year, almost at random, and noticed an
article on “LA Design.” That article was a useful window on a new
multicultural society emerging in L.A. I saw photographs of single
dwellings that fused Asian and Latin references, high technology,
“MTV”-style 
youth 
culture, 
and 
Western 
materialism. 
It
foreshadowed what I would later recognize in our “Global
Teenager” project described in Chapter 7.
To offer a sense of the range of publications one might read
regularly, I assembled the following list. It includes my regular
sources for mainstream and fringe illumination. I also gathered
suggestions over a computer network from Global Business Network
members and present those here as well. This, of course, is a early-
1990s list. No one’s perception of a magazine stays constant, as the
comments about Omni will note. Magazines rise and fall over time.
Some disappear altogether and are occasionally resurrected. The
Saturday Review followed just such a trajectory.
•  Discover is a popular science magazine which “has a scoop now
and then,” says Kevin Kelly, editor of Wired.
•    The Economist is, in my opinion, the single best source of
information about what is happening in the world. I always told my
staff at Shell that I wanted Shell managers to read news in The
Economist six months after they heard about it from us. When that
happened regularly, I was happy. It was a great challenge. They set
a very high standard. Occasionally The Economist covers speculative
and imaginative issues brilliantly, but it is a very mainstream
publication. They’re willing to take on topics that others won’t.


Regrettably, I know of no credible fringe-oriented business
magazine.
•    Electric Word was a magazine of the early nineties, “about the
externalization of language and almost everything else.” It was
subsequently transformed by its editors into Wired magazine.
According to executive editor Kevin Kelly, “Wired is about what the
new technology means to our lives, from art, business, politics,
culture, and education, to our personal relationships.”
•    Foreign Affairs, the mainstream journal of thought about
international relations, read by actor Peter Coyote and businessman
J. R. Frey.
•  A small periodical called Future Survey is quite good. It’s literally a
newsletter, with consistently interesting abstracts of books, and
pointers to magazine articles. I often find small, valuable nuggets
summarized there.
•  Granta—“published in London, each issue is a book-sized journal
of unusually perceptive, high-quality writing and thinking,” says
writer Art Kleiner. Peter Coyote also suggested this magazine.
•  Harper’s is a relatively mainstream magazine which is very useful
for surveying the fringes, because it culls material from unusual
sources.
•  The Manchester Guardian Weekly is a good source for news stories
as seen from three of the most interesting newspapers in three of the
most important countries. “It includes excerpts from the Manchester
Guardian, Le Monde, and the Washington Post,” says J. R. Frey.
•  Mondo 2000 is about new forms of mind-altering electronics and
similar ideas emerging from underground culture now.
•    As Jon McIntire puts it, “The New Yorker, amazingly enough,
breaks news from time to time in a very thorough way.”


•  Mark Satin’s New Options, says Kevin Kelly, “has the best pulse on
the American grassroots political future.”
•  The British New Scientist has an excellent filter. Important science
news will often appear here first, while it is still navigating its way
out of the fringes. It is also an excellently written magazine, with a
good grasp of the policy implications of new technologies.
•  I read the New York Times Tuesday science section every week for
its in-depth coverage of three or four important science stories.
•  I never read Omni myself, but others do. “I’ve changed my mind
about it,” says writer/editor/Whole Earth Catalog founder Stewart
Brand. “It’s a mainstream Mondo 2000. Omni’s bonding of science
and science fiction I once excoriated, but they were right and I was
wrong.”
•  Esther Dyson’s insider computer newsletter, Release 1.0, is “one of
the best future gazers,” says Kevin Kelly.
•  Scientific American is not where I see new ideas, but where I see
new ideas moving to the mainstream. If an idea moves from the New
Scientist into Scientific American, I know it’s being taken on board the
mainstream and will have a large impact.
•    Science is the most authoritative science magazine. It covers
energy, the environment, economics, biology, psychology, and
information technology—dense, but accessible to any intelligent
layperson.
•    Technology Review is the “best on social consequences of new
technology,” says Kevin Kelly.
•    Howard Rheingold, writer and former Whole Earth editor,
recommends the Utne Reader—a digest whose editors scan
thousands of small and alternative magazines. I personally find Utne
too well cooked, too unfocused, and too uncritical. Nonetheless, the


Utne Reader is worth scanning if only because it’s the only magazine
of its kind.
•  The Washington Spectator is, says Peter Coyote, “heir to I. F. Stone’s
Weekly.”
•    Finally, there is the Whole Earth Review, formerly called the
CoEvolution Quarterly—a magazine which I have written for, and to
which many Global Business Network members have close ties.
Nonetheless, I am often surprised by its contents. There’s a rawness
to Whole Earth which is appealing, and an acute intelligence that has
been there for a long time, through a half-dozen different editors. Its
contributors, often readers of the magazine itself, poke into new and
strange phenomena.
In many cases, publications are too ephemeral to recommend. I
receive a fascinating newsletter on interactive media that, two years
from now, will be of less interest because interactive media will be
in everyone’s living room (as the explosive growth in the World
Wide Web and commercial on-line services on the Internet have
since shown).
Our own preconceptions sometimes keep us from paying attention
to ideas that challenge conventional wisdom. We need to break
through those preconceptions without opening ourselves completely
to new ideas. If we open completely, we’ll drown in such trivia as
crystal power and pyramid effects. The distinction between that sort
of thing and, say, Mondo 2000, is subtle. Filters whose opinions you
trust are crucial for telling the difference.
Filters act on your behalf, discarding everything but the
information that might be of interest to you. This kind of mediation,
traditionally performed by editors and publishers of newspapers,
books, and magazines, is a growth industry as the tide of data
swells. I follow the work of some agencies, for example, that do
nothing but monitor and interpret information: the U.S. Congress
Office of Technology Assessment, for example. Their main client is
Congress (which arguably doesn’t use them as it should), but they
make their interpretations available through inexpensive reports,


from the Government Printing Office. It’s like having a cut-rate
think tank at your disposal.
Universities serve as filters. A good local political science or
economics department will sponsor speeches or symposia. Some,
like the University of California, publish articles and newsletters
that they send to interested neighbors. I’ve come to appreciate the
National Public Radio network as another prime filtering source,
with a catholicity of tastes and a willingness to talk to the fringe. I
listen regularly to their “All Things Considered,” “Monitor Radio,”
and “Fresh Air” programs. And I’ve come to love CNN; I see it as
providing the texture of our times.
The most beloved filters are friends. Information-hunters and -
gatherers seem to work best in groups. As people sift, they forward
news and ideas to other people who would find it interesting. If you
have a dozen or more friends who reroute key items of information
to 
one 
another, 
the 
total 
amount 
of 
information-sifting
accomplished is much greater than the sum of the parts.
But strangers can be filters too. I was walking down the street one
day in Palo Alto, California, and a man came up to me and said,
“How’s the future?” I looked blankly at him. “You’re Peter Schwartz,
aren’t you? You write about the future, right? You’re interested in
computers and kids, aren’t you? You ought to read a book called
Mindstorms by Seymour Papert. You’d really like it.” He turned and
walked away. He was absolutely right on all counts. I still haven’t
the faintest idea who he was.
And there is, of course, a filter within yourself. When a book, or
magazine article, or idea makes you uncomfortable, notice your
exact reaction. If you’re bored, move on. If you feel threatened, stay
with it and see what troubles you.
•    Immersion in Challenging Environments: Travel is the single
best way to immerse yourself in unfamiliarity—to force yourself to
adopt an alien point of view, albeit temporarily. It forces you to ask
questions about why people live the way they do. What created
their relationships, goals, and values? What are they trying to
accomplish? When traveling, I make a conscious effort to encounter


difference. I take local transportation, and walk unaccustomed
streets and routes. Because I usually have to work in urban offices, I
deliberately visit factories or villages. I seek out friends of friends,
or other nonbusiness contacts, and provoke conversations with
shopkeepers and cab drivers.
Visitors to India these days discover that there are three separate
cultures to see there: 350 million people there live in the Stone Age;
250 million live in the nineteenth century; and 100 million live at
the technical edge of modern society with nuclear power plants,
satellites, and advanced computer systems. This 100 million people,
a population twice that of England, reached its proficiency only
during the last twenty years. To a scenario-planner, this means that
the future of India is not that of a typical developing nation. India
could be one of the next great military powers; already it has the
fourth-largest military in the world, with aircraft carriers,
submarines, bombers, and long-range missiles. One could envision
China and India in an all-out war for control of Tibet.
Another scenario has India becoming the world’s most proficient
producer of computer software. It’s not an accident that Hewlett-
Packard has set up a programming center outside of Bombay.
Consider the number of Indian mathematicians in American
universities. They are the tip of a much larger iceberg. The most
important advance from Bell Labs in ten years was produced by an
Indian mathematician. When you travel in India, you can see
evidence of a five-thousand-year-old Tamil mathematical tradition.
In Delhi there is a museum of ancient astronomical instruments,
including a giant protractor three stories high, which they used to
measure the movements of the heavens. They didn’t have lenses or
telescopes, but they understood the mathematical movements of the
planets centuries before Copernicus.
I particularly love to visit countries which shock my American
sensibilities. On my last trip to Japan, a cultural anthropologist
named Steve Barnett (former head of product planning for Nissan in
the U.S. and now with GBN) took me past two buildings that have
occupied my mind ever since. One, a four-story artifact in the
Roppongi district of Tokyo, towered over its one- and two-story


neighbors. It had a stone front, with giant arches and gothic
windows, modeled (I later found out) on a sixteenth-century
Florentine palace. But out in front of the stone was a cast-iron frame
(in the style of the very modern Pompidou Center in Paris), visible
to the street, and giant cast-iron stairs, such as those of a
nineteenth-century factory. The stairs were designed to lead
nowhere, and to distort perspective in a distinctly hypermodern
fashion. The building was a deliberate architectural joke. The
Japanese culture, it is often argued, is becoming an incoherent
jumble of influences picked up from all over the world.
Nearby, Steve and I found ourselves walking down an alley past
another building—a tiny, one-story nightclub, painted black. Its
walls were a densely packed collage of tires, parts of cars, and
bicycles, protruding from the concrete. A young Japanese man in his
mid-twenties stood in the doorway, wearing thin wire-rimmed
glasses and a long black coat. It looked intriguing enough that we
tried to visit. Without speaking, the man now blocking the door
refused to let us pass. As we walked away, a long black Japanese
limousine pulled up, and three tough-looking young men stepped
out of the car. No one smiled or spoke; the doorman stepped aside
silently and let them by.
We had seen two hidden sides to Japan, lurking behind the
Toyota/Sony/Matsushita face. The first was the intense playfulness
of Japanese society, even in such ponderous fields as architecture.
The second was the high-technology, dark side of Japanese
gangsterism. I found myself imagining those men running a black
market in semiconductor chips, or selling biotechnological methods
for changing identities. Any scenario in which Japan influences the
rest of the world had better include these two elements as part of
the influence.
Visiting Singapore, I realized what a powerful force for economic
growth exists in the workers of Asia. In the driven eyes of the
workers, in the instant factories stacked in vertical concrete high-
rises, and in the quick response to the whims of tastes halfway
around the world, I could see the aspirations of wealth aborning.
These people will make it, no matter what happens.


You need not travel all over the world to expose yourself to
differences. You can encounter the Third World right down the
street, or stumble onto a pocket of the twenty-first century around
the corner. In the past, gathering information meant going to
centers of culture and commerce—Paris, London, New York,
California, Tokyo. Today, just as power is universally less
centralized, so are information and culture. For instance, one of the
major sources of new thinking is Salina, Kansas—home of the Land
Institute and a branch of ecological philosophy which gets little
media attention on the coasts. But even Kansans won’t find the
sources of ideas there unless they consciously look with a receptive
mind.
One of my most fruitful scenario trips was to a friend’s house in
Big Sur on the California coast, on the opening day of the 1984
Olympics. I had been out of the U.S. for about two years at that
point. My friend suggested we watch the ceremonies and reached
for his television guide—not the ordinary TV Guide, but a new, inch-
thick magazine called Orbital Satellite. Page after page covered
hundreds of options for every time slot: international broadcasts,
network feeds, cable relays, and local programs. The listings
mingled with ads for satellite dishes, receivers, tuners, and motors,
all made by companies that had not even existed two years before.
An entire outlaw industry had sprung up almost overnight—literally
in the two years I had been gone. The guide itself was produced by
a hippie commune in Tennessee. That visit opened my mind to a
future of proliferating, fragmenting media, no longer dominated by
the reigning “big three” television networks, which were just about
to begin a long slide into dramatically diminished audiences.
•  Networked Sensibilities: At Royal Dutch/Shell, we had a tough
time sharing ideas among the scenario-planners who were scattered
in 120 countries, in every imaginable time zone. So we decided to
open up the community and make it a network instead of a
bottleneck. We acquired the services of a computer conferencing
system, equipped around fifty of our planners with computer
terminals, and taught them to use them. When we brought outsiders


into some conferences, making it possible for a planner in London to
query a scientist in California (while others could still monitor the
conversation), everyone in the network was enriched. Knowledge is
the only kind of wealth that multiplies when you give it away, and
computer conferencing can be used as an engine for generating and
multiplying that kind of wealth. Shell continues to experiment with
computer networking.
To a computer novice, the idea of hooking up a computer and
telephone seems daunting, but there is no more personal way to use
a personal computer. You enter text for other people to read. They,
in turn, sign on at their convenience and reply with their comments.
It is the most efficient, effective way to reach people; you need not
struggle to find a time to talk, and you can ask a question of dozens
of people at one time. By navigating the networks, you can find
experts on any field: toxic waste disposal, preparing for a career in
education, azaleas, Middle East architecture. Some of these people
will be strangers whom you would never meet otherwise. You will
not see them personally, only their ideas and words (although many
computer network users end up meeting and becoming friends).
Computer network users now number over fifty million worldwide,
including a large population of opinion leaders, scientific
researchers, technologists, and writers. They form a round-the-clock
network of consultants. The Whole Earth Software Catalog described
the online culture this way:
Good writers have charisma. Mediocre writers improve. Pushy or
insensitive writers get ignored. People learn to articulate their
emotions more explicitly to avoid being misunderstood. Race,
gender, shyness, disabilities, age, and physical presence all lose
importance. You come to feel as if everyone is always accessible.
But you also learn not to pressure people—they’ll just shrug and
ignore your message. The key impression is one of civilization—or,
more precisely, a new way of being civilized.
A modest disclaimer: By now the reader may have guessed that I
am fascinated by and am an enthusiastic user of new technologies.


My enthusiasm may creep in as a bias. I do pay close attention to
new technology both because of its larger impact on the world
around us and because I want to use it myself. However, by working
in teams that bias can be tempered by attention to social and human
spheres, including the impact of technology on people’s lives as well
as life in societies which are not built around Western technologies.
The Global Business Network: Designing an Information-
Hunting and -Gathering Company
In 1987, when I left Royal Dutch/Shell, I sought out Jay Ogilvy,
who was then the Director of Research of the SRI Values and
Lifestyles Program. Essentially, we wanted to create a new type of
company which would do for many clients what Pierre Wack had
done for Shell: to plug them into a network of remarkable people, to
include them in a highly focused and filtered information flow, and
to reorganize their perceptions about alternative futures through the
scenario method.
We suspect that many companies will take the form of an
information-gathering company during the years to come. The
advantages—high information, pleasant contacts, little office
politics, low expenses, and a flexible workforce—are just too great
to resist. When we began there was not anything quite like what we
wanted to create in the research and consulting world. There were
informal 
networks 
of 
professionals 
on 
subjects 
such 
as
organizational development, but they rarely tackled projects
together. Such mainstream consulting companies as McKinsey, Bain,
and our old alma mater, SRI, were closed; they drew tight walls
around their people. Occasionally they hired technical experts, but
the last thing they wanted to do was network; they saw it as giving
away their jewels. On the other hand, we saw this new “Global
Business Network” as a company based on openness. People would
share their insights and knowledge, and take away our insights and


knowledge in return. Some companies would hire network members
to tackle special projects; others would simply pay to participate.
That much was obvious to us; deciding how to organize it, and how
to make our network available to client companies, required a lot
more thought.
But we did not have much time. Almost immediately, we had our
first few clients: the International Stock Exchange, AT&T, and
BellSouth. We served them in a conventional consulting role:
developing strategic scenarios. But we gradually realized that this
work gave them less value than our original idea of a network.
Alone, they were hiring our time. As part of a network, they could
develop their own understanding.
Part of the inspiration had come from the experience of the
Learning Conferences. In 1986, Shell’s Planning Coordinator Arie de
Geus was attempting to understand the nature of learning in
complex systems such as Shell. He was trying to improve Shell’s
capacity for using planning as a tool for corporate learning. He
began a project with executives at AT&T and Volvo, who were all
interested in organizational learning; how did a large institution
achieve proficiency in adapting and changing? If we brought them
together with individuals who were aggressively thinking about the
nature of learning, some creative understanding would emerge.
We organized a series of face-to-face and computer conferences,
in which leading-edge researchers in learning could talk to each
other. As organizer and convenor, we brought in Stewart Brand,
who had founded the Whole Earth Catalog and CoEvolution Quarterly
(now the Whole Earth Review), and who was then working on a book
about the MIT Media Lab. When he visited prospective participants,
such as computer learning pioneer Seymour Papert, biologist Peter
Warshall, artificial intelligence pioneer Marvin Minsky, or
anthropologist Mary Catherine Bateson, they would invariably say,
“Why would a big corporation be interested in my work?” Our reply
was, “These vast organizations were beginning to function like
organisms as their complexity began to approach that of biological
systems.” These large companies had large problems; seemingly
esoteric ideas seemed to hold solutions. An organization at the scale


and complexity of Shell, for instance, functions very much like a
brain. It has the same unconscious sense of values, myths, and
psychology. Papert’s research in cognitive science and individual
learning might directly help people who wanted to make large
organizations operate more effectively.
We held two meetings each year—Learning Conferences—
deliberately 
scattered 
around 
the 
world—in 
a 
Cambridge,
Massachusetts, supercomputer company, a Volvo factory in Sweden,
at the Tucson “biosphere” (a project for creating an artificially
sealed ecological environment, as a sort of model for space
colonies), and in Costa Rica. Each environment was chosen because
people were trying to build learning institutions. Costa Rica, for
example, is a remarkable example of political and social learning. Its
quality of life—as measured in mortality rates, per capita gross
national product, individual incomes, literacy, and education—is far
superior to its Central American neighbors. One reason is the fact
that they renounced war forty years ago; they are the only Central
American nation with no military. They invested, instead, in solving
their social problems, and managed to do so effectively: they have a
very modest police force and virtually no crime. The Learning
Conference attendees deliberately sought out people (including
President Oscar Arias, and the director of a Costa Rican department
store) who could explain the details of how this happened. But the
trip brought more than conversation; the participants had to go and
see the day-to-day life for themselves to appreciate the possibilities
of a peaceful Central American country.
The meetings did not “work” in the sense of creating any tangible
product. Rather, they led to understandings and collaborations, for
both the corporate clients and the participants. Among the more
interesting collaborations that resulted was a partnership between
Chilean neurobiologist Francisco Varela and computer scientist
Danny Hillis (designer of the “Connection Machine,” a massively
parallel computer) to simulate the learning processes of the immune
system to better understand how such auto-immune diseases as
AIDS work.


As we began GBN, the Learning Conferences gave us another
model, and encouraged Stewart to join us as a principal. Not long
after that, Napier Collyns, a former colleague from Shell and a
master at creating and nurturing networks, came aboard. Our fifth
partner was Lawrence Wilkinson, an alumnus of Oxford and the
Harvard 
Business 
School, 
who 
was 
president 
of 
a
filmmaking/animation studio in San Francisco. The simple truth was
that, as individuals, we each wanted the network for ourselves. By
selling it to client companies, we could make it more formal, and
expand it beyond what any of us could individually afford.
Some of the first members of GBN were old friends from Shell;
Francisco Varela, the paradigm-busting neurobiologist, for example,
had been involved in our research into planning and learning in
companies and the natural world. We also sought out other people
whose diversity and depth would enrich the network, much as we
had done at Shell. Our first corporate members were also diverse:
AT&T, Volvo, Inland Steel, UNOCAL, Shell, BP, Pacific Gas and
Electric, the International Stock Exchange, Statoil, ABB, and
BellSouth. We met in Stockholm to discuss the future of the global
environment with a group that included environmentalists,
European industrialists, pollsters, and environmental policymakers.
A different mix of people met in San Francisco to discuss the theme
of “people in the nineties.” Yet another group met in London and
considered the integration of Europe. Meanwhile, we built up our
own set of conferences on the Whole Earth ’Lectronic Link (WELL)
computer network, and set about encouraging and abetting our
members to join in and take part.
We wanted to make GBN feel convivial, like a club that people
could join. Thus, we could not organize it according to the hierarchy
of a traditional consulting firm. We retained some elements of a
conventional organization: accounting, bookkeeping, office chairs,
and photocopiers. But there was no “boss” in the traditional sense.
That’s possible, in part, because we do much of our administration
via computer conferences, which allow us to stay in touch while
traveling and reinforce the feeling of equals. Online, we can not
dominate with our physical presence or cut someone else off in mid-


sentence. That ethic carries over into face-to-face meetings. By
contrast, I have visited consulting firms where everyone talks only
about “what the CEO thinks.” Before long, the entire organization
ossifies. I could not imagine trying to control a Stewart Brand, a Jay
Ogilvy, a Lawrence Wilkinson, or a Napier Collyns—all substantial
figures in their own right—nor, I’d guess, could they imagine trying
to control me.
Disagreements are handled by “dissensus-avoiding.” If no one says
“no” very loudly, we move ahead. I may come in and ask to hire
someone new, buy a computer, or start a project; if no one says,
“Schwartz, that’s really stupid,” as Stewart wisely often does, I’ll
move ahead and do it.
We deliberately priced the basic cost of membership in our
network at one year’s salary for a research assistant. I have found
myself saying to CEOs, “If you can get your ‘r.a.’ to do a better job,
then that person is remarkable—lock him or her up.”
Each of the techniques of hunting and gathering became
institutionalized in our practice. We scoured newsletters and
publications for quotes and recommendations, and sent out two
books every month to members. Stewart, who is arguably one of the
world’s most cogent “filters,” took on the job for GBN. Every week
he comes to the office with a stack of papers and says, in effect,
“Read this. It’s the best I’ve found this week.” Our clients, we found,
most appreciated the filtering in our entire operation. They feel
assaulted by a steady stream of conventional consultants and experts
for hire, and can’t be sure who is worth paying attention to. Some of
our pointers were to members of GBN, others to nonmembers whose
books or writing we recommended. We never counseled that Global
Business Network should be an executive’s only set of filters. People
who travel this route know that several networks of people serve as
a more effective filter than one. People in the same network often
think too much alike. Being part of several networks not only opens
up diverse arenas, but allows you to cross-check the insights that
emerge among people from vastly different places.
For our own research, we used travel inventively; when we
needed to investigate the “global teenager” (see Chapter 7), we


joined with Whole Earth Review to send writer Will Baker and
teenage photographer Amon Rappaport on a worldwide expedition
to interview teenagers and confirm or challenge our ideas.
With our atmosphere of openness, clients began to contribute not
just as information users, but as sources. Some of our corporate
members are remarkable in their own right, and would not dream of
missing a meeting because they are deeply engaged in the dialogue.
We often find that member companies begin talking to each other
and begin joint projects. This sort of collaboration across industrial
boundaries is becoming more common; for example, Shell and PG&E
began working together to provide compressed natural gas (CNG) as
an alternative fuel to gasoline.
Scenarios are part of our regular work; we produce sets of
scenarios on the world economy, for instance. But like the scenario
approach of this book, GBN’s scenarios are meant to involve people
—to lead to understanding rather than a set of statistics. In one
meeting, we suddenly asked, “What might happen if Gorbachev
fails?” Angela Stent, a Sovietologist based at Georgetown University,
invented a scenario on the spot called “Brezhnev Plus.” The U.S.S.R.
would not go all the way back to the policies of the Brezhnev days,
but it would revert to a heavy bureaucracy with an active black
market: a lot less glasnost, a little less perestroika, and a healthy
underground marketplace that would become a driving force in the
Soviet economy. It would resemble Mexico. This was very different
from the conventional wisdom scenario—that the U.S.S.R. would
revert all the way to aggressive Stalinism. She and Richard Cooper,
who had been an assistant secretary of state for economic affairs,
began debating the internal and external forces that could push the
Soviet Union in either direction. In that same discussion was Bo
Ekman, former head of planning of Volvo, who had recently been
trying to cut deals in the Soviet Union. From that intersection of
perspectives—a scholar, a government policymaker, and a
businessman—emerged a view of the world that couldn’t have been
found in any individual’s vantage point.
Along the university model, we plan to take in fellows from
various companies, who would spend a period of several months in


our offices and attend all of our meetings, becoming (in effect) an
in-house filter themselves.
GBN is a small company, with around thirty employees. Other
principal relationships involve far-flung members and contributors,
who are paid on a project-by-project basis and often participate with
nothing in exchange but the contacts and information they receive.
This approach has allowed us to move from consulting into media,
taking advantage of opportunities to produce television programs.
Napier, who holds a history degree from Cambridge University in
England, compares GBN to a European-style university, with the
same style of dialogue and debate, but held among people from
many different disciplines who live scattered around the world.
Unlike many universities, there is no “party line”—no attempt to
control viewpoints or information. That would negate the purpose
of the network, because it would keep out the unthinkable ideas
which we hope to uncover.
OceanofPDF.com


CREATING SCENARIO BUILDING BLOCKS
            In the days when pharaohs ruled Egypt, a temple stood
far up the Nile, beyond the cataracts in Nubia, in what is now the
northern deserts of the Sudan. Three tributaries joined together in
that region to form the Nile, which flowed down one thousand miles
to produce a miraculous event each year, the flooding of its river
basin, which permitted Egyptian farmers to grow crops in the hot,
rainless midsummer.
Every spring, the temple priests gathered at the river’s edge to
check the color of the water. If it were clear, the White Nile, which
flowed from Lake Victoria through the Sudanese swamps, would
dominate the flow. The flooding would be mild, and late; farmers
would produce a minimum of crops. If the stream appeared dark,
the stronger waters of the Blue Nile, which joined the White Nile at
Khartoum, would prevail. The flood would rise enough to saturate
the fields and provide a bountiful harvest. Finally, if the stream
showed dominance by the green-brown waters of the Atbara, which
rushed down from the Ethiopian highlands, then the floods would
be early and catastrophically high. The crops might drown; indeed,
the Pharaoh might have to use his grain stores as a reserve.
Each year, the priests sent messengers to inform the king of the
color of the water. They may also have used lights and smoke signal
to carry word downstream. The Pharaoh then knew how prosperous
the farmers in his kingdom would be, and how much he could raise
in taxes. Thus, he knew whether he could afford to conquer more
territory. As Pierre Wack (who often told this story at Shell) would
say, the priests of the Sudanese Nile were the world’s first long-term
forecasters. They understood the meaning of predetermined
elements and critical uncertainties.
