# Creating Scenario Building Blocks

The process of building scenarios starts with the same thing that
the priests did—looking for driving forces, the forces that influence
the outcome of events. In this case, one such force was the rain. It
fell upstream on the Nile’s tributaries, and affected the balance
between them. That, in turn, influenced the fate of thousands of
people whom the Pharaoh might conquer that year. There was a
second driving force, as well—the dependence on Nile flooding to
grow crops. Had the Egyptians had irrigation canals and fertilizer,
they could have planted crops further out in the desert. They would
not have had to worry about the river flow at all.
Driving Forces: What We Know We Care About
Every enterprise, personal or commercial, is propelled by
particular key factors. Some of them are within the enterprise: your
workforce and goals. Others, such as government regulation, come
from outside. But many outside factors, in particular, are not
intuitively obvious. The color of the water’s stream made it easy to
guess its effect on the floods downstream; if all the rivers were the
same color, the priests might never have understood. Similarly, the
impact of government regulation on businesses is obvious, but there
are many less obvious external factors as well. Identifying and
assessing these fundamental factors is both the starting point and
one of the objectives of the scenario method.
In other words, driving forces are the elements that move the plot
of a scenario, that determine the story’s outcome. In a mystery
story, the motive is a driving force; indeed, much fictional detective
work consists of figuring out a credible driving force for an
otherwise unexplainable murder. In adventure stories, one driving
force is the quest that propels the journey. Another is the opposition
—a villain, force of nature, or opposing tribe that resists the hero’s
quest. In Romeo and Juliet, the romantic love of the two young
principals is one driving force. Another is the concept of filial


responsibility which binds them. The third is the rivalry between
the families. Without all three forces, there would be no story.
Without driving forces, there is no way to begin thinking through
a scenario. They are a device for honing your initial judgment, for
helping you decide which factors will be significant and which
factors will not.
As a business executive thinking about the future of your
company, you know that interest rates, energy prices, new
technology, the behavior of the markets, and your competitors’
actions all come from the outside to affect your business. But how
do you find the significant driving forces among them, and the
forces which underlie them? You start by taking another look at the
decision you have to make.
You will quickly see that some driving forces are critical to that
decision, while others don’t require much attention. Gravity and the
laws of physics affect everyone’s life. But you will rarely have to
ponder them for scenarios. Few forces could be more boring, for
example, than the fact that British Commonwealth countries speak
English—until you investigate the future of French Canada or
Pakistan. Trust your instincts; it is part of human nature to be
interested in factors that affect the decisions we need to make.
When the founders of Smith & Hawken tools (in Chapter 2) asked:
Should we open a small business? we looked first at what would affect
the outcome of our decision. Our answers were all driving forces:
the demographics of the United States; the availability of tools from
abroad (which, in turn, was driven by the balance of payments); the
importance of a home and garden in American values; and the
American economy. There were other driving forces in the world at
that time—for instance, the growing enmity among Arab nations—
which had little to do with our story.
Often, identifying driving forces reveals the presence of deeper,
more fundamental forces behind them. I described in Chapter 4 how
Shell planners asked: “Should we build a giant off-shore gas drilling
platform?” Among the driving forces we considered were the
European gas market and the European gas supply. What forces
influenced the European gas supply? One clear factor was European-


U.S.S.R. relations. And what force influenced those relationships?
One was the totalitarian, seemingly rigid politics of the Soviet
Union.
Driving forces often seem obvious to one person and hidden to
another. That is why I almost always compose scenarios in teams.
Often, we begin this stage (after we have individually done our
research) by standing before a large sheet of white paper, and
brainstorming together. Several years ago, I did this with a group of
Pacific Gas and Electric executives. They were considering a
perennial power utility question: Should they invest in building
more power plants? Or should they instead try to reduce the need
for more power by promoting energy-efficiency? Both paths would
cost the same, and result in the same amount of available energy.
But they needed to know which driving forces existed, to make one
choice or the other preferable.
Some factors were obvious. Every executive in the room was
keenly aware of twenty-year-old environmentalist resistance to
nuclear power in California. After years of bitter antagonism, the
PG&E executives were now coming to accept the fact that the
movement would not go away, and that it would have long-lasting
political impact.
Less obvious was the force of immigration—the fact that
California was becoming a more multicultural society. If the
company promoted energy-efficiency, it would henceforth depend
more on the nature of its customers than on the economics of
nuclear technology. Promoting energy-efficiency would mean
communicating with millions of Philippine, Vietnamese, and El
Salvadoran homeowners. That meant the human capital of the
company had to change. There was not a single Tagalog speaker, for
example, among PG&E’s executive ranks—so far. If the company
chose energy-efficiency, it might need to hire some.
Another driving force was economic volatility. Everyone in the
room could see signs of distress: the stock market turbulence, the
U.S. deficits, increasing inflation, As large borrowers of capital, big
power projects are keenly sensitive to inflation and interest rates.


The economic volatility increased the risk of massive investments—
it made the energy-efficiency side look better.
Finally, the company’s own growing appreciation of the
greenhouse effect was another driving force. PG&E had come to
realize that a large-scale investment in energy-efficiency—in which
it would help customers make individual investments in, for
example, insulation—would not only help its public relations, but
would stabilize California’s energy demands. Whatever happened to
oil prices or nuclear power, the state would be able to manage.
Ultimately, PG&E decided that it could handle the necessary cultural
change. The effects of this decision will increasingly change
California. In other words, PG&E’s decision will itself become a
driving force.
Whenever I look for driving forces I first run through a familiar
litany of categories:
•  Society
•  Technology
•  Economics
•  Politics
•  Environment
In nearly every situation, I find forces from each of these arenas
which make a difference in the story.
For example, consider a decision which many large book
publishing companies are making. Today, publishers print massive
overruns of popular “mass-market” paperback books. Bookstores
order more than they can sell, and place them on shelves for a few
weeks, knowing that a few books will take off as bestsellers. The rest
are returned to publishers, which refund their cost to bookstores
and pulp the books. It’s a wasteful, costly practice which puts
pressure (some feel unnecessary pressure) on writers, bookstores,
and publishers.


But under what scenarios could that practice be different? To
answer, we need to analyze the driving forces which exist to keep
the practice going—and the potential forces which could influence it
to change:
•  Social: The continuing wave of population growth is perhaps the
strongest driving force of our time. It suggests a continuing market
for books, especially because people tend to read more as they get
older. Literacy in America, while hard to measure, is generally
considered to be declining: another growing force. A third force is
the increasing cultural diversity of America, which continues to
affect book publishing by opening new markets and changing the
demographics of old ones.
•    Technological: The continuous improvement and innovation in
electronic media may shrink the audience for books. It may also
have more subtle effects on the distribution of books; on the ability,
for instance, to build high-speed laser printers in bookshops that
download books over telephone wires, print them, and bind them
while people wait. Meanwhile, improvements in paper shredding
and recycling technologies may make it less expensive to shred
books.
•    Economic: The cost of transportation may add to the cost of
printing and pulping excess books. It, in turn, depends on the cost of
oil and on inflation. The 1980s brought another economic driving
force in some companies: the amount of debt added to publishing
expenses after a leveraged buyout.
•    Political: Laws affect every endeavor. One important ruling
affecting U.S. book sales is the Thor Power Tools vs. Internal
Revenue Service decision of 1981. By allowing the IRS to tax
publishers on their back inventory in warehouses, it added pressure
to destroy unsold books, instead of saving them to sell later. Another
might be restrictions placed by countries (such as Great Britain) on
importing American books for sale. Internal politics can matter as


well. Thus a third political force would be the pressure within any
corporation 
to 
continue 
existing 
practices, 
rather 
than
experimenting with new ones. Book publishers have invested
heavily in developing and promoting these mass-market distribution
channels.
•  Environmental: The impact of ecological damage on human affairs,
and the increasing public perception of ecological harm. In the long
run the cost of paper and the resulting books will be significantly
affected by the growing pressure to restrict logging practices.
Having identified driving forces, I usually step back to sort
through them. Which are significant and will actually influence
events? Which are irrelevant? The international restrictions on
imports, for example, can be ignored for this domestic book
publishing problem—unless it’s plausible to think that these
restrictions might change, and books returned from bookstores can
be shipped profitably to other countries.
Some forces are clearly significant: the cost of transportation, and
declining literacy rates. But their effects may be ambiguous.
Declining literacy rates, for example, could imply a shrinking
market for paperback books—or a growing market, compared with
hardback books. To learn which effect it will have, you will
probably have to return to the hunting and gathering phase,
researching whether book outlets are expanding in the United
States. If they are expanding, are mass-market outlets growing more
quickly or slowly than independent specialty shops?
You may not immediately see any influence from some forces, but
don’t rush to discard them. Environmental influences, for example,
seem remote from book publishing considerations; but conceivably a
forest shortage would raise the price of paper. Even more
conceivably, a perceived deforestation crisis could lead to public
pressure for more efficient publishing. A few farsighted publishers,
realizing that more efficient practices would save money for them in
the long run, might find themselves promoting environmentalism
for the most self-interested reasons.


As individuals, or even as companies, we have little control over
driving forces. Our leverage for dealing with them comes from
recognizing them, and understanding their effect. Little by little,
then, as we act within society, our actions contribute to new driving
forces which in turn will change the world once more.
Warning: Ambiguity Ahead
After “identifying and exploring the driving forces,” one must
uncover 
the 
“predetermined 
elements” 
and 
the 
“critical
uncertainties.” There is a temptation to assume that these are all
separate categories, painted in three distinct colors. That, alas, is not
the case. (I say “alas” because then scenarios would be much easier
to explain. However, they would also be much less illuminating to
use.) There are overlaps among them. But you mull over them for
different purposes, in different ways. Weaving together these
conceptual building blocks you are deepening your understanding of
the world by considering the elements of your scenarios. Once your
understanding of the dynamics and patterns of the situation is
clearer, then you go on to write the scenarios.
Some scenario-builders—including Pierre Wack—refuse to give
definitions for any elements at all. They believe that any definition
would trivialize the subtleties of the process. Scenario creation is
not a reductionist process; it is an art, as is story-telling.
I am willing to try to offer a few definitions. But as I go on to
describe the other two building blocks—predetermined elements
and critical uncertainties—I warn you not to focus on the
definitions. Focus, instead, on how you perceive elements in various
situations. There is indeed something almost mystical about human
understanding of events. If you have trouble distinguishing driving
forces from predetermined elements, and those from uncertainties,
think of a story important to your life and business. Create an image
of the elements in that story. They will come to you. For example in


my business the spread of sophisticated desktop electronics is a key
driving force. I can be sure that over the coming decade our
technological capabilities will continue to accelerate as new
computing technology becomes ever smaller, faster, and cheaper.
However, I can’t be sure how rapidly that new technology will
appear on the desktops of the companies we work with. My strategy
will be governed by the intersection of the predetermined elements
of accelerating technology and the critical uncertainty of the pace of
innovation in the giant multinationals we work with.
Predetermined Elements:
What We Know We Know
Put yourself now in the position of a priest on the river, watching
the water turn brown and green. To warn the Pharaoh of a
devastating flood required supreme confidence. Being wrong was
breaking a religious sacrament and would also, no doubt, have
meant losing one’s life. They had that confidence, however, because
the fate of the floods that year was predetermined. Nothing could
change its impact on the crops, even though the impact would not
be felt for months later. The priests may or may not have known
why the color of the water affected the power of the flood. They
may or may not have been aware of the driving force—the rainfall
pattern which caused one river, or another, to dominate. But they
knew the predetermined elements of flooding as well as they knew
anything.
The modern era has its predetermined elements as well. General
Motors and American Telephone and Telegraph both tried to
reshape their businesses during the 1980s. Both lived out their
troubles in a public, almost humiliating way. Analysts have
predicted deeper troubles for both. Yet their situations are very
different. General Motors could collapse from its current troubles,
but AT&T could not. It has a guaranteed flow of cash from its long-


distance telephone network. It so dominates the long-distance
market, and that market is so profitable, that any time AT&T’s top
management need capital they can merely slow down their long-
distance equipment maintenance. Soon, they have enough cash to
cover their crisis and speed up their maintenance again. Thus, in
any scenario we can think of for AT&T during the next few years, its
survival is assured. In order to imagine AT&T failing, you have to
imagine something happening to destroy that predetermined flow of
money. Imagining such a change, in turn, would mean looking more
closely at the forces that drive the system.
Predetermined elements do not depend on any particular chain of
events. If it seems certain, no matter which scenario comes to pass,
then it is a predetermined element. In 1982 at Shell, we came to
believe that there would be a substantial United States Government
budget deficit throughout the 1980s. We reached that conclusion
after examining the prevailing American political logic of the day.
The two largest components of the American government budget,
defense spending and Social Security, were rising uncontrollably.
The American public supported both increases. Four months after
Reagan took office, he tried to propose a slight delay in cost-of-
living increases for Social Security. The proposal was defeated in the
Senate, one hundred votes to none. The third biggest budget
component—interest payments on the deficit itself—could not be
controlled.
Other governments might have raised taxes, but American anti-
tax feeling was (and remains) too strong. The origins of this anti-tax
feeling, incidentally, probably stemmed from another driving force:
the reality that, for most middle-class Americans, purchasing power
had hardly changed in ten (now almost twenty) years. The Reagan
administration cut everything it could: space, education, welfare,
transportation, non-defense research, infrastructure maintenance.
The net result of the cuts was insignificant in a 200-billion-dollar
deficit. America was caught in political gridlock: Americans wanted
to cut taxes and increase spending. If that continued, interest on the
deficit would have to become the largest single element of the
budget. The government would be forced to borrow abroad. As a


result of that, the dollar would eventually fall, interest rates would
rise, and government bonds would be devalued.
That, ultimately, is exactly what happened. The Japanese bought
the U.S. bonds, let them be devalued, and have supported the U.S.
deficit ever since. Once our assumption was in place we could agree
to assume a big deficit in every scenario we wrote for the 1980s.
This contradicted every economist we talked to; they all said the
deficit could not be sustained past 1984.
Identifying such elements is a tremendous confidence builder—
not in the U.S. political system, but in your own decisions. You can
commit to some policies and feel sure about them. There are several
useful strategies for looking for predetermined elements:
•    slow-changing phenomena: such things include the growth of
populations, the building of physical infrastructure, and the
development of resources.
•  constrained situations: for example, the Japanese must (and will)
maintain a positive trade balance because they have 120 million
people on four islands who do not possess the resources to feed,
clothe, warm, or transport themselves.
•  in the pipeline: today, for example, we know almost exactly how
large the teenage population of the nineties in the United States will
be. All of them have been born already. They are all in the pipeline
already. The only uncertainty is immigration and we have a pretty
good feel for that now … it will be high.
•  inevitable collisions: in the deficit discussion above the inevitability
of an enduring federal imbalance was created by the collision of the
American voting public’s absolute refusal to provide the government
with higher taxes at the same time that they also refused to forego
any public benefits. Once the gridlock was created there was no way
out.


The most commonly recognized predetermined element, of
course, is demographics, a slowly changing phenomenon. As soon as
the baby boom began, it was obvious that its members would
eventually age. The effects of this aging are still unclear, and many
members of the “Don’t trust anyone over thirty” generation denied
that they too would one day be gray. Deep in their hearts, however,
the baby boomers knew of the inevitability. “Will you still need
me,” they asked, “will you still feed me, when I’m sixty-four?”
I first realized the impact of the aging of the baby boomers in the
early 1970s, while creating a scenario on new businesses for the
lumber company Weyerhaeuser. We knew that, no matter what
happened, there would be a massive opportunity in houseplants.
Our three scenarios were similar to those we used to inform Smith &
Hawken (as described in Chapter 2), but the outlook was even
better for houseplants than for high-quality garden tools. If the
economy boomed, baby boomers would invest more in their homes;
along with the paintings and furniture, they’d buy plants as “indoor
landscaping.” If the economy collapsed into violence and
incoherence, houseplants would allow frightened nature lovers to
avoid the risks of going outside. Finally, if a social transformation
took place, houseplants would be as much a part of it as meditation
and health food. Reality turned out to be a combination of all three
scenarios. Weyerhaeuser went into the commercial nursery business
with considerable success. And I came away with a new
understanding of how the marketplace of things and ideas in
America was about to change.
Demographics also made it clear why perestroika was inevitable.
The Soviet Union experienced a sharp decline in births during and
immediately after World War II. During the 1960s and 1970s the
original “baby bust” was echoed by an even greater decline than we
saw in the United States. In the mid-eighties therefore it was certain
that the U.S.S.R. would experience a decline in its labor force as
fewer and fewer young people came of age. That would begin to
turn around in the early nineties, but a short-term decline was
predetermined. Gross national product depends on the size of the
labor force, and the level of productivity. The Soviet Union’s


productivity was declining, and people were trying to get out of, not
into, the U.S.S.R. When the labor force shrank, it meant the collapse
of the Soviet economy.
Pundits kept asking why Gorbachev was having so much trouble
jump-starting the Soviet economy. Demographics made it clear that
he wouldn’t succeed until after 1991. At that point, the number of
twenty-year-olds would begin to rise once again.
Predetermined elements are fearful sometimes because people
tend to deny them. The chickens coming home to roost is a
predetermined element. So is the next payment on our loan, or a
project deadline that we hoped might never arrive. Gridlock is also
predetermined. To calculate the amount of gridlock in 2000, look at
the number of people of driving age. Multiply it by the average
number of cars per person in America. Then calculate the increase
in highway mileage, based on construction projects started in the
last five years. (It takes at least five years, and usually more, to
build an urban highway.) Even if tomorrow the United States
embarked on an unprecedented effort to build highways and mass
transit systems, it would be too late; we can be certain that seven or
eight large urban areas in the United States will be frozen with
traffic gridlock. In Chapter 9, we will look at other predetermined
“challenges,” as the Japanese would say.
Critical Uncertainties: Dwelling-places of Our Hopes and Fears
For five thousand years, the waters of the Nile rose and fell
predictably. The dynasty of the pharaohs declined; other
governments emerged and they too declined, but the means for
predicting floods remained basically the same. Then, in the early
1960s, the Aswan High Dam was built. It was a remarkable feat of
engineering, five hundred miles downstream from where the fierce
Atbara joined the Nile. Now if priests had still kept vigil at their
temple (or government clerks a monitoring station at the same


locale upstream), they would have lost their ability to foretell.
Whether the water was blue, white, or green-brown, the result
would be the same: the flow would reach the Aswan Dam and stop.
The fate of the flood plains below is now in human hands.
One could perhaps, based on a knowledge of Egyptian politics,
make an educated guess about the flooding level. It would now
depend on two competing driving forces: the farmers’ same need for
water, and a new need by Egyptian consumers for electricity from
the dam. Regulating the dam was a political act, subject to pressure
from both sides. The flooding, as a result, became an “uncertainty.”
If you wanted to know how much money the Egyptian Government
could raise in taxes from farmers this year, you could not simply tell
from the color of the water. You had to find out what the people in
the dam’s control tower would do.
In every plan, critical uncertainties exist. Scenario-planners seek
them out to prepare for them, an approach that hearkens back to
old military scenarios: “We know they have to come from the east,
General, but we don’t know if they’re traveling up the mountain or
through the forest. Here’s what we’ll do in either case.”
A critical uncertainty for Smith & Hawken was the degree to
which the U.S. economy would recover from the shocks of the
seventies. Although we knew the approximate numbers of our
potential market, we didn’t know how many of them would be
prosperous enough to buy imported garden tools. In the Shell
scenario, we knew the demographic pressures on the Soviet
Government. We didn’t know how responsive their political system
could be.
Critical uncertainties are intimately related to predetermined elements.
You find them by questioning your assumptions about predetermined
elements: what might cause the price of oil to rise again? What might
AT&T do to lose its domination over the long-distance business, and
its resulting cash cow? Shell’s scenarios, for example, still include
the U.S. deficit as a predetermined element. But Shell also asks:
what might happen to change the deficit? It would have to involve
drastic cuts in defense spending and Social Security. Thus, the
American debate over military cutbacks and the “peace dividend” is


a critical uncertainty when considering scenarios for the late 1990s.
Another critical uncertainty is real income growth in America. If it
returned to the levels of the 1960s, people might feel more generous
about taxes.
We’ve already seen such “miracles” take place in recent history. In
the 1970s, futurists said that oil reserves would be exhausted by the
1990s. They were right about the predetermined elements:
population growth and an on-going level of energy consumption at
the current price. There was, however, an uncertainty that few
futurists considered: would people (and institutions) be willing to
change their habits if the price of oil rose? People and institutions
did, and that change made a critical difference.
If gridlock, for example, becomes too onerous, could a similar
change of habit occur? Would businesses institute flexible hours en
masse? Would they allow “telecommuting?” Would real estate prices
decline enough that people could afford to move closer to work? Or
would car telephones and fax machines turn the automobile, stuck
in traffic, into a portable office? We cannot know for sure, and any
look ahead at gridlock could include two scenarios: one where many
cities are paralyzed, and one where commuting undergoes a
transformation.
I sometimes think of the relationship between predetermined
elements and critical uncertainties as a choreographed dance. You
cannot experience the dance just by knowing the sequence of steps
that must take place. Each dancer will interpret them differently,
and add his or her unpredictable decisions. Similarly, for example,
you cannot completely know the nature of a labor force from the
population demographics. It is uncertain how many people will
pursue a job. This figure has varied a great deal in recent years,
especially as more and more women began working. If boom times
break out and incomes rise quickly again, will more women (or
men) elect to raise families and drop out of the labor pool?
Or consider the publishing industry again. The readership
population is mostly predetermined—it depends on demographics.
Increasing competition from electronic media is also predetermined.
Literacy is also a crucial element—but it is far from predetermined.


It depends on decisions made about education during the next few
years. Thus, the quality of education now will influence the print
media market in the next twenty years. Yet how many book
publishers have bothered to invest in improving education in any
significant way?
We might create two scenarios for the publishing industry,
depending on the degree of literacy. In Scenario A, a large number
of literate people spend some of their time reading. Scenario B is the
opposite; people become more oriented to television and radio
because reading is unable to hold their attention. There is also a
third possible scenario—even faster growth for print media, because
more people spend their time with a variety of media which
mutually reinforce each other in an increasingly closed and
mediated world.
Driving forces, predetermined elements, and critical uncertainties
give structure to our exploration of the future. Several times in this
chapter I have referred to the powerful impact of the baby boom on
my thinking. In the next chapter we explore the evolution of a new
set of forces that may re-create a similar experience on a global
level. In the story of the “global teenager” we will see all the
elements of the scenario building blocks at work.
OceanofPDF.com


ANATOMY OF A NEW DRIVING FORCE: THE GLOBAL
TEENAGER
            While walking in Jakarta one day in 1987 I came upon a
remarkable sight; a vast bazaar of stalls, the nearest of which were
filled with all manner of electronic goods—from Walkmans to
computers to microchips to CDs. And every booth was “manned” by
a boy, hardly any over twenty, and many under ten, all dressed in
brightly colored polo shirts with insignias from Benetton and Ralph
Lauren. One sees these new teenagers everywhere. Do these signs
portend the emergence of a global culture in the coming decades?
Or are they merely superficial symbols of a global consumer society
masking a deeper and more enduring cultural diversity. We know
the numbers, we just don’t know their meaning. This chapter shows
how we come to develop scenarios by exploring driving forces,
predetermined elements, and critical uncertainties.
Most futurists and forecasters would agree, I think: we learned
about the power of driving forces, in part, by watching the impact
of the baby boom. The mountain of 40 million teenagers born in the
post-war decade and a half (the late forties and fifties) was one
driving force. The unprecedented post-war affluence in the United
States was another. The two forces combined with the explosion in
automobiles to create post-war suburbia—a new type of community
—to house this new mass of middle-class children. Dependent
minors, for the first time in recorded history, became an influential
economic force: arguably the most influential, if only because it
changed existing businesses the most. Smith & Hawken’s tool
company and Weyerhaeuser’s houseplant division are just two of
thousands of businesses that would not exist in the same form, or at
all, if it were not for the baby boom. The impact of these two
