# Anatomy of a New Driving Force: The Global Teenager

driving forces on global politics, culture, and corporate life is still
going on so powerfully that no one can fully assess it yet.
Could any other demographic force be as powerful during the next
few years? A group of people, under the auspices of Global Business
Network, began to ask themselves that question a few years ago.
They were spurred by an entertainment industry client who wanted
to know, simply, Where would its major market be a decade hence?
They looked at demographic trends and discovered a new global
baby boom of such a size as to make the American baby boom seem
like a dress rehearsal. Once again, its fate is linked with other
factors—technological, political, and economic forces, some
predetermined and some wildly uncertain. The implications will be
exhilarating to some; already, they have led to some of the success
stories of the eighties such as clothing retailers Benetton and Esprit.
And they will be profoundly disturbing to others.
Barring widespread plague or other catastrophe, there will be
over 2 billion teenagers in the world in the year 2001. That’s five
hundred times the number of teenagers in America in the peak years
of the baby boom. All of these future teenagers are already born.
Most of them live in Asia and Latin America; a smaller but still
sizable and rapidly growing percentage live in Africa. In Europe,
North America, and Australia, meanwhile, there will also be a mini-
baby boom, but their percentage of the global teenager population
will be minuscule.
They called their scenario the “Global Teenager”—not just
because this new baby boom is worldwide, but because its members
will 
be 
far 
more 
interconnected. 
Satellite 
communication,
videocassette recorders, and the ubiquitous Walkman have
penetrated even poor countries. The results of this baby boom will
not be the same as the impact of the youth culture of the 1960s in
America; the world is a bigger and more diverse place, and the
social mood is different from what it was twenty years ago. But they
knew some of the certainties to expect, and many of the critical
uncertainties to watch out for.
For this scenario at GBN, they asked what would be the interplay
between this new global adolescent community and the evolution of


the new electronic media? Their research was intensive, and yet by
necessity arbitrary. They could not hope to talk to more than a small
fraction of the first group of global teenagers. They looked carefully
at the experiences of companies which have sold to them—Benetton
and Swatch, for example. They asked cultural anthropologist Steve
Barnett to investigate further the crossover between cultural
diversity and marketing. They pored over the statistics that existed
so far, looking for patterns that might indicate critical forces—those
changes that would have a big impact on the situation. Finally, they
hired two astute observers to travel the world for them. They
interviewed teenagers from twelve countries about their ambitions,
and the pressures on their lives. One of the observers was Will
Baker, a veteran writer on cultural issues. (His book Backward had
covered the “horrifying impact of civilization,” as he put it, “on an
Amazonian tribal people.”) The other researcher was an American
teenager himself—Amon Rappaport.
The group at GBN did not focus, as I will later in this book, on the
plots or logics of scenarios. They wanted to know what driving
forces would be critical. As the baby boom appeared (or should
have appeared) as a factor in every scenario of U.S. behavior in the
1950s, 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, so the wave of global teenagers
will be a factor dwarfing other demographic factors in scenarios
starting from 1990, through the next fifty years or more.
The Nature of Adolescence
Human nature is predetermined—it changes only very slowly, if
at all. We know what adolescents are like. The years when people
come of age involve exuberance, exploration, confusion, and
rebellion against old structures. That’s as true of teenagers in
Bangkok, Nairobi, or Caracas as it is of teenagers in Los Angeles or
Paris. It will be exacerbated by a newfound sense of power which
teenagers will feel—power in their numbers. Adolescents tend to


identify with each other anyway, set apart by and from other age
groups. The pressure of their numbers will be so immense that it
will reshape the world.
What they do with that pressure is a critical uncertainty.
Teenagers are not necessarily altruistic by nature; rather, they are
energetic and idealistic. In their travels, Will and Amon found that
idealism translated not into a political sensibility but into either
intense ambition or cynicism, both fueled by inflation and poverty,
contrasting with the media’s images of affluence. What flickered
between the lines, wrote Baker, was “a generalized feeling that the
circumstances of modern life are new and dire, that something like a
global crisis is underway, and that they—the young—must find
some original solution and the resources to apply them.” Twenty
years ago, if one had forecast a youth revolt in Latin America almost
everyone’s scenario would cast it as a move toward socialism, led by
the armies of Che Guevara. If a revolt takes place from this global
teenage population, it will most likely be entrepreneurial and
capitalist—the armies of some new, Third World equivalent to Steve
Jobs.
Or it may be literal armies. In the past, societies with large
numbers of adolescent males started wars. This option, unlikely on
the global scale, may take place in many locales. Already, Iran and
Iraq have a long-lasting demographic “hole” created by the millions
of deaths of young males in their protracted war. The Middle East’s
five-thousand-year history of conflict is unlikely to end in perpetual
peace any time soon. Injustice (Latin America and Africa) and
enduring enmities (India and Pakistan) will not go away, so conflicts
will endure and recur.
Technology
In thinking about the driving forces that will interact with the
sheer demographic impact of teenage numbers, a walk down the


street with your eyes open quickly leads you to one of the areas we
noted earlier: the ubiquitous Walkman points you to new
technology. The power of the predetermined element of new
entertainment technology will make the experience of being a
teenager different from what it ever has been before. The
distribution of new types of communication devices, in particular, is
taking place so fast that by the time most of the global teenagers are
teenagers, they will literally be in constant contact with each other.
At GBN, we developed an image of the future which we called the
“Video Café.” We imagined two children of middle-class parents,
one in a rapidly developing country and the other in the high-tech
leader: seventeen-year-old Luis, a college student in Caracas, and
seventeen-year-old Hiroki, living with her family outside Kyoto,
going on an electronic “date” through an international broad
bandwidth video-conferencing network. It would be more than
seeing each other’s images; using camcorders, image synthesizers,
computers, and other cheap electronic video equipment, the two
teenagers would be part of a globally connected performance group.
They might have met in an online discussion of desktop video
techniques, and cemented their friendship with electronic mail. Luis
might be, for instance, a young video effects wizard; Hiroki, a
musician (which by ten years from now also, effectively, means
being a wizard electronics engineer). They might jam regularly with
other teenagers: visual designers from L.A., electropercussionists
from Lagos, and a rhythm vibraphonist from Turkey.
In the video cafés of the future, teenagers would do what you
might expect them to do in person: flirt, dance in image form, listen
to music, and (increasingly) be creative—the intense sexual energy
of teenagers would still be present even in this attenuated form.
There would be a constant insatiable hunger for fresh material—
new music, new images, new fashions. A few artists, in traditional
pop culture style, might appeal to everyone—almost all 2 billion
teenagers—but more of them would be specialists, tapping into
particular groups who have similar styles in common, but whose
residences would span the globe. In the twelve to twenty-two age
group 
worldwide, 
knowing 
several 
languages 
would 
be


commonplace, and world travel would be a constant temptation. (In
many newly industrialized countries such as Taiwan and Korea,
parents would indulge their children, just as they did in America in
the 1950s and 1960s.) The answers to such questions as “Who are
you, where do you come from, and how rich are your parents?”
would be less important than “What do you know and what can you
show me?”
Some readers, no doubt, will find this scenario hard to imagine.
But it’s based on three very plausible ideas. First, that new
communications technologies are becoming so powerful and so
cheap that teenagers all over the world will be able to afford them.
Second, that the global teenager will want to communicate this way.
And third, that using these kinds of new media tends to change
peoples’ behavior and values.
The availability of the technology is predetermined. A “video
café” requires high-resolution television conferencing, digital
storage, a worldwide high-speed data network, and graphics/music
workstations. All of those exist in the marketplace but are not yet
universal or well integrated, but that will come with time. The
companies which make consumer electronics are interested in
pushing these technologies; especially, in the United States, Europe,
and Japan, they’ve invested millions in developing and marketing
them. It’s not certain that consumers will be interested in these
machines, but in the past, nearly every new communications
technology has caught on in some form. At worst, it takes a while to
catch on; as with laser disks. Or it sweeps the world in an explosive
wave, as the fax did in the eighties. In particular, there is so much
worldwide growth in youth-oriented consumer electronics (radios,
Walkmans, home music studios, desktop videos, computer games)
that we can confidently predict continued growth. By the time the
“video café” scenario takes place, people will buy home computers
the way they buy pocket calculators today. The two great obstacles
—price and familiarity—will no longer exist. And at the opposite
extreme some young people will spend what they might have spent
on a car on the new tool for “cruising,” the powerful interactive
video-computer station with full virtual reality capabilities.


Will teenagers be able to afford them? That depends, in part, on
the uncertainties of the world’s economic future. However, some
formerly undeveloped countries have clearly prospering middle
classes: Venezuela, India, Korea, Singapore, Costa Rica. Whether a
country’s teenagers are rich or poor, however, they will use more
information technology than they do today, if only because it will
be more available and far less expensive.
Finally, on the issue of technology changing habits: we know from
current users of computer networks, video conferencing, and
interactive media that their attitudes about communication are
different. Reality is no longer so fixed; information is no longer
static; people feel as if they’re swimming in a constant flow of
images, text, and sounds. You can appreciate that feeling by
watching a few minutes of MTV; it reflects the ambiance of
interactive media. The next generation will grow up with a
pervasive sensibility based on electronic media, in which computer-
generated images and quick video cuts are a natural part of their
language. If it’s a style that 2 billion young people around the world
adopt for themselves (and every indication suggests they will), then
electronic media will become not just a means of communication,
but a generator of global style. Hollywood scriptwriters understand
that the aesthetic sensibilities of the young audience have been
shaped by sound bites and quick flashes of “Sesame Street” and
MTV. Every movie begins to resemble Top Gun, essentially a string
of rock videos about fighter pilots.
Moreover, since the next wave of telecommunications media will
flow in two directions, it will encourage active intelligence; people
won’t be able to take part any more simply by sitting back and
letting images flow over them. They’ll be talking, selecting,
ordering, criticizing, and (in some cases) creating. As computers
become more embedded in the new technology it will become
increasingly common to experience various forms of synthetic
computer-generated realities. These virtual realities will be
experienced in whole rooms or inside video eye-phones and will
create yet further realms of interaction in shared and mutually
designed realties.


The biggest uncertainty about technology will be its effect on
cultural differences. Will it homogenize the world, as television has
begun to do? Or will the creativity inherent in the newest machines
(where people generate their own images and sounds) compensate?
In our research, we saw evidence for both trends. Every country will
be more like the mass-mediated world, but the mass-mediated world
will increasingly incorporate bits and pieces from every local
culture. To be truly hip in the world of the global teenager could
mean knowing how to recognize indigenous music from Senegal,
New Zealand, Uruguay, and the Yukon. The growing interest in
World Music is the first indicator of this trend.
There will be economic reasons for each nation to keep its unique
culture intact. Michael Porter suggests that a nation’s ability to
prosper (its “competitive advantage,” as he puts it) depends in part
on cultural uniqueness. A nation’s sophistication in a particular area
gives it strength, by challenging its industries to do better. Some of
the finest garden tools come from Japan, the home of highly
demanding Japanese gardeners. The global teenager may serve as a
significant force here; helping nations recognize each others’
uniquenesses, and doing their best (just by doing what comes
naturally) to preserve their country’s uniqueness—albeit in a form
which the electronic media can transmit.
Economic Fears and Hopes
In exploring the economic interactions of demographics and
culture we can see some of the longer term driving forces. As the
coming of age of the American baby boom helped shape the
American economy of the seventies and eighties, the global teenager
will help shape the world economy in the nineties and beyond.
While the presence of 2 billion global teenagers is predetermined,
their characteristics are an uncertainty. We do not know how
wealthy or literate they will be. There is a temptation, especially


among industrial companies, to assume the worst. Many people, no
doubt, would find plausible this sentiment from Paul Hawken:
Young people that I have seen in the so-called Third World
countries remind me of a juggernaut—hungry and rapacious—
thrust into a world of tremendous uncertainty. Their need, demand,
for certainty is so great that almost anybody can pander to it in
ways that are quite destructive, both to their own culture—their
own inherent culture—and to the environment at the same time.
After a decade of Third World debt and inflation, Paul’s concerns
are real. Global teenagers will either be uneducated, unemployed,
undernourished, and in the end hopeless, street criminals—like the
Brazilian teenage hero of Hector Babenco’s film Pixote—or their fear
of poverty will fuel ambition that drives out every other
consideration. As a scenario-planner, this type of pessimistic image
always inspires the question in me, What would have to take place
for this image not to come true? The accelerating power of
education via the new technology could turn out to be an answer.
As it happens, there are three driving forces in the world which
might, together, be enough to catalyze that education. None of the
three have anything to do with a formal educational establishment.
The first is the ambition, already noted, among teenagers who want
to better themselves. The second is the presence of cheap
communications links; to play even a simple computer game is to
become familiar with the habits and mind-set of programming, and
there is every reason for programming education (and education in
other subjects) to travel via interactive telecommunications—
assuming that the teenagers of the next fifteen years want it. The
third factor is a critical uncertainty, derived directly from the
driving force of demographics. How will countries around the world
handle the overwhelming pressure for immigration?
Half of Mexico’s population, for example, is under the age of
twenty. In the next two decades its population will double, from 70
million to 140 million, even more dominated by people in their
teens and twenties. Many of these young people will not find jobs in


Mexico. But across the border, the United States will face a labor
shortage, especially in entry-level positions. So will nearly every
country in Europe, Eastern and Western. When Will Baker asked
teenagers around the world, “What would you like to be doing ten
years from now?” he nearly always got the same answer: travel to
the United States. “Not a few,” he wrote, “foresee declining to
return.”
In past waves of migration, unskilled labor from developing
countries was welcome. Now, however, new jobs in the industrial
countries will require training and communication skills. Teenage
immigrants from developing countries will not be qualified unless
they’ve educated themselves. Immigration will add pressure to
learn, and will also provide some people with the opportunity.
Young Third World people will end up working in a car factory in
Sweden; then return to their own countries and create new
businesses of their own. Young software designers in India begin
work on contract for American banks in Chicago and end up on the
payroll at corporate headquarters.
“I think we are in for a new period of people movement,” says Bo
Ekman, formerly with Volvo (now head of SIFO, a large Swedish
research and consulting company). “[There will be] mighty waves of
migrations. How can we in Europe stop the pressure from Northern
Africa and Turkey and the sub-Sahara when 60 percent of their
population is younger than 20, unemployed and uneducated, and
we are crying for young people. It’s a highly dangerous situation
because the sentiment in Europe is becoming more anti-
immigration. There are new parties in virtually every European
country that have a racist agenda.”
Most industrialized nations (and most corporations) have not
learned to deal with cultural diversity. The demographic pressures
of the global teenager suggest that they will have to. Most
employers and heads of the hierarchy will still be white males, but
more than 85 percent of the labor force will come from young,
nonwhite men and women from diverse cultures. Managing
multicultural enterprises promises to be the single biggest challenge
that managers will face in the 1990s. The numbers are


predetermined. The reactions of managers and employees are
critical uncertainties.
Seeing these driving forces will hopefully help managers realize
that the change in their workforce is not a temporary phenomenon.
It may in fact be a permanent change in perception, where teenagers
decide that national boundaries are simply irrelevant to their
ambitions. To migrate may no longer mean being oppressed; under
one scenario of the global teenager, migrators may outnumber those
teenagers who stay home!
All economic opportunities for global teenagers depend, of course,
on the robustness of the world economy. Right now, that is probably
the most significant critical uncertainty in the picture. As Chapter 9
will show, there are at least three plausible scenarios for the global
economy right now. We don’t know which will prove correct; but
only one spells disaster for the next wave of global teenagers.
New Markets
And what of the businesses who serve them (some of whom, not
coincidentally, paid for our study)? The global teenager will have as
great an impact as, arguably, the baby boom generation did in
America—as a new form of consumer. The elements that win over
global teenagers so far are:
•  A sense of identity with their generation: as blue jeans were the
universal style of the sixties, the styles of Benetton, where colors
change but patterns remain the same, suggest a cultural uniform.
•  Cost-consciousness: like all teenagers, the global teenager is not a
luxury consumer.
•  High technological awareness: the power of new technology is a
force for their sense of liberation and sets them apart from their
elders; how many parents ask their kids to program their VCR?


•  Global identification: while their parents fight immigration from
other countries, global teenagers will embrace their peers from any
country.
The scale of international travel is an uncertainty. Depending on
economic conditions, teenagers may or may not be able to fly
around the world to see their compatriots of the video café. The
desire will almost certainly exist; telecommunications usually breed
the impulse to meet other telecommunicators in person. Charter
flights for teenagers and hostel-related tours, with several languages
spoken, could be a great business—particularly if those tours
involve picking up skills along the way. The market for such trips
could increasingly include not just North Americans, Europeans, and
Japanese—but Indonesians, Thais, Mexicans, and Brazilians as well.
Global youth travel could be a market. Global entertainment
certainly will. In every economic scenario—prosperity or depression
—the demand for global entertainment is high. Moreover, with new
production technology, costs of producing films and television grow
smaller as the audience grows larger; in a pie of 2 billion people,
almost any slice is large.
We’ve already seen how less media might be centrally produced.
Kids will make their own videotapes, their own recordings. Where
does that leave the entertainment industry? Some parts, such as the
producers of “America’s Funniest Home Videos,” will serve
essentially as filters, putting the best stuff over the air. Others will
serve as taste-setters, putting out films (for example) that carry the
taste of the global teenager one step further. Batman sweeps the
world’s teenagers and inspires an industry behind it. Admittedly
many of these films will be American and British, but it is possible
to imagine a scenario in which films from Japan, Latin America, and
India become equally important to the global teenager. The culture
may be worldwide, but it need not be homogeneous.
If I were contemplating a business, I would be looking at
opportunities in fashion, entertainment, travel, and communication
that might be created by this large demographic wave. Clearly, Levi
Strauss was one of the biggest beneficiaries of the U.S. youth culture


of the 1960s. A similar array of opportunities will emerge all over
the world as a result of this new youth culture. Selling will be no
problem. “The youth of the world,” wrote Will Baker, “wants or is
capable of wanting every taste treat and fashion switch [marketers]
can devise: they want Levi’s, Cokes, cassette players, video games,
Benetton combos, Big Macs, skateboards, PCs, Yamahas, etc., etc. No
problem. Except they don’t have any money.… They scrimp for
months to buy a couple of blouses or some boots, a cheap watch.”
Political Change
The political agenda of the United States and Europe in the 1960s
was shaped by young people marching in the streets. Will the world
political agenda of the late-1990s be similarly shaped by the global
teenager? The political outlook of the global teenager is impossible
to predict today—as the political outlook of the 1960s in America
would have been impossible to predict in 1955. We know only that
hunger for freedom is a powerful force, pent up in many countries
for a long time. We are likely to see intense pressure worldwide for
democracy, and for an opening up of opportunities. Perceived
oppressors in Third World countries—be they Marxist or capitalist,
politicians or employers—may literally find millions of young
people fiercely battling against them, convinced (as another baby
boom was before them) that the whole world is watching.
Beyond that, anything is possible. Global teenagers could be
armies of nihilism and desperation, legions of entrepreneurs and
small business owners, waves of immigrants, majorities of “Green”
voters, brownshirts, or builders of young democracies. If they are
more or less unified politically (and there is reason to believe they
will be), their point of view will affect every government on the
planet. When we asked teenagers all over the planet what issues
concerned them most, environmental problems were at the top of
the list—even in the poorest countries visited. This suggests that


ecological issues will dominate the world’s political agenda in the
decade ahead.
There is one key warning signal to indicate their likely direction:
how youth around the world see the Chinese pro-democracy student
protests and the Tiananmen Square massacre. Were the protests
morally empowering? Or were they naive and self-destructing?
Either way, the Tiananmen Square massacre was the first
government attempt to clamp down on the global teenager. It’s
fitting that the survivors within China kept in touch with peers
outside the country, through computer networks and fax
transmission.
If I were a young person going to school today, I’d ask myself
what was going on in Asia and equatorial countries (rather than
Europe) for interesting ideas. I would learn Japanese, Chinese,
Spanish or maybe Arabic rather than French or German. Old
boundaries between races may finally dissolve; the message of the
global teenager is that we are all interrelated. Indeed in the lives of
today’s global teenagers we have seen the confluence of several
powerful driving forces such as the predetermined impact of the
vast demographic wave underlying this emerging phenomenon, the
impact of new technologies, and the uncertainties of the global
economy that will shape the fate of these global teenagers. In the
next chapter we will examine how to weave such threads to form
the whole cloth of a story.
OceanofPDF.com


COMPOSING A PLOT
            The French historian Fernand Braudel offered a coherent
way to understand the world. His three-volume history Civilization
and Capitalism 15th–18th Century described three different levels of
activity. First, there was the shifting political alliances which led to
an internationally linked economy. Those, in turn, reflected a new
set of economic cycles as the capitalist system emerged. And
beneath that was a constant, gradual evolution of the activities of
daily life: people going to markets and working in thousands of
communities in Europe. Each level—political, economic, social—had
its own version of what scenario-planners call “logics”: the plot
which ties together the elements of the system. All cycles have a
similar plot, a plot of rising and falling fortunes. All evolution works
pretty much the same way. And there is also a recognizable pattern
in the behavior of political alliances.
To explain the future, scenarios use the same sorts of logics. They
describe how the driving forces might plausibly behave, based on
how those forces have behaved in the past. The same set of driving
forces might, of course, behave in a variety of different ways,
according to different possible plots. Scenarios explore two or three
of those alternatives, based on the plots (or combination of plots)
which are most worth considering.
If you were a mainstream book publisher, concerned about the
future of your industry, your predetermined elements might include
the pressure to globalize the industry and combine it with other
media, such as film and television. We know the pressure exists,
especially as European publishers buy American companies. But
who might control that globalization, and under what terms? Under
one plot, the bigger the companies get, the more effectively they
serve readers, and the more they prosper. The Time-Warner
