# Composing a Plot

corporation apparently believes this plot will lead them to success.
Under another logic, every move toward elephantine growth
provokes equally fierce resistance; corporations such as Time-
Warner might lose touch with readers, and end up less prosperous
than when the two companies were separate entities.
To find plausible plots you use the uncertainties that have seemed
so important. What factors might lead to success or failure for Time-
Warner? How well does media integration work?—Does it make
sense to license the movie of the book of the record of the magazine
of the poster—? How well has it worked when one company has
controlled all the media? How have most such conglomerates
handled the integration? Eventually, you would sketch out both
plausible plots, in a way that helped you foresee a good strategy for
either eventuality.
What is finding a plot line really like? Here is how it works in
nearly every scenario situation in which I have taken part. We
gather a team together that is aware of the decision that we are
considering. Each member has done his or her research. We sit
around talking for a day, developing ideas in response to these
questions:
•  What are the driving forces?
•  What do you feel is uncertain?
•  What is inevitable?
•  How about this or that scenario?
We get to a point where ideas are churning, and we break off for
the night. People go home. The next morning, someone walks in and
says, “You know, as I was lying there last night in the bathtub, I had
an idea for a scenario.” And he or she lays it out, nearly complete.
Someone else across the table says, “And here is the complement.”
This happens so often that many scenario-planners have learned to
include an overnight stay in their workshops.


I often compare this part of the scenario process to writing a
movie script. Scriptwriters frequently begin with an idea: “I’d like to
make a film about car racing.” They develop characters: “One will
be a hot racer. I want him to race his childhood friend. Other
characters will include his girlfriend, and a crusty old mechanic.”
The characters are like the building blocks of scenarios. Having
decided upon them, they create a plausible setting for them: all four
characters have gathered at the Indianapolis Speedway. What will
happen next?
Now the scriptwriters consider several possible plots. Maybe the
story will be based on rivalry over the championship and the girl. If
so, conflict and competition will be its gist. But what if the real
thrust is the old man’s education of two young drivers? Then it’s a
plot about the challenges these young people deliberately face, and
how they learn to develop prowess. A more interesting movie might
combine both plots, or throw in a sudden and unexpected (but
possible) event: halfway through the movie, one of the car racers is
abruptly crippled.
Now imagine that you are one of the characters in such a movie,
at its start, standing at the gate to the raceway. You cannot know
which plot will unfold. Reality could go several ways. But if you
have the imagination of a scriptwriter, you can envision the
possibilities. That is what it feels like to be a scenario writer.
The Nature of Plots
We’ve all been to movies that are based on the story of a man
meeting a woman. It’s one of the oldest plots in the world. It can
either be handled sentimentally, in a manner full of clichés (as in
the movie Love Story), or in a wonderfully original and moving
fashion (as in A Man and a Woman). Either way, it’s the same story
—but what a difference! Scenarios, too, can be formulaic or moving,
depending on how you think about the plots.


There are only a few plots relevant in scenarios. Most are derived
from the behavior of real-life economies, political systems,
technologies, and social perceptions. In most good scenarios, several
plot lines intersect, just as a good film often includes several
subplots. The scenario-planner looks at converging forces and tries
to understand how and why they might intersect—then extends that
imagination into coherent pictures of alternative futures. That’s
what gives texture to scenarios.
In this chapter, I’ll describe the plots which are most fruitful in
scenario-planning. One can apply each of them to a wide variety of
situations. Very often, the obvious logic for a specific scenario jumps
out. But sometimes, this first impression is wrong. At times, the
logics must be teased out of the environment. Recognizing them is
not a cut and dried matter. As I do with driving forces, I review the
list of plots when thinking through the action of any scenarios.
“Technology is clearly a driving force here,” I say to myself. “Will
that take effect with its usual evolutionary pattern, or could there be
an abrupt discontinuity?”
We have already said that one of the purposes of scenarios is to
help you (or your managers) suspend disbelief in possible futures.
To that end, you construct your plots as carefully as if you were in
the theater. The trick is deciding where, in the story, to start the
diverging alternative futures. In scenarios for a company, you
should design at least one alternative that frightens the management
enough to think—but not so much that they shut down. Ask them to
consider a future of shrinking markets, or even a hostile takeover
with which they might have to deal; but not a sudden nuclear war
that would destroy the city. On an individual level, you might create
a scenario for a member of the family becoming ill (“What will we
do if we have sudden medical expenses?”) but not for the entire
family being wiped out in a bus crash. Your goal is to select plot
lines that lead to different choices for the original decision. What
plots might make you do something different?
Note that the characters in scenarios tend to be either driving
forces or else institutions: nations, companies, regional bodies.
Individuals rarely shape the cultural shifts, political alliances, and


technological evolution which scenarios care about. A planner might
ask, “What if the Soviet Union fell under the control of a new Stalin-
like figure?” If that happened, the new Stalin’s self-image and
relationship with his mother would be grist for future psychological
historians. But there would be no need to speculate on it before the
fact—or on Gorbachev’s psychology, or Bush’s relationship with his
dogs. Usually leaders are an expression of the forces at work in their
own societies. By understanding those forces one can anticipate the
possible pattern of future leadership. For example, those of us, in
1977, thinking about scenarios of the future of Iran with an
understanding of Iran’s various cultural roots, could foresee a
possible scenario where rising fundamentalist resistance to
westernization might bring to power a man such as Ayatollah
Khomeini.
Similarly, you wouldn’t build the scenario for a corporation
around the personality of its CEO, even in this age of “leadership.”
In most companies, the role and power of the leader are exaggerated
enormously. As in society at large, business leaders reflect wider
forces within the company itself, forces which choose and influence
them. John Reed, the bank’s CEO, reflects Citicorp more than
Citicorp reflects John Reed. Thus, the scenario writer’s task is to
define the forces inside and outside the company, and analyze
which plots they fit.
Some plots will fit your elements and some won’t. Looking at your
predetermined elements, you might make a judgment: “These will
never fit together in a framework shaped by challenge and
response.” Having gathered the variations that are possible, you
would tease out five or six variations that fit the case. Eventually
you narrow and combine those into two or three fully detailed
descriptions of what might happen.
Why two or three plots or logics? Because people’s minds can
cope with only two or three possibilities. Two may not capture
reality, so you often use three. On rare occasions you might consider
four. Any more choices will produce a hopeless muddle. Scenario-
planners did not always know this. At SRI, in the early 1970s, we
generated thousands of possible futures. We had to use a computer


to sort through them. It was silly. In 1974, our seminal scenario
project for the Environmental Protection Administration offered a
mere ten scenarios. Jay Ogilvy, Paul Hawken, and I narrowed those
further into a book called Seven Tomorrows. Upon reflection, those
seven were still too many; in essence, we had three possible futures
in mind, with a lot of sub-variations. The EPA would have learned
more if we had just given them three.
There is a common trap with three scenarios: it is easy to offer a
bland assortment in which one represents the high road, one the low
road, and one the average of the two. That is why, in figuring out
plots, I usually return to contemplate the decision that must be
made. “If the United States suddenly loosens up all immigration
restrictions, it would really change my decisions about labor
recruiting. I had better make sure one of the scenarios includes that
possibility. Can I design a plausible set of plots which lead to that?”
I try to make the third path a little bit off-the-wall, to avoid a
business-as-usual path. For example, could a labor shortage driven
by an economic boom force the United States to open wide its
gates?
There are three main plots that show up constantly in modern
times. They should be considered for every set of scenarios.
Winners and Losers
Most plots start with a perception: a motive that propels the
characters. This plot starts with the perception that the world is
essentially limited, that resources are scarce, and that if one side
gets richer, the other side must get poorer. Economist Lester Thurow
called this the “zero sum game.” As a plot, it shows up often in
politics (and in business in very mature industries). Only one
candidate can win the election; therefore, others must lose. Only
one country can dominate the economy; therefore, others must be
subservient. Only one executive can become CEO; therefore, the


rivals must leave the company. Only one corporation can dominate
the market; there can be only one IBM in computers, or only one
Hertz in rental cars.
In a winners and losers situation, conflict is inevitable. Often, the
sides compromise in a balance of power. This typically leads to a
gradual buildup of tension, suspicion, and uneasy alliances. It’s the
winner’s game, typically; as long as other computer companies play
against IBM, or other rental car companies play against Hertz, the
game will tend to keep both companies on top. Apple fought the
system by turning the computer industry to another game (which I’ll
describe under the “Lone Ranger” plot).
South African scenarios always include a “winners and losers”
plot where different groups battle for control of the country: white
supremacists, the various black organizations, and (increasingly)
white liberals. Only one group can win and dominate the country’s
politics—at least as long as the country’s people conceive of their
politics that way. If the game continues, incidentally, the identity of
the winner will depend upon technology. The fate which white
South Africans fear most—blacks taking over the country and
confiscating white property—does not appear in any realistic
scenario for South Africa. The reason: the supposedly “violent”
black groups such as the ANC have very few weapons, and little
money or support with which to get them. The white militia, by
contrast, is well armed and prepared for violence. They, on the
other hand, lack the economic support which they need to build a
prosperous country.
Winners and losers plots lead to covert alliances. In a bizarre
sense, this is a pragmatic stance: “who” you’re involved with is
more important than “what” you hope to achieve politically. Stalin’s
1941 nonaggression pact with Hitler is one example. In the Middle
East, this logic becomes a political ethic in which “the enemy of my
enemy is my friend,” transcending even the fiercest animosity.
Consider the weird cooperation between Israel and Iran, involving
sharing of military intelligence and matériel during the Iran/Iraq
war.


To explain such peculiarities, people with a “winners and losers”
view of the world rely on conspiracy theories. At the height of the
1973 oil price crisis, a Japanese businessman once asked me why
the United States and OPEC had conspired to attack Japan by
raising oil prices. Were not Saudi Arabia and Iran close allies of the
United States? Did they not need American support to quadruple
their oil prices? Meanwhile, angry Americans at gas lines were
blaming American oil companies for colluding with the Arabs. And
Arabs were blaming the U.S. relationship with Israel, and oil
company insensitivities, for provoking them.
In the past, this logic has led to war. Historian Barbara Tuchman
describes a winners and losers standoff in The Guns of August.
Individuals acted in what they saw as self-interest (they were
following another plot, the “Lone Ranger” logic in which the
individual entity stands against the rest of the world). To “protect”
themselves, they formed alliances. No one wanted the war which
followed; it came in an uncontrolled fashion, incoherently, with no
easy resolution. Thirty years later, the “Losers” of World War I were
still playing the same game. Any scenario with winners and losers
had better consider the possibility of perpetuation of persistent
conflict.
If you were a U.S. auto worker or executive thinking about your
future in 1980 you should have considered a scenario based on a
logic of winners and losers. The growth in the U.S. auto market had
stopped for both demographic and economic reasons. The baby
boom was tailing off and income growth slowed. The economic
winners bought fancy European cars (later fancy Japanese cars),
while the fading middle class could no longer afford to keep up. The
losers would be the American car makers. GM saw its share of the
market fall from over 50 percent to less than 35 percent. Thousands
of jobs and careers went with that fall. By the end of the eighties the
leading selling car in America was a Honda. Would you have been
better off going to work in the successful nonunionized Honda plant
in Marysville, Ohio, or in the “protected” unionized factories of GM
in Detroit? Where would your prospects have been better? If you
were plotting steel company strategy, would you rather have


targeted the fading markets of Detroit or the new markets of the
Japanese companies rapidly expanding their manufacturing capacity
in the U.S.?
Challenge and Response
In the summer of 1987, I looked at the future of global finances
for the London Stock Exchange—with particular emphasis on
looming problems such as the U.S. deficit and the Latin American
debt crisis. At the time, conventional economic thinking admitted
only two scenarios. Either the economic system would crash into a
prolonged depression, or we would “magically” defeat the problems
created 
by 
these 
huge 
international 
financial 
imbalances
permanently and break forth into stable prosperity. These scenarios
in their naive extremes did not seem to make sense. I visited
Ariyoshi Okimura, the chief financial economist and director of the
Industrial Bank of Japan, a quiet, soft-spoken man in his fifties, and
a brilliant economist. “I don’t think the imbalances are going to go
away,” he said casually. “And I don’t think they are going to destroy
the system. I think we will have ‘managed imbalances.’ The question
will not be how to eliminate them, but how to live with them.”
Okimura was correct. The economy has been volatile, with many
crashes and rises, many individual winners and losers; but it has
also been resilient. As new problems come up, investors and
countries learn to adapt. We may see events that bring us to the
brink, but the system itself won’t fail. Instead, it will evolve further
with each new challenge and response.
The term “challenge and response” comes from script writing as
well as from historian Arnold Toynbee. There, it refers to adventure
stories, in which an individual faces one unexpected test after
another. Each time, as a result, the tested person emerges different
from the way he was before. Overcoming the test, passing the test,


is important—not for its credential, but for its effect on the hero’s
character.
I described in Chapter 5 how one Japanese definition for
“optimism” means “having enough challenges to give life meaning.”
That mentality is arguably Japan’s greatest asset in the modern
world. In 1973, the United States and Japan were hit with the same
challenge: a quadrupling of oil prices. The United States responded
with a winners and losers scenario in which it was, it felt, the
winner. “This is temporary, we will surely win,” said American
policymakers. “We don’t need to worry about it.” Within a year, the
United States was importing half its oil. Japan responded instead by
completely rebuilding its capital structure to become the most
energy-efficient economy in the world. Today, the average Japanese
automobile gets thirty-five miles per gallon. Their most efficient cars
go much higher. If the entire U.S. car fleet averaged thirty-five miles
per gallon America would need to import no oil.
Ironically, America’s history had been a continual succession of
challenge and response stories. Mark Twain’s Huckleberry Finn is one
of the great novels of challenge and response; by the end of the
book, having met every challenge, Huck is a very different person
from when the book began. Each push westward on the frontier was
a new challenge; so was every moment in an immigrant’s life. The
American myth is built on stories of step-by-step success, in which
the hero rises to each challenge and improves along the way. The
United States could have reacted against World War II with
isolationism; it intervened instead, and became, as a result, a
successful capitalist global empire. Today, scenarios for America’s
future must include one key challenge and response plot: can it pass
the test of its deficit?
Environmentalism offers another test. For many years, the most
widely 
perceived 
relationship 
between 
economics 
and 
the
environment was a zero sum winners and losers logic. You could
either have growth or environmental safety, but not both. If you
wanted a cleaner environment, you had to waste money on
paperwork, catalytic converters, and coal plant scrubbers. If you


were pro-growth, it meant you opposed environmentalism. People
were locked into polarized positions by the logic of the debate.
Today, the logic of “sustainable development” suggests that both
economic growth and environmental quality are possible—if people
tackle the challenge of satisfying both criteria. That means
developing new technologies which cut waste and save energy.
When we designed scenarios for PG&E, for example, we deliberately
set them up as challenge and response plots. We said that they had
consistently seen their world as winners and losers, in which they
were limited by politics and the supply of energy. That meant
fighting to build power plants and transmission lines. In a challenge
and response mind-set, they look at each difficulty as an opportunity
to learn. As a result, their perceptions are now influenced by
community feelings and their sense that the public will work with
them to solve problems. If they don’t meet the public halfway, the
problems won’t get solved. Indeed, it was the challenge of the
October 1989 San Francisco earthquake and the very effective
response of PG&E and the community it serves that helped create
the sense of shared fate that now shapes corporate strategy.
Evolution
The window by my computer, up in the Berkeley hills, surveys the
sweep of the heart of the San Francisco Bay. Three spines of land,
from the south, the north, and the east, descend to the waters of the
bay. One can imagine Miwok Indians walking down to the water’s
edge. Today, I see the Golden Gate Bridge in the distance, the Bay
Bridge a little closer, and a web of streets and arterial highways
between them. The bay is dotted with sailboats and windsurfers;
rows of houses encroach upon the summertime-tawny hills of Marin
County. In the north, I see a cluster of oil refineries. A steady stream
of tankers churn in and out of the Golden Gate to reach them.


When I moved into this house, I obtained photographs of the
region, taken from the same place as my window, dating back to
1926. There was no Golden Gate Bridge; there were no freeways
and few roads. There weren’t any other houses on this now-
populated hillside. And, surprisingly, there weren’t any trees. The
trees had all been cut down to build San Francisco, with the
remainder destroyed by a great forest fire in the early twenties.
Nearly everything I see has grown gradually over the past sixty
years; a time-lapse film of the intervening time (with, say, one frame
per week) would show people flowing into view, roads and
buildings sprouting like plants, industry’s roots burrowing into the
soil like botanical roots.
These evolutionary changes are always biological in nature. They
always involve slow change in one direction—usually either growth
or decline. Evolutionary changes are hard to spot if you’re not
attuned to them, because they take place so slowly. Once spotted,
however, they are easy to manage, precisely because they don’t
suddenly leap upon you.
The most common evolutionary plot in the world today is
technology. New innovations grow in a biological fashion—
sprouting slowly from earlier technologies, gradually ripening, and
then bursting upon the world. In the early 1980s, new types of
microchips, sensors, and control devices made robotic machines
with astounding new capabilities possible. Promoters expected to
sell 2 billion robots in a few years. Instead, they sold 200 million
and lost tons of money. Before the new machine could catch on,
learning had to take place. Customers had to discover how to use
robots; and in the process, they learned that robots could not
perform as well as they hoped. That in turn sent robot designers
back to the labs. When the next round of robots is introduced, once
again people will have to learn to value and use them. Technology
entrepreneurs often fail to predict their own growth because they
don’t take that learning time into account; they don’t see
technological growth as a process of evolution—the development of
new niches.


Technology is also evolutionary because new tools fit within an
existing system. The aviation industry created wealth, but only after
many smaller forces coalesced—including jet engine research, air
traffic control development, and government support of airports.
Automobiles could not travel without asphalt paving, oil pipelines,
tire manufacturing, rubber plants, engine design, assembly lines,
and the vast network of highways and streets. If anyone wishes to
make major changes in automobiles (such as designing an electric
car, or a “people-mover” style car that runs on rails), he cannot
merely design a machine. He must think about changing the web of
systems that support the car.
Similarly, any scenario for technologies must include an
understanding of the political and social systems around it. The Wall
Street 
Journal 
has 
extolled 
the 
future 
of 
fiber 
optic
telecommunications, linking everyone in the United States in a
wonderfully versatile digital telephone network. Individuals would
all get access to far more information, control over incoming calls,
and an electronic mail system for sending videos, music, and
computer programs as well as text. Technically, most of the
mechanisms exist. But we can’t get there from here in the United
States, given the current American regulatory framework for
telecommunications. Large businesses can expect hookups to fiber
optic channels, but most small businesses and individuals in the
United States will not get them soon. The initial cost is too great;
well-meaning consumer groups, trying to keep phone bills from
rising, have stymied the movement. Meanwhile, Europe and Japan,
with different regulatory frameworks, are moving aggressively. By
the next century, the rest of the industrialized world will have a
superpowered telephone system; compared with them, the American
system will feel as antiquated as the telegraph is today.
Economic control tends to move to the places where technology
evolves the fastest. While the Japanese have deliberately moved
since 1981 toward a hyper-industrial society of sophisticated
manufacturing, the Americans saw the future as a post-industrial
service society, in which heavy industry was done elsewhere. The
Japanese model is turning out to be correct even in the United


States, except that the hyper-sophisticated plants are no longer
owned by Chrysler, but by Toyota. Solar power in this country is
dominated by Germans, not by Americans. The ownership structure
rather than the nature of the industry is turning out to be different.
As a result, Americans will be much less in control of the American
economy.
The competitive dynamics of business tend to obey rules very
much like the competition of nature. Mergers, acquisitions,
diversification all have their counterparts in nature. Capitalism, by
its nature, follows an evolutionary plot. For quite a long time the
old order—especially if it is embedded in government bureaucracies
and giant companies—resists sudden change and challenge. While
the directors of the London Stock Exchange adapted a challenge and
response plot, the other major financial players continued to accept
slow evolution. It makes the old order more vulnerable to sudden
sharp discontinuities as the pressure for change builds up.
Common kinds of business decisions often lead to structurally
similar scenarios. Decisions to build a new business around a new
technology often lead to evolutionary scenarios addressing the
ability of new technology to find a successful niche in a competitive
ecosystem. The continuing success of SUN Microsystems, for
example, relies on its ability to anticipate the possible pattern of
evolution of today’s scientific and technical networks and adapt
accordingly. Industries anticipating the possibility of restructuring—
say AT&T, before the breakup of the Bell System in 1983–84—might
think about scenarios of challenge and response; how to respond to
the challenge of a newly competitive environment? If your company
is thinking about investing overseas, in an increasingly protectionist
environment, perhaps the logic of winners and losers will help
identify the regions of greatest likelihood of success. In other words,
similar decisions often lead to similar classes of scenarios. But each
would be unique to its particular circumstances. AT&T and
BellSouth faced similar challenges, but in very different situations.
Their scenarios of challenge and response would be very different.


Other Common Plots
The three plots just described are the most common in scenarios,
but they do not cover all situations. Other, spicier plots need to be
stirred in. These plots are ones which I have personally found
illuminating:
•    Revolution: Every now and then there’s a sudden dramatic
change, usually unpredictable in nature. Peter Drucker called such
changes “discontinuities” and gave as examples an earthquake, a
volcanic eruption, a political revolution, the toppling of a
presidency (as in Watergate), and the sudden emergence of an OPEC
as a political power. Revolutions are rare, but they must always be
considered if they are plausible. The most frequent question asked
of scenario-planners by business people is: “Where are the big
discontinuities likely to be?”
It’s fun and a little scary to think of possible discontinuities. They
can include human-made natural disasters: pollution-precipitated
sudden climate change. Or plain natural disasters: a large meteorite
striking the earth, or a series of earthquakes. They can include
surprising changes of public attitude. People might suddenly decide
that space is a bore; there isn’t much worth doing out there. As a
result, space technology would lose a great financial and
inspirational impetus. New religious and cultural wars could erupt
as fundamentalists clash with the world’s growing secular tolerance.
Or new types of plagues might strike, more virulent than AIDS,
spread not through direct blood contact but simply through normal
contagion, exacerbated by the expanding global transport system
and by more crowded cities. Less likely, but still possible, is a
sudden world government, responding to the increasing perception
that independent governments are not fit to manage their nations.
There is no guarantee that a world government would be benevolent
or democratic.


Revolutions are important for their aftermath. People perceive
possibilities differently. Consider what the 1929 crash did to a
generation’s optimism. After Chernobyl, people suddenly realized
that nuclear accidents were not a local problem, they were a global
problem. After Proposition 13 in California, American politicians
realized that their constituents no longer trusted government
enough to support higher taxes. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, no
one could see Germany or the U.S.S.R. the same way.
In San Francisco, on the morning of October 17, 1989, the
possibility of an earthquake felt far away. Thus, few people were
prepared. When the earthquake struck, hardware stores sold out of
gas wrenches; bottled water and batteries went fast. Traveling
outside the Bay Area that day, I found it almost impossible to get
news of my family. Today, we have bottled water and gas wrenches
in our house. We also have a plan for what to do if we’re trapped
away from the city when a quake occurs; a scenario, in effect, for
how our neighbors and friends could get news to each other.
•  Cycles: In the 1920s, the small city of Emeryville (just outside San
Francisco) was a sparsely populated industrial area next to the salt
marshes. After World War II, Emeryville grew into a major
industrial center, a healthy blue-collar home to steel mills, chemical
plants, and research laboratories. With the decline of heavy industry
in the United States over the past two decades, Emeryville became
sparsely populated again; stagnant, with empty factories, empty
streets, a few active warehouses, and a small residential population.
But in the late 1980s, Emeryville revived. The old International
Harvester factory was converted to airy, sunny, fully electronically
wired, loft-like office spaces. Software design and biotechnology
businesses occupy buildings where bridges were fabricated and
tractors manufactured. Cetus, the biotechnology company, occupies
the old Shell research lab. Rents and property values are rising.
Emeryville is playing out a cyclical plot of decay and rejuvenation.
Many cities go through these cycles; the next up-and-coming area of
New York, for example, may well be the South Bronx. It is where


the cheap close-in real estate will lie as gridlock diminishes the
capacity for commuting.
Economic matters often occur in cycles; for that reason, it is good
for a scenario-builder to be familiar with some economic theory. If
the Federal Reserve increases the money supply, you can count on
interest rates going down. That in turn means that people (and
industries) will borrow and spend more. That, in turn, often
encourages inflation, which then influences a restriction on the
money supply.
But the cyclical logic of market economics appears in other areas
as well. Ronald Reagan’s drug policies, for example, unintentionally
created crack. When the Drug Enforcement Administration began to
put pressure on cocaine dealers, the price went up. When the price
goes up on a commodity, it becomes a more valuable line of
business. In classic market economic terms, when the price went up,
the volume went up. Many more dealers entered the business in the
United States. They, in turn, flooded the market, which (up until
that time) had been a fairly upscale market; cocaine was expensive.
So they added a new low-cost product: crack.
Today, every time another drug war is announced, and law
enforcement gets tougher, the same plot line takes effect. Cocaine
gets more expensive, and thus more enticing as a business, and the
volume goes up. But the volume does not stay high, because (as
classic market economics suggest) there is only a limited demand for
the drug. When the market gets glutted, the price falls. Business
shrinks, and the supply goes down—until the next crackdown on
drugs raises prices again. Clearly the main role of the Drug
Enforcement Agency is to assure the profitability of the drug barons’
business. Imagine how they would feel if the DEA stopped enforcing
the law and anyone could sell cocaine?
The timing of cycles is important, and unpredictable unless you
look for clues. To know where a neighborhood is located in a real
estate cycle of rise or fall, you might have to actually go and visit it.
Savvy real estate investors often do exactly that, using their insight
to buy real estate as a long-term investment. An individual’s only
weapon with cycles is awareness; they swing independently of


anyone’s attempts to control them. Because of their lag time, cycles
can be emotionally misleading. When things look like easy street,
quite often there is danger at the door—and vice versa. As a result, a
cyclical plot often leads to an impression of scarcity, and therefore a
winners and losers plot.
•    Infinite possibility: At the end of every decade, The Economist
produces a special issue looking ahead for the next ten years. In
1950, its tone was cautious, reserved, and a bit shell-shocked: “We
hope the world never again experiences what it did in the last ten
years.” The magazine hoped, not for affluence or growth, but merely
for a peaceful, tolerable world. By 1960, its attitude had completely
changed. Growth was inevitable: abundance and unparalleled
growth. The only question was how high it could go, how much
could be expected? The Economist, like the rest of the Anglo-
American world, had entered the plot of infinite possibility.
Infinite possibility starts with public perception: the world will
expand and improve, infinitely. It is a seductive perception; under
its influence, many things happen that would not otherwise take
place. Money gets poured into research; people spend instead of
saving for the future (as they would under challenge and response);
excess thrives in many forms. Under Johnson, infinite possibilities
produced the War on Poverty. Under Reagan, it produced the
Housing and Urban Development Department scandals. Tom Wolfe’s
novel The Bonfire of the Vanities is about the shattering of the feeling
of infinite possibility. It’s no accident that his hero, bond broker
Sherman McCoy, thinks of himself as a potential “Master of the
Universe.”
Infinite possibility may be a seduction story, but it is not always
seduction with bad result. The computer industry in 1975 was
fueled by infinite possibility. Many people and companies
prospered; eventually, many failed, but on the whole personal
computers were an unequivocal economic boom. Xerox did not see
it: their executives said, in effect, “We don’t think there are many
possibilities here. No one will want these on their desktops.” They,


instead, were following the plot of evolution: seeing computers as
natural extensions of a mainframe world.
Infinite possibility is powerful. In 1950, most Americans did not
envision that, by 1960, they would live in a society of two-car
families and three-car garages, in which any American, it was said,
could have his own mini-estate with a plot of grass around it. The
pursuit of infinite possibility made that change possible.
•    The Lone Ranger: In 1982, when Margaret Thatcher began
tackling the stagnant British economy, she had in mind a scenario
built around the individual versus a system. She saw herself battling
the dominance of self-serving labor and the excesses of the post-war
“Yes, Minister”-style social welfare state. Her strategy was to
dismantle the existing system, provide the right incentives, and let
entrepreneurial spirits blossom. Her “Lone Ranger” plot has been
proven mainly right.
The Lone Ranger plot is mainly a social logic, driven by a street
sensibility that emerges in an incoherent fashion. It says that the
ordering principles of politics, trade, and technology cannot reach
the basic individuality in our souls. David facing Goliath is a “Lone
Ranger” hero; so was James Dean in Rebel Without a Cause, as well
as the Lone Ranger himself, riding alone into town to confront a
corrupt system and win. Apple Computer was an archetypal
corporate Lone Ranger, confronting the faceless minions of the IBM
“ranch.”
Despite the romantic image of Lone Ranger-style heroes, the
effects of the attitude are often troublesome. When two or more
Lone Rangers butt heads, it creates a particularly virulent winners
and losers conflict. Both sides see themselves as the independent
heroes, each convinced of his own virtue and the inevitability of
victory.
•  “My Generation”: In 1963, planner/futurist Don Michael foresaw
that the world would forever be different when he looked carefully
at the demographics of the early 1960s. His resulting book was
called The Next Generation: The Prospects Ahead for the Youth of


Today and Tomorrow. He noted that the youth of the post-war era
were not only large in number, but were growing up with
experiences different from those that any generation had
encountered before: affluence, peace, and freedom. With their needs
for food, shelter, work, and companionship satisfied, they could
think about self-expression, status, and the meaning of life. Seeing
this, Michael could anticipate the youth rebellion and widespread
social experimentation that, soon thereafter, burst upon the scene.
He also saw that women, as well as youth, would have enough
freedom and increased affluence to question their traditional roles.
Scenarios should always include the influence that the culture has
on people’s values—particularly the culture of large generations of
people. There used to be four ways to live in America—poverty,
working class, middle class, or upper class. But now, the common
experiences of the baby boomers have been transformed, through
their own experimentation, into an amazing diversity of lifestyles.
Steve Barnett, in a GBN meeting, described people who are “bankers
by 
day, 
punkers 
by 
night”—comfortably 
moving 
between
discontinuous lifestyles. Advertisers and employers can no longer
look at their markets and workforce as simple and consistent.
Our global teenager scenario (Chapter 7), of course, is another
example of the “My Generation” plot at work. It relies, for its power,
on enough demographic force to make a generation of people feel as
if their culture will influence the world.
How Plots Interact
Scenario designers rarely consider plots individually. They
consider the ways in which different plots might handle the same
forces. Global environmental policy, for example, could follow
either an evolutionary plot or a challenge and response plot.
Evolution could lead to ecodisaster simply by producing more of the
same. Waste dumps would proliferate; refinery explosions and


chemical 
accidents 
would 
continue. 
The 
transportation 
of
biologically hazardous wastes would increase, creating the
opportunity for dangerous accidents, such as those of oil tankers
before them. Most often nothing would happen; or outbreaks of
polio and typhoid would occur, not linked to the accident until
much later. Fear of such epidemics would most likely trigger an
eventual overreaction against technology; that, combined with the
reduced productivity of poisoned land, would drive the economy
downward—slowly.
Alternatively, if policy followed the challenge and response plot,
we might experience an ecoboom. This late in the game, the
urgency of building a “sustainable growth” society would inspire
unusual innovation and change. Somewhere out there, the Aristotle
Onassis of the 2000–2010 era is growing up. Spurred by the
challenges of these years, he or she will figure out a way to
entrepreneur intelligently managed transportation, for example. At
first he would fill only a niche that exists because of the
environmental threat, a niche that gradually expands to the full
system.
Often, people think they’re in one plot, while the system follows
another plot—with miserable results. Many of Ronald Reagan’s
policies ostensibly followed a scenario logic of individual against the
system. No energy policy was a good policy as far as Reagan was
concerned. Unfortunately, the real logic behind the energy
environment of the eighties was challenge and response. The
Reagan government, for example, reduced mileage standards and
failed to increase gasoline taxes. Thus, America, with low oil prices
and low income from a gas tax, did not invest as much as other
nations in energy-efficiency. Instead, the U.S. addicted itself to low-
price gasoline. Now, there is good reason to expect an increase in oil
prices. While other nations merely adjust their taxes down, the U.S.
will end up paying the money to the “tax collectors” in the Middle
East, instead of having used it to invest in its own energy-saving
infrastructure while it could. The U.S. failed the challenge of
efficiency and did not even recognize it as a nation. Americans had
the wrong image of the future and did the wrong thing, coming to


regret it only when Saddam Hussein marched into his neighbor
Kuwait in the summer of 1990.
The Unbroken Line
One cautionary note in developing plot lines. When things get
worse, people often expect them to get much worse, until they
produce devastation—war, economic collapse, apocalypse. Thus,
watch out for the unbroken line—conditions that change, but do not
engender any response. If there is dramatic continued growth, look
for the undertow of resistance which will slow down the growth.
The threat of war breeds resistance to war. Environmental threat
breeds ecological activism. Japan’s prosperity has provoked forces
in competing countries (Korea, Taiwan, France) and in Japan itself
(its severe labor shortage). It is the prophecy itself that leads to
change and the prophecy’s negation.
Royal Dutch/Shell planners saw the undertow in oil prices in the
mid-1970s. After prices jumped, most forecasters assumed that they
would continue rising. But the price jump provoked a wave of
energy-efficiency innovation and new oil development, which then
helped bring the price back down.
A similar case is going on today in oil exploration. Most of the
large oil companies are spending billions in exploration, expecting a
return from the oil. Their projections assume that the price of oil
will stay the same. However, if every company that is exploring for
oil succeeds, that will produce a glut, and the price of oil will drop
—perhaps to ten dollars per barrel. That price is too low to develop
most of the new oil, which is expensive because it is difficult to
retrieve. The companies’ projections all tacitly pretend that others
will not see the world as they do and act accordingly. The result will
be either lower oil prices, if they succeed, or fewer oil companies, if
they don’t.


Training Yourself to Recognize Plots
As a student inspired in the early 1960s, during the aftermath of
Sputnik, I resolved to pursue a career in aeronautical engineering. I
knew that the space race would guarantee me employment and
excitement for years. However, I was not prepared for the response
to the success of the moon walk in 1969. After having met the
challenge of the competition with the Soviet Union, America lost
interest and support for the space program diminished. When the
aerospace industry became depressed after the completion of the
Apollo program, the bright future I had trained for disappeared. I
realized that I had never thought about such a situation. What could
I have foreseen if I had been paying attention? What might I have
done differently as a result?
If I had really thought about it I would have had to say, “This is a
short-lived effort. If we get to the moon first, we are out. If the
Russians beat us, we are out. It is predetermined that the space
program will wind down.” Moreover, I might have recognized a
winners and losers plot which suggested that rivalry was the deep
motivation. I had been interested in my own growth, and assumed
that the space race followed a challenge and response logic. I could
have learned differently by paying more attention to what
Washington bureaucrats were saying at the time.
Hindsight is useful for sharpening your foresight. That’s why I
recommend that you practice such a “retrodictive” scenario
yourself. Imagine that you had been trying to write the scenario for
your company, or yourself, or your country, ten years ago. What
would have been the right scenario, what would have been the plot,
what were the driving forces, what were the critical elements, what
could you have seen then that you didn’t? I have actually done this
as a formal exercise with, for example, executives from a major U.S.
steel company. We went back in time and said, “What might you
have seen about the near demise of the U.S. steel industry, if you
had been doing scenarios?”


The answer was that they could have foreseen the collapse of
American steel, but they probably could not have prevented it. They
would have seen slow growth in their markets, if they had stopped
to consider it; and the growth of foreign competition as a driving
force. They might have reacted much sooner and given themselves
much more maneuvering room. Some players didn’t make it at all,
while most were forced to change dramatically and painfully.
U.S. steelmakers did not consider a plot in which high inflation
and interest rates continued. They did not foresee their inability to
invest in steel manufacturing, or their customers’ inability to invest
in new facilities for using steel. Finally, like the U.S. auto industry,
they did not notice the Japanese attitude toward challenge and
response: they believed Ford, and ignored Toyota; they saw
promises of rising American markets, and ignored new Japanese
steel competitors. Everything was there to be seen. It was missed,
not for lack of information but for denial and lack of methodology.
They didn’t want to see it, and didn’t have the mechanism to force
them to see it. A well-constructed scenario plot is exactly that sort of
mechanism.
OceanofPDF.com


THE WORLD IN 2005:
THREE SCENARIOS
            The fundamental uncertainties of our time will shape the
context for many of our business and personal decisions. Will there
be war or peace? Prosperity or depression? An atmosphere of
freedom or one of restraint? As a group, Global Business Network
produced our first set of global scenarios in 1990. We followed the
same practice discussed in this book—isolating predetermined
elements and critical uncertainties, and then considering the
possible scenario plot lines. And we emerged with three scenarios of
the future which we still feel are plausible. Any of them may come
true; the future will probably be a combination of all of them.
Large-scale scenarios such as these serve as a sort of template; you
can use them as a basis for more specific scenarios. We use them to
keep ourselves from reinventing the wheel each time we consider a
new decision, and it helps us continue to educate ourselves as well.
As we learn more about the fate of any individual organizations or
people, we learn more about the quality of our wider-scale long
view, and more about the global economy.
You might use these scenarios (or parts of them) as components in
your own planning. Alternatively, they may just spark your own
thinking. I offer them in the spirit with which scenarios are always
offered: as a vehicle for envisioning where the world could go so
that we can learn in time to do something different.
Driving Forces of the Next Two Decades
