# The World in 2005: Three Scenarios

As always, our scenario process started by looking at the driving
forces in the world today. They led us to a surprisingly large number
of predetermined elements, and an equal number of critical
uncertainties. Here, I’ve grouped them thematically:
•    Shuffling Political Alignments: The post-war era is over; the
Cold War is ended. Economic forces are increasingly more important
than military. Germany appears to look more toward Eastern Europe
and the Soviet Union as its future, than toward its American former
political ally. A united Germany will be an economic powerhouse,
the most powerful nation within Europe; politics on that continent
will unite many diverse economies, possibly including the Soviet
Union, in an on-going balancing act.
Meanwhile, Japan and the United States essentially share one
economy already, based on mutual investments, markets, and
strategic alliances between multinational corporations. Despite the
political resentment on both sides, the network of interconnections
is so dense that tearing it apart could happen only under the most
extreme circumstances. Like it or not, the United States and Japan
are bonded together. One great uncertainty is the shape of this
alliance—a fiery, conflicted marriage, or a formidable, well-
balanced partnership? A few prescient politicians have recognized
the opportunities in the latter. In a speech in San Francisco in
December of 1988, for example, U.S. Senator Bill Bradley proposed
a “Pacific coalition for growth and democracy,” including the
United States, Japan, Canada, Australia, Mexico, South Korea,
Indonesia, and Thailand. “Trade,” said Bradley, “has made the
Pacific rim the only part of the post-war world to evolve successive
generations of high growth economies.”
Note 
that 
Bradley’s 
proposed 
coalition 
included 
both
industrialized and developing countries. That division is rapidly
falling. New free trade talks between the United States and Mexico
are one sign; the inclusion of borderline countries such as Turkey in
the European Community is another. If the trend continues, then
India, China, and Latin America could wield greater influence by
how they choose to participate in the new alliances.


In a world of stronger regional governments (such as the
European Community) one uncertainty lies in the role of
international political and economic institutions—the United
Nations, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
They may not be as necessary. Though they continue in vestigial
form, their roles may be replaced by negotiations between rival
power blocs. The failure to sustain the long-term development of
more global rather than regional organizations will slow the process
of global integration considerably. Conversely, the environment—a
global-scale crisis that doesn’t recognize national or regional
boundaries—may make worldwide organizations (e.g., IMF or
GATT) stronger. The same may be true if marketplace laws take
precedence over national interests. The movement away from global
economic and political institutions may portend an increasingly
difficult period for companies trying to operate at a global level.
Regional barriers and politics may come to dominate the evolution
of the business environment.
•    Technology Explosion: Rapid technological evolution will
continue. This will put education in an increasingly important role,
as the human community’s means for keeping up to date. Education
levels are already accelerating rapidly worldwide, as people in
developing countries realize their financial survival depends on it.
That’s not good news for the United States, whose educational
system is in decay, but it’s great news for Taiwan, Korea, and
Singapore.
We do not know which new technologies will be resisted by
narrow 
self-interest 
(as 
Detroit 
resisted 
energy-efficient
automobiles), and which will be so dangerous that they will require
severe controls (as with nuclear and chemical weapons). To judge
from the history of the computer, the transistor, the laser, and the
fax—the 1990s are almost certainly bound to spawn several world-
changing innovations that nobody but a few scientific specialists
had ever heard of in the 1980s.
Despite vexing global problems, technological change might alone
be strong enough to guarantee global prosperity. The single most


frequent failure in the history of forecasting has been grossly
underestimating the impact of technologies. We may, in fact, be in
the midst of a major transition to technologies that may make
possible much higher economic growth—fueled by the faster pace of
research and by “nanotechnologies” such as molecular engineering.
By the late nineties, genetic medicine may take off with the
increasing capability to operate at the bio-molecular level. Industrial
materials may be nearly impossibly precise in their fabrication from
the atom up, which (since the precision of materials is an
acknowledged factor in quality and productivity) may lead to vastly
better, 
more 
productive 
infrastructures. 
And 
improved
infrastructures is one of the most important factors in sustaining
increases in business productivity and profitability.
•    Global Pragmatism: A new political ideology—“whatever
works”—transcends old attitudes about left versus right, or
capitalism versus socialism. You see the effects not just in
perestroika, but in Ronald Reagan’s surprising willingness to
negotiate arms treaties and the ideological “caution” exhibited by
George Bush. The Ayatollah of Iran has bought armaments from
Israel; the totalitarian Chinese Politburo has wooed entrepreneurs
from London and Los Angeles. “Who cares what color the cat is,”
asked Deng Xiaoping, “as long as it catches mice?” The near
universal condemnation of Iraq following its invasion of Kuwait was
born of the recognition that our collective reliance on the global
economy with its oil jugular running through the Persian Gulf made
us all brothers in oil with common interests to defend.
Developing and industrialized countries have learned from the
debt crisis of the early 1980s: those who resisted change with
rhetoric of protecting sovereignty, jobs, and consumption lost the
very control, jobs, and income they sought to protect. This change
of mood is predetermined—that is, we cannot imagine any plausible
scenario which would contradict it, unless, local cultural conflicts
such as those in the Soviet Union, the Middle East, and South Asia
come to play a much wider and larger role on the world stage.


The downside of global pragmatism is a loss of belief structures
and a widening gap in society between rich and poor. This is
especially hard in countries based on an egalitarian promise, such as
the U.S.S.R. and China. Japan, for example, has a brand-new super-
rich class.
•  Demographics: We have already covered the rise of the global
teenager in Chapter 7—2 billion teenagers by the year 2000, most of
them in Asia, South America, and Africa. Meanwhile, industrialized
countries face declining population growth or even losing
population. In these industrialized countries, per capita income is
forty times as high as in the poorest developing countries; and there
is evidence that the gap is widening. Thus, there will inevitably be a
tidal wave of people yearning to migrate from developing nations to
the industrialized world in the 1990s.
In the United States, the sheer size of the baby boom, along with
its tendency for embracing social change, opens up uncertainties as
its members reach their fifties and sixties. Significant numbers of the
generation that learned how to drop out in the sixties, once past
their decades of homemaking and family rearing, may revert to
nonconformist ways during the next decade. At the same time, there
will be far fewer twenty- to thirty-four-year-olds. Entry-level job
seekers, college students, and young marrieds will be evident by
their relative absence. Much of the decline may be offset by
immigrants—for example, by young people coming from Mexico.
How will countries manage the crucial immigration issue in the
1990s? We do not know. Will new immigrants be effectively
absorbed into a pool of human talent to contribute to economic
development? Or will the presence of immigrants from poorer
nations, with different ethnic backgrounds from those of their new
destinations, provoke ethnic conflicts around the world? As noted
earlier, for businesses which deal with large numbers of people
either as customers or employees the new multicultural realities will
impose dramatic new requirements upon a management which is
largely white male. Understanding the needs of these new customers


and workers will require a level of cultural sensitivity that has at
best been rare.
•    Energy: The amount of energy people consume is a powerful
driving force in political matters, technology, and global ecology. In
the 1990s, two forces will hold back energy consumption: perceived
price benefits from efficiency, and perceived damage to the
environment. Population is a critical driving force here: if every
Chinese citizen had just one motor scooter, the world’s oil demand
would leap by 2 million barrels per day. Fortunately, fuel is used far
more efficiently today than twenty years ago—accounting for more
than half of the lowered demand for oil since the 1973 OPEC-
spurred oil price crisis. If the impact of the Kuwait invasion is to
lead to moderately high prices it will accelerate the pace of
efficiency improvements as they become more economically
justifiable.
The rapid growth of population in the developing world
undoubtedly will push up energy demand. But it is not clear how
energy-intensive the economic growth in those countries will be. If
prices remain too low for very long, the marketplace will squander
energy; efficiency requires investment up front. Fortunately, energy
is sufficiently taxed in most countries that consumers have not
experienced a major fall in prices. Meanwhile, technological options
include a one-hundred-mile-per-gallon car and new networks of
high-speed, magnetically levitated trains. A lowering of demand
buys time to develop new and unproven energy options such as
large-scale solar power and (possibly) next-generation nuclear
power.
Technological improvement in energy development will continue,
particularly if oil prices rise and nanotechnology research begins in
earnest. We can expect more efficient solar cells, smaller nuclear
power plants (in pro-nuclear power countries such as France,
Germany, and Japan), and small-scale electric generators, using fuel
cells or gas-fired turbines. If these devices appear in large enough
numbers, it could mean the end of the electric grid that underlies
industrial civilization. Homes would still be connected, but the


nature of interconnection would change and economics of location
would be different.
While the world or particular localities will still continue to
experience disruptions based on local politics (e.g., the Middle East
or local opposition to development), over the long run the vast
improvements in efficiency and the proliferation of energy supply
options mean that business will experience no fundamental long-
term constraint from lack of available energy.
•    Environment: Judging by credible warnings from atmospheric
scientists and ecologists, such perceived looming crises as global
climate change are, unfortunately, predetermined elements. Even if
the scientific realities still contain enormous uncertainties,
perceptions have already shifted fundamentally. But their outcomes
are uncertain. The world’s environmentalists and technologists
could develop an effective response, leading to a cleaner, more
efficient, and wealthier world. Or there will be an ineffective
response—too little, too late—resulting in a dirty, decaying
environment with pockets of wealth fleeing the unlivable air and
water. Some people still argue that the magnitude of environmental
problems has been exaggerated. If they are right the answers are
more research and moderate actions. In each of the scenarios in this
chapter, environmental issues play out differently.
Over the last couple of years, we have come to feel fairly certain
of continued public concern about the environment as a driving
force. But we do not know whether people will target local issues—
such as air and water quality—or global concerns such as the
greenhouse effect. Will the problems be so severe, so soon, that their
drastic economic and political fallout forces many countries into a
crisis mode? Or will scientists discover that global environmental
concerns were mainly a false alarm, leaving behind some definite
problems such as toxic wastes, but allowing people the time and the
means to solve them? Or will other concerns such as a renewal of
economic recession, unemployment, or inflation take over the public
spotlight as they did during the seventies and early eighties.


•  The Global Information Economy: Information technology will
create new forms of organization. The financial, entertainment, and
communication industries are spearheading this transition, although
its effects reach into every business and home. Industry and natural
resources will still be important—this is not a post-industrial
economy in which “services” replace “things.” But key economic
relationships will be transformed. The speed of global electronic
transactions will generate speculative wealth much faster than
industries and services; the exchange of information, not the
possession of treasure, is the new definition of wealth. World paper
financial transactions are already ten times larger than physical
trade transactions.
Semi-industrialized nations, building their industries from scratch,
may use the productivity of “smart” technologies and management
methods to leapfrog past today’s industrial powers. The advanced
economies will seek more of their growth in nonindustrial activities
such as services and information—which tend to use less energy.
The move toward a global economy is inevitable. It suggests
regional currencies—a single European currency, for example—and
eventually a “WorldEx” (World Exchange Unit). But we do not know
how quickly the global economy will develop, or whether it will be
dominated by old political structures or market dynamics. This fate
hangs on a number of political issues, such as the evolution of
telecommunication standards and the regulation of international
securities trading. The outcome of the Gorbachev revolution is by no
means predetermined, nor is the global political role of the new
Japan and new Germany. And China after June 1989 is a fulcrum of
uncertainty. Will the U.S. deficit be any more manageable in the
nineties than it was in the eighties? How will the Europe of post-
1992 fare? What will be the impact of early-nineties downturn? Will
the growth potential of Latin America be liberated from the burden
of debt, and will the Asian “Tigers” follow the course of Japan and
become the new industrial powers?
The only certainty is that the 1990s will be a time of economic
and political “rapids”; far more turbulent than the early- to mid-
1980s. In retrospect people may say that the 1990s really “began” in


1989, when the Berlin Wall came down. In a decade of uncertainty
and turbulent transition, no one is guaranteed success. Every nation,
rich and poor, faces new challenges of competition and of
adaptation to the emerging new rules of the game.
At GBN, we chose the mid-1990s as the point of divergence for
our long-term scenarios: the coming few years will remain highly
constrained by the momentum of history, such as the U.S. deficits
and the need to integrate Eastern Europe into the West. But as the
legacy of the recent past diminishes, by the mid-nineties the
possibilities begin to open up as we enter a period where many
choices will be made that will set the rules of the game for a long
time to come. We chose a vantage point of approximately ten years
later from which to see the results. Let’s paint portraits, then, of
three possible scenarios for the world in the year 2005.
New Empires
By the early 1990s more and more people in the industrialized
countries are increasingly angry with their trading partners. Buying
and selling companies, the rise and fall of regions at the hands of
distant foreigners, the buying of precious assets such as art and
landmarks all create a hostile mood, where recent friends come to
be seen as new enemies. Demonstrations against foreign owners
become a commonplace sight. Campaigns for “Buy American,
French, or Korean” raise the level of friction and anger. In such an
environment of conflict, what if politics wins control of the new
information economy? What if the winners and losers logic proves
persuasive—if politicians believe that they are in a zero-sum
competition for wealth and prosperity with all other nations? It’s a
plausible scenario; it merely suggests that governments will
continue to do what comes naturally.
This scenario begins in the mid-1990s with most nations deciding
to protect their threatened cultural identities and to take control of


the pace of change by regionalizing their interests. The tension
between isolationism and the global economy creates what George
Kennan called “fateful alliances”: multinational power blocs. We call
them “New Empires” because they take on the qualities of empires.
Federated and all-powerful, bureaucratic but decentralized, these
superpower-style blocs of countries and corporations grow to
dominate the world. They are often benevolent, but they are always
despots.
One such empire is the Pacific bloc, including Japan, the United
States, Canada, Mexico, and most of East Asia. A rival European
bloc revolves around Germany and the Soviet Union. Nearby hover
fragmented and short-lived confederations involving countries from
the Middle East, North Africa, and Latin America. China and India
go their own way, preoccupied with territorial disputes against each
other. Though the direction of Africa is still unclear, the term “Third
World” no longer has any meaning and is not used as the spectrum
of nations no longer divides so neatly into three groups. Those
within each circle of allies protect each other. Those outside the
circle are economic rivals. The two main circles control most natural
resources and industry, with roughly equivalent riches that hold
them in balance.
This is a world vastly different from the world of the bipolar Cold
War. And for many, it’s a relief from the turbulent rapids of the
nineties. There is still change, but all progress is held in check by
resistance from the existing giant bureaucracies, both public and
private. Tariffs and protectionism hold back what would otherwise
be spiraling technological growth. In global telecommunications,
multiple bloc-defended standards continue to collide inefficiently.
The age of incompatibility persists. There are no global
infrastructure projects, but there are some intra-bloc undertakings.
Boeing, Mitsubishi, and the Daewoo Bank, at the instigation of U.S.
and Japanese governments, join forces to build the “Orient
Express”—a space plane traveling at twelve times the speed of
sound, linking the cities of the Pacific bloc.
There is prosperity in this world: stable, controlled, but not
universal. Africa is still trapped in poverty, in part because it is


unaligned. And it is unaligned because it is so poor and no bloc
wants the drag of massive poverty on its economic performance.
Within each bloc there is fairly open trade, but between the blocs an
elaborate network of regulations governs all forms of economic
interactions, from physical trade to financial flows and even the
movement of information. “Sony-Apple” and “IBM-Siemens” (now a
completely European-owned company) sell to computer markets
that are almost monopolistically controlled.
Perhaps the clearest example of the failure to integrate lies in the
financial markets. After the crash of 1987, there had been much talk
of a single global stock market. But the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission could not agree with its counterparts in London, Tokyo,
and Brussels on any long-lasting framework for international
securities trading. Instead, protectionism had increasingly decoupled
the markets. The United States, coping with the long-term
consequences of its massive foreign debt, had placed limited
controls on capital outflows in 1995. The EC retaliated, and London,
looking toward the massive opportunities of a revived Europe, had
joined the Continent. British and Continental European sources of
capital had dried up as a result, putting even more pressure on the
U.S. capital markets.
By early in the decade post-2000, bureaucrats at Eurobank and
the Japanese Ministry of Finance have learned to wrangle each
week over the value of their currency units: the European Currency
Unit (the “eckoo,” as people call it) and the Pacific-Asian “packoo.”
Americans keep both dollars and packoos in their wallets.
Negotiators meet through a complex web of electronic media,
including elaborate computer simulations of the global economy,
managed by no one but watched carefully by every bloc.
Governments set the rules; corporations enforce them. Managers in
both sectors are increasingly difficult to tell apart. Access to markets
is their key issue: who for example will forge the best relationships
with China?
Environmental troubles continue, in some blocs more than others
and also on the global scale. The new China of over 1 billion people
wants to manufacture for the world as Taiwan used to. But the


pollution costs of such industrialization are not trivial, and every
bloc resists paying for it. Generally, the right to pollute is a critical
international issue. Each bloc finds it can’t legislate against ozone
depletion, greenhouse warming, acid rain, deforestation, toxic
wastes, and despoiled oceans—so each takes refuge in blaming the
other blocs.
Within blocs, the cultural variety of individual nations is officially
respected—even officially encouraged—but larger loyalties are also
demanded. There is almost unlimited population migration within
blocs, for example, and contributions to shared military research.
Nonetheless, for the young who came of age at the turn of the
century, identity is a major psychological issue. Are the Europeans
French or British or Hungarian or something new not yet seen? The
social tensions between those who fight to preserve national identity
and those who find their meaning within a larger context is a
deepening divide. As a reaction to international media, there is a
revival of native arts, culture, and language, particularly in Europe.
Fashion becomes a way of expressing differences of origin.
A major surprise is the key role of Canada as the glue that binds
the Pacific bloc together. Since the Canadians are relatively wealthy
and unthreatening, they serve as mediator within the bloc. Having
managed a genuine federal and multilingual system (especially after
resolving the differences between French-speaking Quebecois and
pre-Columbian Native Canadians during the early 1990s), they are
adept at the skills required to manage a fiercely multicultural
political entity.
It’s a conflict-prone world. The mood is similar to the Iron Curtain
tensions of the sixties—little cooperation and collaboration, lots of
belligerence. The arms trade is booming. Each major bloc possesses
sufficient nuclear weapons; the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists has
moved the hands on its “doomsday clock” warning closer to
midnight than they have been since the early eighties. Most
hostilities play out in border-state and client-state conflicts. When
physical force is needed, elite military units are secretly deployed.
More often, war is economic and computer-based. New types of
“generals” in Japanese and German banks wield armies of traders,


armed with computer-based simulations, boosting and cutting credit
where needed. False information suddenly appears on data banks of
trading strategy, placed there by enemy agents. A computer virus
paralyzes London’s sewage system and thus the financial operations
of the City; its source is never identified, except that it came from
outside Europe.
There is still, of course, uncertainty about the future in 2005. The
greatest uncertainty is military. If freedom, diversity, and
competition are preserved as social values, then the growth of
bureaucracy and the web of constraints will prevent full-scale war.
However, if the new mercantilism of the times evolves into full-scale
economic competition, then that could easily move to the military
front. Most people won’t see that potential until it’s too late.
It’s useful to remember that similar blocs have risen before in the
world, battling for military and economic supremacy in times of
wealth, growing population, and new technologies. George Kennan
was writing about just such a situation in his book about “fateful
alliances”—the stalemate of rivalries that existed in 1912. Two
years later, the world had entered one of the most tragic wars of
history. It produced a war which no nation wanted, and which no
one could figure out how to stop; a war which devastated a
generation, and provoked the half-century of depression and
continued war which followed.
If “New Empires” does appear, the most worrying variation would
be a North American bloc with Japan outside of it. That’s exactly
what happened before, and it suggests that the most dangerous
policy decisions Americans could make would be to isolate the
Japanese. The U.S. can either keep them in the family or make them
its enemies; but it will be one or the other.
Market World


Imagine now that economics wins the ideological battle of the
1990s. Most of the world has adopted the Japanese challenge and
response willingness to meet all difficulties head-on and learn from
the experience. There is a resulting sense of “infinite possibilities”
almost everywhere, along with a sense of interconnected
responsibility. That is good business in the long run. This world is
entrepreneurial, multicultural, full of hope and harshness. It’s as
purely capitalistic as an open market, but it’s a smart form of
capitalism. The major international institutions are not government
alliances, but associations: international rule making, standard-
setting, conflict resolution and system management groups that
collectively form an informal “global commons.” As every village
had a group that set the rules for the use of the village commons, so
an integrated world economy needs some means for setting the rules
of those things we share in common such as the air, water, and
radio/TV spectrum. The new global commons is critical if the world
is to function like one vast market; without it the abuse of the
commons leads to conflict and friction. There will still be some who
come out on top while others are left behind and hunks of the
planet despoiled. Markets are like that.
Economic 
intelligence 
is 
the 
organizing 
principle. 
Large
corporations learned through the 1990s that they could not survive
as bureaucratic, slow-moving entities. They slimmed down as
smaller, more innovative, more creative companies thrived around
the world. The flood of complexity is kept coherent by a new way of
organizing society, built around communications links. It favors
those who can understand the unpredictable dynamics of trade; it
encourages cooperation, productivity, efficiency, and organizational
learning. People work to achieve, not to control; decentralization
and diversity are paramount, but do not block the flow of ideas
between regions. Vested interests still exist, but they get found out
and removed—not by government regulators, but by eager
competitors and investors. The harsh realities of enduring
competition keep pressure on long-term profits and continuous
improvement, increasing the risks of profiteering or nepotism.


Economists still strive for a theory to explain the remarkable self-
organizing and self-correcting properties of the present world
complex of markets—and the speed with which that complex came
together. It began in the early 1990s, as a “pragmatic” realization
swept through every nation (which even fundamentalist Islamic
nations have come to understand). A society cannot survive in a
technologically open world without cooperation, international
coordination, and political freedom. After the “Peace Breaks Out”
period of the late eighties, government priorities shifted toward
rebuilding national infrastructures. Instead of seeking control over
the marketplace, they focused on helping build and enable free
markets, which led to international cooperation.
They also focused on education, which more countries,
particularly in what had been the “Third World,” came to see as the
path to prosperity. Today in 2005, everyone learns in school that
the success of Japan in the post-war era, the U.S. response to
Sputnik, the takeoff of the Asian “Tigers” and the most effective
global companies such as ABB, Nissan, and BP were all founded on
effective learning. Nations and companies invest a still-growing
share of their income in education and its infrastructure. As Arie de
Geus pointed out, learning faster than your competitors comes to be
seen as the only sustainable competitive advantage in an
environment of rapid innovation and change. Pursuing national
strategies for competitiveness, governments are promoting the goal
of becoming a “learning society” and research on learning has,
therefore, become a major growth area. The power of the computer
to simulate “microworlds” (capturing the world of the business and
its environment in a simple computer model) and display them in
vivid “virtual realities” (as the computer creates the possibility of
actually experiencing these “microworlds”) has become a common
tool for coping with the dynamics of modern complex social
systems. Incidentally, the United States is striving to catch up with
the rest of the world, after ten bitter years of political acrimony
about the decline of the U.S. educational system. Some American
parents still send their children to Canada, Singapore, or Korea to be


educated. The public schools are fighting to win back the students
they lost to the private schools in the eighties and nineties.
In this “Market World,” companies continually restructure, rise,
fall, and intermesh. Small multinational consulting firms grow
through their bold innovation and the adept use of interactive
computer simulations. Millions of people work as professionals,
continually shifting to new employers. Many work at home. Asian
software companies bid for jobs for European conglomerates and
vice versa. Entrepreneurial bids from outside undercut inside
departments, so companies divest more and more of their jobs.
Meetings between people at these partner companies take place at a
moment’s notice, operating through video links and computer lines.
People collaborate on projects from different continents, speaking
several languages to do so.
The image of a “rising tide that lifts all boats” appears true, but
there are also many storms on the surface. High and volatile
economic growth is spurred by heavy investment in technology.
Boom-bust cycles are common and expected. Entire industries
emerge and are made obsolete in a matter of a few years. Their
workers retrain as a matter of course. Better-educated workers
produce new markets; “flash trends” for new electronic media, new
clothing, new types of food, and new entertainment sweep across
the world. For example, the product of the eighties, the fax, is gone
by the late nineties as it is replaced by integrated electronic
communication and printing machines. This is a world learning to
live with innovation as a constant.
You might describe the international mood as giddy and
optimistic, but with pockets of frustration. Some countries have high
expectations that the market doesn’t fulfill. Some feel that the speed
of change requires too high a price: from the environment, from
traditional beliefs and values, from the lives of the losers in
economic competition. There is little government-sponsored welfare
by the standards of the 1960s and 1970s. In some cities, companies
cooperate to sponsor small “nursing homes” and “hostels” for
indigent people—considered part of the cost of operating within a


community. But many cities have no such services, and homeless
people throng the streets.
Many people miss the zest and focus of ideological zeal, if not its
economic effects. Independent movements for cultural pride exist in
many places, some with fundamentalist roots and others with
leftover tribal or Communist sensibilities, answering a hunger for
meaning and identity which the pursuit of the almighty dollar, yen,
and ruble doesn’t satisfy. In this highly materialistic world, there are
monasteries of rest and contemplation—but usually among those
people who have their “mid-life crisis” at age seventy-five, for
whom the loss of ideological purpose represents a genuine loss of
the meaning that informed most of their lives. Most of the world is
still in its teens and twenties, and for these people, the drive to get
ahead is not a luxury. It is a necessity. Family and community suffer
as the social fabric is shredded by affluence.
The environment suffers, too—but not as much as people feared it
would. Huge energy efficiency improvements take place each year,
and most companies operate under the principle of “sustainable
growth.” Population has begun to fall, and environmental cleanup
has moved up the “pipelines” in most industries. Nearly everything
is recycled; it’s less expensive that way. Some large companies, and
consortia of medium-sized companies, support large-scale “genetic
diversity” forests as part of their biotechnological research.
Massively parallel, interconnected, locally powerful computers
have blossomed everywhere. Nanotechnology—engineering at the
molecular scale—and life extension are in full swing; dozens of
companies have introduced products for each. Despite opposition
from fundamentalists, the technologies of birth control and fertility
also advance. Most of the world’s people can travel somewhere to
get a “morning after” pill or find a technique that will allow them to
conceive a child. In most countries, the number of births per year
has started to fall—not because of government fiat, but because
prosperity and technology have affected it.
Europe 
is 
thriving. 
The 
cosmopolitan 
traditions 
and
multilinguality of Europeans have suited them well for the new
global culture. The delicate political dance of putting together the


EC helped breed a cadre of business people and flexible bureaucrats
who now lead the managers of the volatile multicultural world
economy. The Japanese had the money but lacked the diplomacy,
while the Americans knew too little about collaboration.
The dollar, yen, ECU, ruble, and dinar are all used around the
world, with constant speculation on their exchange rates. A many-
leveled structure of local and small-scale financial markets is
densely coupled to a new global currency market called the
“WorldEx,” managed by a group called the International Financial
Regulation Commission. It traced its history back eight years, to the
1997 crash—the third major stock market crisis of the decade, in
which the New York Stock Exchange lost more than a thousand
points in a single day. The crash this time had been brought on by
bad Chinese debts to Japanese banks, and a massive corruption
scandal in South America. A group of surviving bankers and
regulators created the IFRC to stabilize the runaway evolution of
international financial markets, using a global electronic market to
link the giant financial trading and investment management houses.
It’s a game for high rollers only—a seat on the World Exchange
costs 100 million dollars. Players trade primary and derivative
instruments based on equities, bonds, currency, and commodities,
plus exotic new securities being invented constantly. Small investors
play in the domestic markets for more modest securities.
By 1999, the WorldEx had developed its own trading counter. In
value terms, the “gandhi” is now (in 2005) worth more than all the
other currencies of the world combined. It is forming the basis for
the first true global currency, with the IFRC beginning to adopt
some of the functions of a global central bank.
Market World is not a utopia. It is a scenario where almost
anything is possible, where innovation and change are king. But as
the new, ever richer world races into the future, there are many
who are left behind. The desperate slums of Rio run directly
alongside villas of the rich. In this scenario the gap between rich
and poor widens, even though more people at the bottom of the
social scale have the possibility of climbing out of poverty. As Peter
Warshall, the biologist, observed at a GBN meeting, this is a world


where wilderness may come to be seen as a Japanese bonsai tree—
beautiful and contained in a tiny pot.
Change Without Progress
The Change Without Progress scenario is the dark side of Market
World: a future of chaos and crisis, in which people see themselves
as the Lone Ranger, fighting the system, and the system falls apart.
It’s a future similar to the world of the movie Blade Runner. Here is a
world with fast-paced economic activity, but in which ruthless self-
interest and corruption run rampant. Social conflict, a widening gap
between those who have made it and those who are permanently
locked out, and environmental decay are all commonplace.
Economic volatility and a disdain for the welfare of average people
color public policy and corporate practice. There is little threat of
big wars; imagine global gang wars instead—small short-lived
incoherent fights born more out of pride and bad temper then
conflicts of real interests.
The principle that “the enemy of my enemy is my friend”
dominates international politics. Instead of rigid alliances, there are
quick-paced, uneasy, tense marriages of convenience. Pakistan
might not be a belligerent principal in the Tibetan War, but
anything that hurts India helps Pakistan, so the Pakistanis regularly
supply China with critical war materials. The war had broken out a
year before, after Beijing nearly exterminated the Tibetan
independence movement and imprisoned the Dalai Lama. India had
entered the war as the purported defender of the Buddhist faith and
the human rights of the Tibetan people. On their way into Tibet,
unfortunately, they had to “temporarily” annex Nepal. Their
bombing raids reduced key Buddhist shrines in Nepal to rubble.
Young Indians lustily cheered the war on; once they controlled the
minerals in the Himalayas, they believed, they could face off against
China. The rest of the world also cheered the war, in a more cynical


sense; if it could rid the world of some of its surplus of unemployed
young people, so much the better.
No one expects the world to be coherent any more. The economy
is a roller-coaster, cycling rapidly through boom and bust—high
inflation, high unemployment, overvalued currencies, high interest
rates, negative interest rates. Every nation muddles through its
reflections of the economic ups and downs. Very few nations are
much wealthier than the rest; all treasuries have been rifled by their
own “first families.” No nation has the power to stabilize the system.
Any attempt to set up multinational efforts is undermined by
nationalistic rivalry and behind-the-scenes gangsterism. The
“winners” devote their efforts to protecting what they have won.
There is no economic accelerator because a larger share of profit
goes to covering risks than to capital investment. Corporate raiders
are the powerful players of this era. Their competition now takes
place on the uneven electronic grid of the global marketplace, in a
thousand different shifting stock exchanges at once. In this
atmosphere, optimistic small-scale investors who “believe in a
company” are punished. Currency volatility makes managers
uncertain about future market conditions. Cautious investment
means slower growth. The world economy sporadically responds to
forward steps in technology, but many of the potentially interesting
technologies wither for lack of an infrastructure to support them. It,
too, is hampered by unpredictable investment. Innovation is a
gambler’s game. The only sure bet is weaponry. Many people make
their living doing electronic spy work. They call themselves “cases,”
after the hero of William Gibson’s Neuromancer, now considered the
most prescient book of its time. The global network is a cyberpunk
world, hacker heaven, driven by hidden forces in a vast electronic
underworld.
Policies in the world of “change without progress” are usually
inadvertent. Quell a riot, build a thousand prisons, cut a tax. Good
intentions occasionally propel a new political party to office in some
Central American or East Asian country. Their efforts somehow lead
to perverse, self-destructive effects. Vicious circles dominate
economic interactions. Every attempt at a solution makes the


problem worse. The resulting incoherence creates a scramble for
change. Speed of adaptability is at a premium and loyalty is a
detriment. The rate of change is itself a driver in runaway markets,
as the world feels more and more frenzied. The framework of
international competition is unconstrained, the rules of the game
shifting constantly and unpredictably. Corporate and national
strategies pay a high price for the flexibility that they need just to
survive. The world wastes its people, its resources, its money, its
time, and worse, its soul.
The EC never did cohere. Did they really think back then that the
Italians would work with the Spanish, or the Germans with the
Dutch, or the British and French with anyone? By now, it’s
considered a lost cause. The governors of the world’s central banks
cannot agree among themselves on the appropriate balance of
monetary policies—tightening or loosening. Japan, meanwhile, has
retreated into near isolation, making products which appeal to the
small, but growing, wealthy class. The United States, like the Great
Britain of a half-century before, lives in a perpetual “nostalgia”
phase. Films of the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, when the United States
controlled the world, are continually rereleased.
There are more wealthy people than there were twenty years ago
—and far, far more of the impoverished. The favelas and barrios are
spreading. We now realize that the city of the future in the 1980s
was Manila. Tondo, the vast trash heap that was home to thousands
of Manila’s most unhappy denizens, was the de facto prototype for
similar shanty towns in every metropolis, housing billions of people.
A few miles up the road from Tondo was Forbes Park, where all one
saw were white walls and armed guards, home of Manila’s rich,
powerful, and privileged. That, too, is a common image of the new
century. There are still a few remnants of the middle class, including
one or two sociologists who give both their profession and their
economic class another generation or two at the most.
Despite the sudden rejection of communism by Eastern Europe,
there was no “socialist surprise” after all in the major Marxist
empires. Reformists were defeated in China and the Soviet Union,
but whirlwinds were let loose in both countries. Frequent ethnic


revolutions are containable only by force. Central power is
maintained, at the price of nearly starving the citizenry, with no end
in sight.
Decadence and the escape from it shape the social mood. The
extremes dominate; the conflicts between the social fundamentalists
and the libertines create the character of the times. A sense of
movement without progress defines the social undercurrent—
cynicism about institutions and pessimism about the future. The
times are ripe for demagoguery and cults. About one third of the
world has hookups for portable, radio-connected telephones which
travel with people and receive calls wherever they go. The phones
were popular until several apocalyptic sects discovered that they
could rig up computers to repeatedly call a number from an offshore
boat and deliver the same message again and again.
Technological accidents are common as now-ancient, poorly
maintained systems fail. Among the worst are the bio-accidents. All
of the Baltic States were evacuated in 2002 to save them from a
sudden man-made plague. Some of the refugees are still living in
quarantine on old Soviet warships. In the meantime, with no
coherent policy to reduce air pollution or save forests, weather
catastrophes are increasingly common. Most of the beaches in
Florida, Georgia, and Louisiana are now fully under water. Other
countries are considering invasions to find arable room for their
expanding populations.
No nation can afford big wars, so (except for occasional acts of
saber-brandishing by Middle Eastern countries) nuclear weapons are
carefully kept under wraps. But there are many small wars, often
started to divert a starving population. They are a popular item on
international news stations. Commentators offer play-by-play
analyses of mountain skirmishes and bombing raids. The Falklands
War and the Iran-Iraq War, it now appears, were the first wars of
the modern era. Dozens of others have followed—along the borders
of the Soviet Union and China, Pakistan and India, Vietnam and
China, and Tibet and China. A corrupt right-wing regime rules
Mexico and is fighting a prolonged dirty war with leftist guerrillas.
The U.S. southern border is a war zone. As millions of Mexican


refugees sought asylum, the United States couldn’t help being
dragged in. Constantly vacillating policy has kept the United States
from improving the situation or getting out of it.
Some people still remember the time, at the beginning of the
1990s, when there was widespread optimism about the world’s
future. Paradoxically, that optimism was one of the reasons for the
current decline. It looked like easy street was on the way; so people
around the world spent instead of investing for the future.
There is one good effect: it’s a great time to be a stand-up
comedian. Anyone who can be sardonic, cynical, and funny finds a
willing audience everywhere in the world.
Why I Am Optimistic About the Future
Each of these scenarios could happen. None of these worlds
represents the sort of utopia which many people had hoped for after
World War II: a utopia in which people’s needs are met, and in
which the largest institutions act appropriately. I simply don’t see
any driving forces in the world which would produce such a future.
However, I also find myself ever more optimistic these days for the
world and for the United States. This is in contrast to my mood
during the 1970s, which was a very pessimistic time. None of these
scenarios is the end of the world. A good life can be found in each of
them.
My vision of the future no longer relies on a world without
troubles and cares. Rather it is a world where the challenges are
realizable. Such a vision is based on a scenario in which the human
imagination, drive, and competence combine to meet the enormous
hurdles of, for example, environmental restoration. In my dealings
with business people I see plenty of imagination, drive, and
competence—and the will to use it.
A great dark shadow has been lifted from all our dreams. With the
new U.S.-U.S.S.R. relationship and the changed situation in the


Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, the likelihood of major nuclear
war is now enormously diminished. We can imagine a world with
many fewer nuclear weapons, none of which would be on the
fragile, hair-trigger alert of the last forty years, where local conflicts
will not threaten to become ultimate catastrophes. Suddenly it
becomes possible to imagine a future where people feel more
inclined to build and plan—for themselves, and for their children. I
believe that this is the hidden driving force of our time—a capacity
to dream of a better tomorrow, confident that tomorrow will arrive.
OceanofPDF.com


REHEARSING THE FUTURE
            Imagine that you are a well-practiced actor in a repertory
theater. One week you come into work and your director hands you
a copy of The Tempest. You learn your part and practice it
thoroughly, preparing for the performance the following month. The
next week, you walk in and the director hands you Rhinoceros, by
Ionesco. A very different play from Shakespeare, but no matter: You
learn those lines and practice that part. The following week, the
director gives you a copy of Eugene O’Neill’s Long Day’s Journey into
Night.
When the night of the performance finally comes, you walk up on
the stage. The stage lights come on, and you are given your first
line. But you don’t know which play you are performing. To find
out, you have to look at the scenery around you. Hopefully, you had
enough sense ahead of time to talk to the stage manager and find
out what each set looks like in detail—so that, by fixing on only one
or two details, you will be able to tell. If there’s a palm tree, it’s the
shipwreck/island setting of The Tempest. A bottle of beer on a café
table suggests Rhinoceros. And a lamp, the kind you might see in a
1920s New England living room, lets you know that you’re in the
O’Neill play.
That’s what using scenarios is like. In the real world, you don’t
know ahead of time which scenario will take place. But you prepare
for all three, and then train yourself to look for one or two small
details so that you can recognize the full play before you’re called
upon to act.
This type of theater is common with many complex technologies.
They call it “simulation.” I witnessed one such specialized flight
simulator in the late 1960s, as a student of aeronautical engineering.
Astronauts were strapped into a flight seat for their space capsule
