# Rehearsing the Future

that could spin in three axes of rotation to simulate chaotic and
possibly fatal wobble. The astronaut had to learn to gain control
over the spin by manually firing guidance thrusters. The astronauts
were experienced test pilots and some felt that such an accident was
too unlikely to waste scarce training time and energy.
But during one of the early Gemini flights, Neil Armstrong found
himself in exactly that unlikely situation. Because he had spent time
practicing that unlikely maneuver, he brought the wild oscillations
under control. The lesson, as I watched that Gemini flight on
television, was not lost on me: even the most unlikely events should
be prepared for if the consequences are great enough.
Using scenarios is rehearsing the future. You run through the
simulated events as if you were already living them. You train
yourself to recognize which drama is unfolding. That helps you
avoid unpleasant surprises, and know how to act.
Thus, the “performance” of a scenario will take you once again to
your original question. But now you approach that question
differently. “All right, now that I’ve considered the future of the real
estate market and interest rates,” you might ask yourself, “should I
buy a house now or continue renting? Should I move to Houston or
stay in New York?”
My wife and I bought our house when interest rates were at their
ten-year low. We had to decide: should we get a fixed- or variable-
rate mortgage? The decision depended entirely on the future of
interest rates. I asked myself, “Is there any scenario in which
interest rates will go much lower during the next five to ten years?”
The answer was no; indeed, there were forces already ready to pull
interest rates back up. Hence a variable-interest rate would be a
disadvantage. Many people bought variable-interest rate mortgages
at that time and regretted it. The value of a scenario for them would
have been twofold: to encourage them to think about the future, and
to encourage them to learn enough about the forces behind interest
rates so they could make a reasonable decision.
The more complex and large a business, the more complex and
large the scope of the scenarios. Thus, scenarios have to be simple,
dramatic, and bold—to cut through the complexity and aim directly


at the heart of an individual decision. Often, the core of the decision
is not that different from buying a house: Should we invest in that
refinery or not? Should we start that enterprise or not? The answer
may not depend on interest rates; it will depend on other factors.
But you consider them in exactly the same way. The role of
scenarios is to arrange the factors so they illuminate the decision,
instead of obscuring it.
To do this, you start by questioning your belief in the inevitability
of more of the same.
The Suspension of Disbelief
At Royal Dutch/Shell, only half of our work was actually building
scenarios. The other half was traveling the globe, presenting the
scenarios to people in chemicals, refining, marketing, exploration,
and production, or in other parts of the business. The heart of the
task had to do with engaging people’s willingness to suspend
disbelief in the futures we offered.
We knew that at least one, and probably more of the scenarios we
had developed would challenge their beliefs. That was the reason
for creating scenarios in the first place. But how could we convince
them to consider the alternative to what they felt in their heart?
One of my first Shell scenarios, for instance, concerned the future of
the Oil Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the cartel which had
dominated oil prices since 1973. Now it was 1982. OPEC’s power
was embedded in the hearts of the directors of the company; they
had been preoccupied with it for nine years.
In 1982, I was working with Ted Newland, one of the first and
most prescient scenario-planners at Shell, and a close colleague of
Pierre Wack’s. We had asked ourselves, “Is there a plausible scenario
under which OPEC’s control over oil prices collapses?” and
discovered that there was such a scenario. With improved energy-
efficiency in many countries and surprisingly large new supplies


from non-OPEC countries, petroleum was no longer so scarce. Ted
made the presentation. He used many slides, mostly graphs and
charts, to show the rise and fall of trends in the industry. Looking
around the room, I could see the managing directors listening
carefully. Emotionally, they had invested a great deal in battling
OPEC, negotiating with OPEC, understanding OPEC, and explaining
OPEC to other Western companies and governments. They were
skeptical of Ted’s entire talk.
Until his last slide—a page taken from a child’s nursery rhyme
book. It showed a giant egg, with human features, cracked on the
ground. Ted read the text aloud to us in his most imposing,
thoughtful, British voice. “Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,” he said.
“Humpty Dumpty had a great fall. All the King’s horses and all the
King’s men couldn’t put Humpty Dumpty back together again.” In
other words, he continued, if their price mechanism shattered, the
OPEC ministers would have no way to regain their former strength.
I can assure you that every manager who heard that presentation
walked out with the image of that silly egg in his mind. It was a
powerful bit of theater. It touched them deeply. Thereafter, in
meetings, they would always talk about the possibility of the fall of
“Humpty Dumpty.”
There is an almost irresistible temptation to choose one scenario
over the other: to say, in effect, “This is the future which we believe
will take place. The other futures are interesting. But they’re
irrelevant. We’re going to follow this scenario.” That’s what Time-
Warner did in announcing that the future lies with integration of
media, with selling books, music, and films together in packages.
Unfortunately, reality does not follow even the best-thought-out
scenario. The point of scenario-planning is to help us suspend our
disbelief in all the futures: to allow us to think that any one of them
might take place. Then we can prepare for what we don’t think is
going to happen.
That’s why scenario-planners avoid single predictions. If we
present several possible futures, our audience would consider plots
which they would not otherwise accept. The “Humpty Dumpty”
Shell scenario included an unthinkable price drop to sixteen dollars


per barrel of oil. The managing directors could consider this because
we also had scenarios for prices of thirty and fifty dollars per barrel.
The executives could say, “Well, it may not be so terrible, because
look at these other possibilities.” If we had told them that there
would only be one outcome and it was bad they would have denied
it. Few people have the perversity to study a future that they
perceive as completely gloomy.
Similarly, many people don’t want to see only the up side. That,
too, is difficult to anticipate. I was surprised at first to find out how
difficult it is to convince people of optimistic scenarios. But up sides
also pose enormous challenges: growth, innovation, and change. In
addition, most people are afraid to feel secure: “Oh, it could never
really turn out that well,” they say, “so why should I even consider
the possibility? It will just make it harder for me to do the dirty,
slogging work I have to do.” People call optimistic scenarios
“unrealistic,” and since it’s a crime in business to be unrealistic, the
scenario is often discarded.
Consider Hollywood’s attitude toward the videocassette recorder.
They saw it as a threat throughout the 1970s and 1980s. They didn’t
see that suddenly there would be enormous new revenues. They
didn’t ask, “What if it doesn’t kill the theater business?” They
considered only the scenario in which the VCR destroyed them.
They could not imagine other scenarios. They fought the VCR hard,
and delayed it successfully, and lost millions of dollars in the
process.
If they had considered other scenarios they might have discovered
that technology follows an “evolution” plot; that it isn’t a “winners
and losers” game. If the VCR won, they might win too.
To help Shell managers overcome their disbelief, we would
literally use simple computer simulations embodying the scenarios
as a means for rehearsal. We would sit in a group, with the personal
computer and a large screen, and role-play the future of oil prices.
One executive would play the Iranians, another the Kuwaitis. Others
would play the oil companies, or oil ministers of industrial
countries. “Now then,” I would say, “what would you do in this
situation? It is the summer of 1990 and the Iraqis invade Kuwait.”


The “Saudi minister” might say, “I will increase production by 25
percent.” An oil company representative might reply, “I’ll buy that
oil, but not at the price you offer today.” By the end of a session,
managers understood the implications of each possible future,
because they had literally rehearsed them.
It’s too bad that such role-playing isn’t done in, say, city
governments or among policymakers. Because they, too, have
unthinkable issues that won’t go away. In the United States, one
such issue is race relations. The success of Asian immigrants is
straining the relationship between blacks and whites in the United
States; so is the perception that the drug war is actually a race war.
An explosion of ethnic and racial war in the United States is an
entirely plausible scenario which no one will talk about, even as
tabloid newspaper headlines scream about Tawana Brawley,
Bensonhurst, Marion Barry, or the Central Park jogger. One
alternative scenario is also taking place: economic success
stimulated by the remarkable diversity of Caribbean, African,
southeast black, Creole, Korean, Vietnamese, South American,
Central American, Mexican, Japanese, Philippine, and Chinese
cultures. That scenario is also ignored because it’s unthinkable. Only
the “Official Future”—a melting-pot society in which everyone
adapts to the upper-middle-class norm—is assumed. Role-playing
each scenario would show exactly why the “Official Future” is
unlikely.
Looking for Warning Signals
At Shell in the early 1980s, when we saw the looming economic
problems in the Soviet Union, the first thing we did was look for
small specific signals that might indicate the change was coming.
For example, any loosening of political control would give the
Communist party a tough public relations problem. How could the
Communists justify their ideological shift from a centrally controlled


economy? We remembered that the Soviet Union had relaxed its
central control once before. In 1920, Lenin’s strict Marxist policies
had provoked massive unrest over food rationing, strikes in major
cities, and at least one mutiny. He announced the New Economic
Policy, a relaxing of restrictions: it allowed small businesses (called
“Nepmen”) to exist, and returned to the old Czarist monetary
system. The NEP lasted seven years, until Joseph Stalin put an end
to it.
We asked ourselves: “Suppose the new leadership now went for
something called ‘the neo-NEP’?” It would be a return to Lenin’s
more mature vision, which had been aborted by that arch-villain
Stalin. We singled out potential leaders of such a new movement,
including Mikhail Gorbachev. We also looked for Russian
economists who might be prime movers in a neo-NEP reform
movement. We found several; one was named Abel Agenbegyan, a
writer for an obscure journal of economics. If Gorbachev came to
power, it would be a signal of change; if Agenbegyan joined the new
government, it would be a sign that the change was serious.
A few years later, Mikhail Gorbachev came to power. In one of his
first speeches, he declared that his new ideas were really in the
spirit of Lenin’s New Economic Policy—not such a radical change
but a “return to Leninism.” In 1985, Gorbachev brought
Agenbegyan to Moscow as his chief economic adviser. Together,
these signs suggested that we could trust the Soviet loosening up.
They meant something because we had taken the trouble to identify
them in advance. We had identified other signs which did not take
place, but we did not need all of them to come true. Three or four
such events were enough, together, to comprise solid evidence.
Any business can use such specific events as warning signs to help
decide which scenario is coming to pass. A book publisher, for
instance, might keep three scenarios in mind for the next fifteen
years. Thereafter, the publisher would be on guard for particular
warning signals:
•    If childhood literacy rates and educational reading scores
suddenly go up, that would suggest the first scenario—a general rise
of interest in reading—might come true. The number of new


bookstores that open and survive for three years would be another
indicator. A third would be the appearance of high-level, serious
books on the shelves of, say, airport bookstores.
•  On the other hand, if the publisher sees a fall in literacy rates and
a rise in picture books or books about television, the second
scenario—a declining public of readers—seems more likely. A
decline in independent bookstores, especially in suburban areas,
would also suggest this scenario was coming to pass.
•  For the third scenario—a fragmented market—literacy rates and
school scores would be irrelevant. The publisher would look instead
at different sectors of bookstore activity: more specialty bookstores
emerging, for example. The publisher would notice the prices of
books: when a market fragments, the prices go up because they lose
economy of scale. Simultaneously, the intensity of service increases
because they have to make more money from a smaller volume.
Thus, an increasing number of books would be an indicator. Finally,
if mass market paperbacks slip a notch in reading levels, that would
be another warning signal.
Warning signals may not have anything directly to do with your
business. In our Smith & Hawken scenarios, one indicator of a
market for garden tools was the market for condominiums. At that
time in the late 1970s, the conventional wisdom predicted a rise in
multiple family dwellings, where people would not garden for
themselves. Perhaps, we thought, Smith & Hawken should plan for a
much smaller audience. But when we saw single-family home
construction take off in the early 1980s, we knew we could ignore
that conventional wisdom.
You always work out the warning signals in advance because
they’re less open to misinterpretation that way. You can’t use your
fears or confidence to influence your judgment about which future
is unfolding. Thus, at Shell, for instance, we looked for the most
specific warning signals possible. In our 1982 study of the stability
of oil prices, we suspected they might go into a spree of seesawing


ups and downs. A period of volatile swings would be hard for an oil
company to deal with. How could we foresee it in advance? We
uncovered one specific technical indicator. In commodity trading,
futures are a way of hedging against price swings. They’re like rain
checks—a guarantee to buy grain, aluminum, copper, or any other
commodity at a particular price later on—even though the price
may have risen or fallen by then. No petroleum futures exchange
existed in 1982. The market organizers would create one only if
they sensed enough brokers who wanted to bet on oil’s volatility. If
we saw a successful attempt to organize a futures market, that
would indicate a future of volatile oil prices. Toward the end of
1983, we saw the first attempts. By 1984–85, a robust futures
market in petroleum was in full swing. Oil prices were headed to
new volatility.
You ignore warning signs at your peril. As the “Global Teenager”
chapter pointed out, American demographers failed to predict the
“echo baby boom”—the massive increase of births in the last ten
years 
among 
women 
aged 
thirty-five 
to 
forty-five. 
The
demographers could have easily avoided the embarrassment (for
them) and expense (for local governments) by asking themselves,
“What factors might indicate a change in the large trend?” They
might have noticed a small emerging industry for in vitro
fertilization in the early 1980s. Its mere existence would suggest
that older women could have babies in greater numbers. If its
popularity soared as those women began to run up against their
biological clocks, that would suggest that more older women would
want to have babies.
Warning signs are also educationally helpful, in the deepest sense.
One uses them to learn sensitivity to change. A good warning signal
in race relations in 1990 was the appointment of a Chinese-
American chancellor of the University of California, along with a
Japanese-American vice chancellor. That means that non-Caucasian
races are being accepted in the establishment.
We are all living with another ominous warning sign right now. In
the mid-1970s, SRI did a study of the greenhouse effect for the
Department of Energy. We couldn’t be certain then whether or not


the buildup in carbon dioxide and other gases would lead to global
warming. One could make a strong case that these pollutants would
produce global cooling instead. But we thought we might be in for a
period of climate change, of such magnitude that it could dwarf
other global problems. After carefully interviewing atmospheric
scientists, we said that one early indicator would be extremes in
local weather conditions around the world: record-breaking high
and low temperatures, droughts, storms, unusually mild or harsh
winters. Ominously, such extremes appeared more and more often
in the late 1980s. We still cannot be certain whether the overall
global climate will become warmer or cooler—but the signs are
clear that a period of drastic climate changes lies ahead.
Creating a Shared Language
Pierre Wack understands how a scenario presentation is a type of
theater. In the early 1980s, after retiring from Shell, he was part of
a team developing a set of scenarios about the future of apartheid
and South Africa for AngloAmerican, the largest South African
company. Clem Sunter, one of Anglo American’s executives, gave a
series of public speeches based on these scenarios, called “high
road” and “low road.” A book of that presentation became a best
seller in South Africa. The book allowed South Africans to see what
would happen if they continued down the path of apartheid. It also
included an alternative scenario that many South Africans had not
considered before—a path in which apartheid could end without the
blacks taking over and driving out the whites.
It is said that De Klerk, the South African president, took these
scenarios very seriously, and that they influenced the release of
Nelson Mandela. Eventually, when people look back on these times
of change, they may consider the names to be the most important
parts of the scenario. The names gave the polarized people of South
Africa a common language for talking about their common future.


The name of any scenario carries a lot of freight: a reference to
“the little boy who cried wolf” or to “Johnny Appleseed”
immediately conveys a complex idea. Try phrasing either of those
concepts in a few words without the name; it’s not easy. Similarly, I
always try to choose the name for each scenario so it condenses a
fully delineated story’s essence into a few words. It gives people a
rich reference point, and that in turn helps them think about a wide
range of meanings. This type of scenario name becomes a critically
important form of shorthand when planners and managers meet in
groups. “This project makes sense in the ‘Next Wave’ scenario,”
someone might say, “but we can’t pursue it under ‘Harder Times.’ ”
One of Shell’s current scenarios is called “the Sustainable
World”—a powerful reference to an increasingly popular set of ideas
about environmentally sustainable growth. As soon as people start
using that name in discussions at Shell, the image comes to life with
all its associations. An image of the world in their grandchildren’s
time pops into their minds. They can’t help but ask themselves what
it really means to be sustainable. The questions that they naturally
ask will lead them to the right issues. A good scenario does exactly
that—it can lead you to ask better questions.
One powerful name for a scenario is “the Official Future.” It
stands for the set of implicit assumptions behind most institutional
policies: that things will work out okay tomorrow once the proper
people get into power and can put their policies into effect. The
“trickle-down theory” was exactly such an Official Future: “By
cutting taxes for high-income groups, the wealth will trickle down
in employment to the poor.” Most Official Futures often turn out to
be mere propaganda; but everybody in an organization subscribes to
them almost unconsciously. “We always try harder at our company,
and thus we’ll eventually beat the opposition.” One of our first tasks
as consultants is to flush out the organization’s version of the
Official Future. Then we often present it as one of a group of
scenarios, so that people can see it for exactly how likely or unlikely
it is. They usually discover that, in laboring under the Official
Future, they have been working toward an impossible or
undesirable goal.


Another exercise in building a scenario from a title is applicable
both to small business owners and managers in large corporations:
“My Worst Nightmare.” Some friends of mine used to own an
excellent bookstore in Palo Alto, California. But they failed to think
about their Worst Nightmare, and when a chain store and a
technical store moved into their vicinity, they didn’t know how to
cope with the changed competition. Nor did they have the time to
find a viable niche or improve their service, time which they would
have had if they had thought about their nightmare in advance.
What will you do if your Worst Nightmare comes true? Often there
are options you don’t consider because your fear paralyzes you. A
scenario forces you to consider it anyway.
There is a difference between a Smith & Hawken situation—a
group of people creating a set of scenarios for themselves and their
own business—versus my role at Royal Dutch/Shell as a member of
a team of planners whose job included bringing many other people
on board our view of the world. In the early days of Smith &
Hawken we had no customers, board of directors, shareholders, or
employees to convince. We were all of those at that stage. But even
the smallest business can change. Paul Hawken’s job as CEO
included literally laying out scenarios of his business’s future and
communicating them to his employees, shareholders, and even
customers. The Smith & Hawken catalogue featured short
comments, written by Paul, about the evolution of the clothing
business and the future of clothing. The goal in all cases is the same:
you and your co-workers, or you and your customers, can make
better decisions by learning about each other’s understanding of the
world.
Arie de Geus, the coordinator of Group Planning at Shell during
most of the 1980s, perhaps best expressed this use of scenarios in
his Harvard Business Review article on “Planning as Learning”:
When people play with [mental models of the world], they are
actually creating a new language among themselves that expresses
the knowledge they have acquired. And here we come to the most
important aspect of institutional learning, whether it be achieved


through teaching or through play as we have defined it: the
institutional learning process is a process of language development.
As the implicit knowledge of each learner becomes explicit, his or
her mental model becomes a building block of the institutional
model. How much and how fast this model changes will depend on
the culture and structure of the organization. Teams that have to
cope with rigid procedures and information systems will learn more
slowly than those with flexible, open communication channels.
Autocratic institutions will learn faster or not at all—the ability of
one or a few leaders being a risky institutional bet.
Did You Do the Right Thing?
When John Gardner describes the art of writing a novel, he is
really describing how to practice—how to develop the talent to write
a novel. Scenario writing works the same way. It takes years of
practice, creating and understanding scenarios repeatedly. Thus, the
most helpful exercise is to go back to old scenarios a year later.
“Well, I missed the thing that was actually going to happen,” you
might say. “What did I not see?” Or, conversely, “What is it that led
me to really see that surprise that nobody else thought about?”
How do you judge whether a scenario was effective? The test is
not whether you got the future right. That is fairly easy if you
consider multiple scenarios. The real test is whether anyone
changed his behavior because he saw the future differently. And,
did he change his behavior in the right direction? Did he do the
right thing?
For example, when we judged our scenario work at Shell, we
were certainly pleased with our anticipation of perestroika. But the
test of our scenarios, the justification for their practice, was the fact
that Shell prospered because of them. They cut costs on the Troll gas
fields. They did not buy oil fields when oil was thirty dollars, when
everyone else did; they bought them after the price fell to fifteen.


Scenarios gave them a huge long-term advantage and allowed them
to think in long-term strategies. They could act with the confidence
that comes from saying, “I have an understanding of how the world
might change, I know how to recognize it when it is changing, and
if it changes, I know what to do.”
An effective scenario almost always changes behavior. For
example, the scenario about race relations in America is of direct
concern to me. I’ve just become a parent. If the scenario of racial
conflict comes to pass in my highly diverse community of Berkeley,
California, it could make public schools into combat zones. On the
other hand, if racial diversity leads to cooperation and awareness,
then I want my kid in the public schools, growing up comfortable
with that diversity. (I want that in any case, but not at the price of
exposing my child to violence.) One warning sign, for me, is crack
babies. I know that my school district will soon face crack babies in
its elementary classrooms. If the school can effectively deal with the
children of addicts, then I feel more confident about its ability to
deal with races. If the system sets up crack kids in conflict with
other children—for the school’s resources, and for the teachers’
attention—then I feel less optimistic about having my kid attend
there.
Many people in the United States are concerned about education
and so we are now focusing our time and attention on schools:
Should we pay teachers more? Should we reform the curriculum
again? Should we add computers? But the problems of education lie
less with schools and more with communities, families, and our way
of life. So we will put almost all of the resulting effort in the wrong
arena. A scenario process would look at the student in the context of
the significant questions. Why are today’s students performing
worse than the previous students? What must we change to have
today’s students improve more? One would research the differences
in performance, and no doubt find social factors as part of the
reason: neighborhoods, families, and other factors that motivate
people. This is an old realization, but politics in America is not
supposed to invade the arena of the family—fortunately. So a
scenario might look at what would happen if those policies that


could be changed were changed: welfare policies, tax policies, and
housing policies could all be rewritten with a focus on making
communities more cohesive and supportive.
The leverage available in those policies is much lower, however.
It takes time to reshape a community. Thus, a policymaker might
emerge from the scenario process with a more realistic time frame.
Education in America is not a five-year problem. It took us twenty-
five years to destroy education, and it will take twenty-five years to
rebuild it. I have discussed this with policymakers in Washington
and it is not something they want to look at. They have a
Department of Education whose function is to look at schools—not
at the community. Moreover, announcing a twenty-five-year
solution is not politically realistic. But it may be the only solution
available.
Scenarios can open up your mind to policies you might not
otherwise consider. One reason that the “drug war” is so persuasive
in America is that most people see only two possible courses: Either
a crackdown on supply, which is expensive, often tragic for
individuals, and actually increases the drug supply (as noted
earlier). Or legalization, which sends a message of social hypocrisy
and impotence: “We don’t believe in a society with drugs, but we
can’t do anything about it, so we’ll change our values: they’ll be
acceptable from now on.” But there is a third scenario, suggested in
1989 in the Economist magazine. What if the United States passed a
law creating a new legal category called “unacceptable practices”?
Unacceptable practices would be those things which the majority
of people in a community or nation would like to ban, stop, and
prevent—but cannot do by legal means, at least not with any
effective enforcement. Right now in America, this might include
such 
things 
as 
alcohol, 
tobacco, 
marijuana, 
cocaine, 
and
pornography. These would be treated differently from murder and
robbery; the practitioner would be regarded as someone who was
doing something to him or herself. Society’s problems would be the
social effects: the crime after a drink, the poor performance on the
job, the added danger to others. Society would neither officially
condone these things nor officially say that practitioners were


criminal. Instead, the government would define strategies for
minimizing use. One strategy might be making criminal penalties far
more severe if an unacceptable practice were involved: a train
engineer who took cocaine and then plowed his locomotive into a
car, for instance, would be severely punished.
The United States has such a strategy for alcohol already. It
includes severe drunk driving penalties, restrictions for minors,
limits to the availability of alcohol (it is sold only during certain
hours, or in certain stores), and general availability of Alcoholics
Anonymous. People accept those limits. The most we could imagine
adding is a substantial increase in taxes on alcohol to diminish its
use. We have an increasingly effective strategy on tobacco, making
it increasingly awkward and socially unpleasant for people to
smoke. (The change about alcohol is slower, probably because
there’s more social hypocrisy involved.)
What is the right decision? It varies from case to case, but after
doing scenarios for twenty years, I believe there is one common
element to all correct decisions. They include a consideration of the
bigger picture. Each of us should have a personal stake in the
quality of the global environment, in the growth of the global
economy, and in the increasing quality of education everywhere.
Our fates are interconnected. People have had a very hard time
grasping these connections because for most of human civilization,
the connection was not as important. A community might
occasionally be affected by war or invasion, but most of the time its
life was isolated and complete in itself. Today the international
economic relationships, our impact on the natural environment and
the globe-spanning technologies, have made a tangible difference in
that old attitude. On the most mundane level, a tiny business such
as Smith & Hawken has its fate coupled to the values of the Thai
currency, the yen, the pound sterling. On the loftiest level, our
fulfillment on earth depends literally, as never before, on allowing
the possibility of fulfillment for individuals everywhere. Scenarios
help us perceive the nature of these interconnections.
OceanofPDF.com


EPILOGUE:
TO MY NEWBORN SON
October 1990
Dear Benjamin,
Your birth comes at a time of perpetual novelty. Your future will
be filled with ample challenges and inspiring goals; it will be a good
future, a future of good people. I am confident of this, deeply
confident, despite the fact that we do not live in a time of vision—
no dream of a better world to come, and no image in my mind of
dynamic new world orders or transcendent technologies. The future
will not be filled with the fulfillment of promises and dreams, but
with something better: surprises.
When I began my career as a futurist I believed a free society
required promises and dreams—not just by experts, but by
everyone. How could we, the people of a society, choose wisely if
we did not know where we were headed? But now I see uncertainty
as the necessary handmaiden of freedom. For freedom to have
meaning, our choices must have consequences. If we could always
be sure that everything would turn out well, then what we think
and do would not matter much. We must be able to get it wrong.
Instead of being confident in our plans, we can be confident in
ourselves. What does it mean to be confident in yourself? In part it
means believing in your own ability to take a long view and act
accordingly. It means knowing that you are prepared for anything—
that you have maneuvering room no matter what happens, that you
can make meaningful choices and will not have to be a complete
prisoner of circumstances.
In the increasingly crowded world you’ll live in, having the scope
to make meaningful choices will depend on other people. You won’t
be able to escape to a frontier; there aren’t any left. Besides yourself,
