# Epilogue: To My Newborn Son

you will need to have confidence in others—in your mother and me,
and others you care about personally in your life—but also in the
general population. I hope you will learn to see people for what they
are, without illusion; but that will not mean giving up on them.
You can confidently presume that more and more people in the
world will act with the long view; not everyone, but enough to
preserve and enhance life. I think the world has changed to make
this so. More and more people, whether or not they think they are
in control of their lives, feel as if their actions have more
consequences. They feel more entwined with the global community.
They thus are learning to look at the future of the world, and at
each other. People who engage in this process become less
dangerous; they begin to take everyone’s interest to heart.
Twenty years ago I would not have written these hopeful
sentiments to you. Indeed, I was so pessimistic about the future that
I did not want to be a father at all. I could not imagine bringing a
child into a world like this. I was worried about nuclear death,
about environmental devastation, about dozens of other threats, and
about the self-centered ignorance that (I thought) kept people from
solving these problems.
Now I admit that there are crack addicts on the streets, crumbling
schools, and other problems so grave that they would have once
made me give up hope. Some of these problems will be worse by the
time you come of age. But I have confidence in democracy; I believe
individuals make good choices in the end.
I was convinced, in part, by the “macro” events of the last few
years before your birth—the end of the Cold War, for instance. I saw
powerful people admit that they had been wrong, and overcome the
boundaries of their own egotism and eminence. When I was in
England in the mid-1980s, I heard people tell Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher about environmental protection and global
warming. Instead of pooh-poohing or stonewalling them she said, in
effect, “My God, you’re right; we really ought to do something.” It
surprised me, at first, that governments and companies were capable
of learning to look ahead. But after a while I came to see it as


natural; their leaders knew that paying attention to the long run,
instead of narrow self-interest, had to serve them best.
People in private life know that too. I can think of many examples
to tell you about, but I’ll only choose one for now. Several years ago
I visited my uncle in Hungary, where I was born and where my
family came from. My visit took place during the first signals of the
bloodless upheaval that would bring democracy to the Iron Curtain
countries. In fact, I was there officially for Royal Dutch/Shell, to
find out what was going on. My uncle was the business manager of
the biggest newspaper in Hungary, very much the puppet newspaper
of the State. And yet he also had a foot in the new world. Hungary
was the first socialist country to try to transform itself into
capitalism; the Hungarians’ efforts went back almost twenty years.
Their example was therefore studied very closely by other
Communist countries which wanted to change their economies,
including Gorbachev’s Soviet Union. During this transitional time in
the mid-1980s, my uncle was one of many Hungarians who knew
what they were doing was very important. He was not a pioneer, a
leader, or a public figure himself; but he did his part in helping the
shift take place smoothly and compassionately. For instance, he
published a weekly magazine called World Economy—a Hungarian
version of The Economist—to help inform his isolated countrymen
about how the rest of the world worked. He wanted to spread
information because he knew it would be important. He was
thinking ahead.
As you grow up, you will use many tools for thinking ahead. They
will include scenario planning, and probably computer simulations
of possible futures, that you will “visit” through virtual reality-style
installations. But the most important tool for taking the long view is
a quality of mind. Among my friends in Shell, it is expected that the
people who get to the top—besides being realistic, analytic, and
imaginative—will have a “good helicopter” in their heads. This
means the ability to see the big picture and zoom down to focus on
the key details simultaneously.
I can readily believe that you and your peers—people born, as
you were, in the last two decades of the twentieth century—will be


better equipped to have such helicopters. With its speed of change
and uncertainty, the world will train you to have them. I see the
difference in kids now; they’re more sophisticated about the world,
steeped in its complexities, with more sense of their own potencies.
The games I played as a youngster were like “Monopoly”—we
followed a never-ending path around the board until somebody
won. In the games you’ll play, like (for instance) the “Carmen
Sandiego” games, the board itself changes depending on what the
players do. Regular exposure to such games, to cable news
networks, to travel, and to new types of contact with other people
will give you the intimate closeness to change that you need to
understand it, and the words to describe what you see.
Where will the challenges you face and the opportunities you
have come from? Three major forces will form the context of your
life. How you and your generation respond to these challenges and
opportunities will determine what kind of future your children will
have.
The economic and political systems of the world are ever more
intertwined at a global level. There is the possibility of a planetary
society of enormous abundance—a truly productive, open, and free
world. But the process of creating that global economy poses many
challenges. The world needs a framework of new international
institutions—a 
new 
global 
commons—to 
coordinate 
people
worldwide and help resolve conflicts over resources like oil and
territory, or the impact of pollution on a country’s neighbors. The
rich and the free need to assure the poor and repressed that they,
too, can have a realistic sense of hope for the future—that the gulf
between the top and the bottom does not widen so much that we
who are well off find ourselves living at the expense of a desperate
and angry mass.
Not only is the population of the earth growing, but its
remarkable diversity will be an intimate part of your life—as it was
not a part of mine. Today, I have Thai, Turkish, or Mexican
restaurants on my street. In your world, Thais, Turks, and Mexicans
will be your neighbors. As an American, you may still be set apart—
but not as I and my peers were; not in the same ways. Americans


will be one of many nationalities, meeting more or less as equals.
You will probably spend time in cities like San Francisco, London,
and Bombay—sources of new ideas, invention, and tastes, because
the new cultures will intersect there.
Inevitably, there will be conflicts. But in the context of a genuine
appreciation for the virtues of diversity, those conflicts do not have
to be duels to the death. They will, however, pose enormous
demands upon you and your world for mutual understanding. The
war in the Middle East going on right now, for instance, is in part a
deep mutual misreading between Islam and the Christian world. The
Islamic tradition includes the ritualistic exchange of hostages to
prevent war. In the desert, tribal chiefs used to exchange members
to prevent one group from attacking another. But in the West, we
think of hostages as “kidnap victims”—a method of provoking, not
preventing, war. Probably neither George Bush nor Saddam Hussein
fully realizes that they mean two different things when they talk
about “hostage-taking.” Will people see those sorts of differences in
your world? And will they be able to find words to clarify and
overcome the misunderstandings?
One of the main sources of perpetual novelty is new knowledge,
both in science and technology. You will have a great deal of
learning to do. The new technologies of information, molecular
engineering, and biology will make possible increasing wealth for
more 
people 
and 
an 
increasing 
array 
of 
pleasures 
and
entertainments. However, that same technological progress comes
with a very high environmental price tag—perhaps even an
unsustainably high price. We need to find ways for our economy to
progress, for people to feel a sense of abundance and hope without
destroying the viability of the earth’s ecosystem. Furthermore, we
need to develop the maturity to enjoy the pleasures made possible
by the advance of knowledge without becoming imprisoned in a
mediated fantasy world, cut off from the fabric of human intimacy
and mutual responsibility. You may not choose a career in the new
science and technology, but you will not be able to escape their
impact on your life. They will be an overwhelming presence in your
world, as they move in from the fringes of my world.


You are not just arriving into a world, but into a life entwined
with mine, and with your mother’s. I believe that both Cathleen and
I have long lives ahead of us. Maybe we will be more than father
and son; maybe we will be friends—most likely not at first, but
maybe eventually. Now, at the time of your birth, I am forty-four
years old. But when you are 100, I’ll be only 144. Maybe the type of
family that you are creating with us is a new type of community
nexus; Cathleen and I talk about it. Given the state of schools right
now, and the way technology is changing, the family may be the
center of your learning, not public education.
And it will be mutual learning. Already, you are forcing me to
confront the world in a way I wouldn’t otherwise. I can’t run away
from the collapse of schools, the decay of roads (or of governments),
or violence on the streets; I can’t be self-centered in the way I was
before. Nor can I gather you and your mother up, as I might have
done thirty years ago, in a little self-contained unit and try to
protect us against all outsiders. Our solution, instead, has been to
involve ourselves in communities—here in our town, and also across
the world. It took me, personally, ten years to make the transition. I
spent most of the 1970s doing it. You will grow up in the
community I created, but of course you will have to create your
own, in a form I could only guess at now. That will be one of your
challenges.
The world is changing just as fast for me as it is for you. We’re on
the same voyage, Benjamin—together. With love and hope for the
future,
Your
father,
Peter
OceanofPDF.com


AFTERWORD: THE VALUE OF A STRATEGIC
CONVERSATION
                       Corporate managers are often caught by surprise.
Corporate policies are often undone by unexpected changes in the
environment—by sudden rises or drops in the price of a raw
material, by a competitor’s technological breakthrough, or perhaps
by a change in the regulations that set the boundaries of the
company’s “playing field.” Being blindsided, managers often then
make decisions that, in the end, exacerbate the original problem. “If
we had only known what was going on,” the responsible managers
eventually say, “we could have avoided this crisis.”
But there is often a profoundly depressing moment, late in the
game, when the responsible managers realize that they did know
what was going on. Or, at least, they had access to the necessary
information. Somewhere within the corporation, there was a
perceptive executive (often more than one individual) who
understood the nature of the changes facing the company. But that
understanding never broke through to the awareness of the people
with the power to act.
Perhaps the understanding represented a view that dissented from
the conventional wisdom of the firm, and the corporate culture
subtly punished people for trying to express such views. Perhaps the
prophets within the firm were disregarded because they were new:
“They haven’t been around long enough to see things as we do.” Or
perhaps they came from a low-status division or function: “The R&D
people always talk about lost opportunities, but they don’t know
what’s going on.”
Or, most tragically of all, perhaps strategy—the setting of
priorities 
for 
the 
company’s 
long-term 
development—was
considered the province of specialists: senior managers and selected
