# Afterword: The Value of a Strategic Conversation

staff people who rarely communicate the strategic concerns and
questions to people throughout the organization. Therefore, at
various levels, different people understood different aspects of the
company’s environment, but never had a chance to talk about them,
and thus to put the pieces of the puzzle together. Because the story
was never fully formed, it never percolated to the specialists and
decision-makers who were responsible for the “strategy.” Is it any
wonder that the resulting strategy was narrow, and shockingly
uninformed?
Examples of organizations that have missed opportunities in this
manner are legion. IBM’s failure to anticipate and move with the
potential of distributed computer processing (brought about by the
personal computer) is a classic case of this. (It was particularly
poignant because IBM did such a good job of anticipating and riding
the first personal computer wave.) Another example is Apple
Computer’s refusal to license its operating system to other
manufacturers—while VHS and Betamax videotape formats were
staring them in the face. (VHS, as a widely licensed standard,
trounced Sony’s Betamax format.) The global auto industry regularly
endures episodes in which group-think leads to a dramatic shift
among winners and losers. Recently, for example, while nearly
every auto manufacturer was focusing on providing high-mileage,
low-emission vehicles, the customer base began abruptly buying
sport utility vehicles and light trucks. Honda, which had done
remarkably well in an earlier era, was suddenly caught off guard
with no suitable vehicles for that market.
There are also, however, a legion of companies that have thrived
on change. Motorola, Hewlett-Packard, and Rubbermaid, for
example, are known for their resilience in change after change, as
one business environment follows another. Yet the cultures of such
companies are strangely calm. Managers there are continually
involved in a collective inquiry into the deep structure of their
business and how it is changing. They are hunting for new
information, and they continually bring questions of possibility
—“What if an opportunity emerged?” “What if an unexpected crisis


took place?”—before the attention of people throughout the
company.
In short, people at resilient companies continually hold strategic
conversations about the future.
Informal, Explicit, Relevant … and Fun
A strategic conversation is a carefully thought-out but loosely
facilitated series of in-depth conversations for the key decision-
makers throughout an organization. Strategic conversations don’t
exist in addition to existing planning efforts; they are effective ways
of framing the planning efforts that already take place, to further
illuminate the decisions that are already being made.
Perhaps most significant of all, a strategic conversation is informal
—or, more precisely, it combines formal and informal elements. To
understand the importance of this point, consider the formal
business planning process that most people think of when they hear
about an organization’s “strategy.” This process often involves
carefully scripted presentations, scheduled according to a structured
cycle, in which senior managers pronounce judgments on strategic
plans. But by the time proposals get to the final stage of
presentation, they have almost always gone through an elaborate,
but unacknowledged, informal process of development and testing to
assure that they will pass this hurdle. Once proposals reach that
stage, there’s no opportunity for engagement.
Meanwhile, informal conversations take place everywhere—in the
“invisible” strategy sessions of the elevator ride, the lunch room, or
the car pool. In these “non-threatening” locales, ideas are developed
and tested, and these ideas ultimately become part of the formal
proposals or strategic plan.
Unfortunately, since these informal conversations are almost
entirely organized on an ad hoc basis, they tend to produce ad hoc
answers that reinforce the conventional wisdom. People make no


concerted effort to bring themselves in contact, regularly and
informally, with others who look at things differently, or who can
offer a perspective and knowledge that they lack.
However, when an informal set of conversations is established in
conjunction with a formal planning process, learning is encouraged.
People know they are free to raise and debate questions without
being held to account for the positions they take. Particularly when
scenarios are part of the conversation, they can “try on” different
futures and attitudes to see how they feel about them. Executives
begin to look at their own companies, see the fundamental
conditions of their success, and ask, “What if these were to change?”
How will they be stressed to evolve next, they wonder, and could
they anticipate that evolution before they feel the stress? The
process of considering scenarios together allows these corporate
leaders to question—and change—their old mental models. As a
result, the decision-makers have more confidence. They can move
ahead, knowing that they have already been forced to talk at length,
and muse together, about both the upside and the downside of their
strategy. They are much less likely to get trapped by unexpected
events.
This broadening is important because change in organizations is
inevitably the prerogative of groups, and not individuals. Much
writing about business creates the illusion of the CEO as a “general,”
who commands his (or, in all-too-rare cases, her) loyal troops. Those
troops, in turn, are supposed to transform themselves in whatever
direction the CEO points. In real life, CEOs of large organizations
are well aware that groups of people don’t work that way. Getting a
group to develop the capacity to change requires a high degree of
shared worldview, and a mutual commitment to change. The
magnitude of the commitment is critical; without it, no one can
hope to divert, or even break the momentum of, a large, complex
system like a big company.
Moreover, the process is a great deal more fun for all involved
than the standard business planning process. I mean this in the best
sense of the word “fun”—the conversations are highly enjoyable
experiences that engage the creativity of everyone in the room. As


former Shell planning coordinator (and learning theorist) Arie de
Geus has pointed out, fun—particularly in an organizational context
—is a necessary prerequisite for learning, particularly for the type of
strategic learning that is the source of an organization’s competitive
advantage.
The Global Strategic Environment
Why, then, don’t most organizations get involved in strategic
conversations? There are two reasons. First, they’re unfamiliar.
Managers are not accustomed to holding informal conversations that
explicitly feed into formal processes, even if conversations are
taking place all the time.
Second, managers don’t think change is needed. Even in the
1990s, managers tend to consider only a narrow range of strategic
options and ramifications. “Here are the costs of the new capital
project,” someone might say, “and the return on investment”—and
based on those two statements, the decision will be made to proceed
with or abandon the project. There is little consideration given to
how successful the project might be in a wide range of changing
circumstances.
Perhaps that approach worked well when decisions were
relatively small or events were relatively predictable. But in the
foreseeable future, corporate managers will be confronted by
situations that require large, difficult decisions. Once upon a time, a
Pacific Gas & Electric manager might have had to decide: “Should
the next power plant be based on oil or gas production?” Today, the
PG&E manager would be part of a team deciding: “Are we going to
get out of the electric-generating business entirely and just become
distributors of power? Should we sell all our existing plants in
America? Should we build plants in Indonesia instead?”
The ordinary planning process does not prepare people well for
decisions like these. And such decisions are replicated in industry


after industry. Book publishers must now consider whether they
should remake their production processes, and how they should
cope with the increasing (but unpredictable) evolution of the online
information environment. Chemical and mining companies must
decide if their futures exist as commodity producers, as specialty
chemical and drug producers, or as both, and they must seek the
opportunities that come from the dematerialization (the increasing
efficiency with shrinking material) of the industrial world.
Or consider the women’s clothing industry. This is a particularly
good example because its managers are acclimated to change—or
think they are. They know how to respond to abrupt demand for
new colors or shifting hemlines. But now, in their business, the
nature of change is changing. New methods of manufacturing make
it possible to manufacture clothing almost anywhere, on a small
scale with very high quality. New shopping malls have provided an
oversupply of look-alike stores. And women, whose leisure time has
decreased sharply in recent decades, spend less time (and money)
shopping for new clothes. (For the last several years, women’s
apparel sales have fallen about 3 percent per year.) Certainly, some
observers and fashion writers pointed out these possible changes as
early as 1987, while they were still nascent, but the industry largely
failed to prepare, in part because industry leaders assumed that the
“new simplicity” in women’s clothing was just another fad that
would last a few seasons and fade.
But it didn’t fade. For it, and the other fashion industry crises, are
the kinds of discontinuities that require strategic thinking and
conversation. They are not like hemline and color shifts. They
cannot be dealt with in the traditional business-as-usual way.
Instability is the inevitable reality for every business in the near
future. It is being driven in part by increasing knowledge, in the
form of science and technology; by the ability to change more and
more of the human condition by design; and by the increasing use of
global-scale media (such as Cable News Network) by people around
the world. CEOs and senior executives must ask themselves: Do the
large-scale changes that we see (in our organizations and outside
them) represent a one-time set of phenomena? Will the turbulent


rapids of change clear out into a smooth, rapidly flowing stream of
progressive stability, as the futurist Herman Kahn suggested? Or, as
management writer Peter Vaili remarks, are we heading into an
environment of “permanent white water?” And if so, can we build
organizational forms that help us navigate through continual
change?
OceanofPDF.com


USER’S GUIDE: HOW TO HOLD A STRATEGIC
CONVERSATION
                        It might seem as if anyone could hold strategic
conversations immediately, without any further preparation, simply
by scheduling time for them. They will be much more fruitful,
however, if they are built around the scenario method, which
systematically raises people’s understandings of their environment
and of each other. The scenario method is designed to produce the
kind of mutual understanding that allows people to act toward
common ends.
Here, then, is a set of precepts for designing a strategic
conversation process, based in part on the scenario methods
described in this book. As with any “recipe” for managers, this
should serve as only a rough guide. Every organization is different,
and every manager will want to construct strategic conversations to
meet the needs and size of that organization. A key here is to
recognize that it is not always necessary to add new dimensions to
the formal planning processes already underway in the company.
Often it is a matter of using the ones that already exist far more
effectively, to build them into a conversational mode.
1. Create a Hospitable Climate
Start by doing what you can to make your organizational culture
welcome diverse points of view and lively discussion. You should
state, up front, that the group is open to new information. No one
should be penalized for raising questions or ideas. In meetings,
