# User’s Guide: How to Hold a Strategic Conversation

allow fierce give and take, but make sure that there is time to
consider every point people make, no matter how strong the knee-
jerk response may be to “shoot down anything that isn’t mine.”
Motorola is a good example of a hospitable climate for strategic
conversations. Motorola executives know how to debate with each
other in an intense, highly coherent, well-focused, and impersonal
fashion. People can have furious debates and still walk out of the
conference room as friends and collaborators. Senior managers
encourage this discussion style and teach it to their subordinates.
There is also a formal mechanism called the “minority report”:
anyone in the company can file a report on any technical issue, and
the chairman will respond. Minority reports have led to several
important corporate successes over the years, which makes people
realize that divergent views are not only tolerated but welcomed.
This style is not a function of Motorola’s industry. Indeed, one of
Motorola’s key competitors has a similar attitude toward change and
self-renewal. But this competitor’s culture rewards rapid consensus;
people see conflict as personal or political, and thus to be avoided.
This organization has far more difficulty adopting strategic
conversation; people simply take the conversation too personally.
2. Establish an Initial Group Including Key Decision Makers
and Outsiders
The group should include most of the key decision makers, as well
as selected “experts” and others who have valuable perspectives.
The senior decision makers may not go out and conduct scenario
research themselves, but their presence at the conversations is vital.
They must live through the scenarios, experience the forces that
have created them, and consider, in depth, how their own options
might be affected by them.
Other members of the group should be deliberately sought from a
variety of backgrounds, including (if possible) finance, science


and/or technology, the humanities, and basic “common-sense
wisdom.” All these views blended together will probably produce a
far more insightful environmental picture than one that is
aggressively homogenous.
In large companies, there are often several sets of strategic
conversations going on at once. Royal Dutch/Shell has established a
set of “business panels”—groups of the most senior executives,
organized around large-scale issues facing the company. One panel
considers energy; another, technology; a third, the environment.
Panel meetings offer an opportunity for issues to be presented,
discussed, and debated, without any immediate agenda other than
the shared interest in the subject and the sense that it might be
relevant soon.
A strategic conversation might involve as few as fifteen or as
many as thirty people. Occasionally I’ve seen fifty or more people
take part, but in those cases most of the participants are spectators.
3. Include Outside Information and Outside People
I believe strongly in the role of outsiders. At Global Business
Network, my own company, we make a point of bringing in people
from the outside. A purely internal conversation will rarely be able
to achieve breakthrough thinking—in fact, I can’t think of any
example of one that has.
You also need to expand the range of information you take in.
Many organizations limit the range of information that they pull in
from the outside. This is a survival strategy: It simplifies a
confusing, ambiguous, and uncertain world. But it also leads to a
narrowly conceived perception of the world, based on a
homogenous internal mental environment. That is why it is vital to
keep abreast of unlikely and even “irrelevant” information, under
the guidelines given on this page–this page of this book.


Recently, I participated in a large-scale strategic conversation, at
Xerox, on the future of white-collar work. The scenarios we
considered were, frankly, very depressing. White-collar work would
be like blue-collar work—full of layoffs and stresses, subject to an
uncertain economy. We couldn’t see any plausible alternatives, or
any enthusiastic future for Xerox, until we turned to two outside
sources that challenged our thinking. The first was a book: The End
of Work by Jeremy Rifkin. Rifkin suggested that people may
redefine their values and respond, through social and political
change, to this stress. The other source was economist Paul Roemer,
of the University of California at Berkeley, whom we invited into
some of the conversations. He convinced us that there was a
plausible scenario, in which changes in technology will drive
economic growth after a difficult period of transition. Once we saw
this one possible future, we were able to talk about Xerox’s desired
role, and capabilities, in a way that will be important in any future.
4. Look Ahead Far in Advance of Decisions
An important characteristic of strategic conversations is their
timing. It takes time for an organization to absorb fundamental new
ways of looking at the world. Introducing new perspectives at the
moment of decision, when an organization is confronted with the
need to act, will inevitably be inadequate. The need to act
overwhelms any willingness people have to learn. Thus, well-
designed strategic conversations occur long before the moment of
decision. They are not oriented to crises, but to the ongoing affairs
of the enterprise.
For example, Pacific Gas & Electric began to use scenarios in the
late 1980s, after having struggled with serious crises (including
expensive write-offs associated with the excessive construction costs
of the Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant). Those scenario exercises
helped senior leaders develop new policies and recover financial


stability. But the strategic conversation has continued into more
stable times. The current CEO, Stanley Skinner, recently said,
“There’s nothing immediately on our plate that worries me. But this
absence of worry—that worries me.”
In most companies, executives know months or even years in
advance about most of the significant decisions coming up: a new
distribution system, a major capital investment, a product
introduction. Yet in startlingly few cases do they make an effort to
learn and consider the ramifications of that decision in advance. A
strategic conversation can instill a learning orientation within the
company, so that the ramifications of decisions are considered as
early as possible. Alternatives take shape in managers’ minds long
before the appearance of short-term factors that make reflection
more difficult.
A typical strategic conversation might take place over three to
nine months, with sessions every few weeks or so for a half day at a
time. These informal conversations can be structured—that is, they
can have deliberate schedules, agendas, and lists of participants—
but they do not necessarily fit the formal planning schedule. They
can include ad-hoc meetings, called to discuss a particular issue that
is pending; or they can include regular Friday afternoon “work
sessions” (as opposed to “bull sessions”), in which the topics may
range widely but the concerns remain fixed on the key decisions
that must be made. The only requirement is a basic core of members
that remains the same, so that the group can build upon its
continued experience.
5. Begin by Looking at the Present and Past
Before you can look ahead through scenarios, you need to
understand your organization as it has acted in the past, and your
environment as it exists in the present. Start by asking, “Where are
we now?”


For example, if you were an executive in a women’s fashion
business, wanting to build conversations that would help you look
at the new economic dynamics of your industry, you might start by
looking at what has happened in the past. Talk at some length about
the ways you have traditionally dealt with change. How have you
responded to trends in fashions, hemlines, and materials? What
changes have you dealt with effectively, and which have taken you
by surprise?
Then take a look at the trends going on around you. In women’s
fashion, these might have to do with changes in the nature of retail
and shopping patterns, in the role of women and the workplace, and
in economics.
Talk informally about these matters, ask each other questions,
casually elicit opinions about what is important. You will find
yourself saying, “We really ought to learn more about such-and-
such.” As a result, you might form a working group to look at the
nature of the retail system, another to look at women and the
workplace, and another to look at the future of household income.
6. Conduct Preliminary Scenario Work in Smaller Groups
A large meeting involving all the key players is the best way of
starting—and continuing—a strategic conversation. But subgroups
of that meeting are the most effective way to study individual issues
in depth. Each subgroup, in effect, will have its own strategic
conversation, focused and framed by a small scenario effort that
might last a few weeks, with one or two meetings per week. These
smaller conversations are particularly effective because the scenario
process feeds both diversity and consensus. At some stages, people
diverge, offering widely different points of view and information.
And then, people converge, fitting those different views into
common story lines.


Each subgroup might emerge with two or three specific scenarios
to present to the full strategic conversation team. Because every
member of the team has been a part of a subgroup, each will be
eager to see the other subgroups’ reports. In our hypothetical
women’s fashion business, those on the retailing team will want to
see how those forces studied were viewed by the women’s future
team, or whether the economy team saw something that they
missed. Since the scenarios are all couched around real concerns,
the discussions that follow these presentations are heated, vital, and
expressive, and they gradually coalesce into a full set of scenarios
for the larger group.
7. Playing Out the Conversation
By now, several months have gone by. You know your present
and your past, and you have scenarios for your future. So what?
Now you can ask, “What are we going to do as an organization?”
You are no longer trapped in the paradigms of conventional
wisdom. You can more easily distinguish evanescent trends from
deeper structural changes, because your conversations have forced
you to question each other about the distinction. The workers in our
fashion company will no longer be prone to say, “Well, this is a
fashion-driven industry. There are always trends, and we don’t need
to do anything about them.”
Now you might want to structure a few workshops in different
parts of the company, to spread the message to those who did not
participate in the strategic conversation.
You raise some questions. Should we think about opening our
own retail chain? Or getting out of the retail business? Should we be
looking at mail order? Moving up market? Or down market? You
might “wind-tunnel” each of these options, testing them against
each of the scenarios you’ve developed. “Would mail order work as
a strategy in Turmoil World? How about in Fast-Tech Future?”


Various hypotheses will be raised—not answers. Now you’ve got
some real questions that merit further work. Probably you form new
working groups around some of these options. One group looks at
dropping out of the retail business, while another looks at changing
the focus on the kind of women you’re trying to reach as apparel
customers.
After a month, the new subgroups come back and say, “Here’s
what it would cost to close the retail operation, and open the mail
order operation.” Or, “Here’s what would be involved in changing
the market focus.”
And you are ready to continue another round of strategic
conversation.
8. Living in a Permanent Strategic Conversation
You may have gotten the idea, by now, that the strategic
conversation never ends. It just moves into different venues. It
becomes the model for discourse in the company.
Along the way, other habits change. People start reading the
newspapers and the trade press differently. “I saw this article in
Women’s Wear Daily,” they might say, “and boy, did that fit what we
were studying when we looked at the changing role of women.”
They start passing around articles. The scenarios influence the
informal conversations that take place in the lunchroom or car pool.
And that informal, unstructured material becomes part of the
context of the more established conversations as well.
Individual observations are now data for group consideration.
Somebody comes back and says, “I just saw for the first time the
Levi’s computer system for custom-manufacturing jeans.” They start
putting their experiences into the framework of their collaborative
dialogue. No longer do you hear people complain, “Gee, I wanted to
talk about my concerns at the meeting, but I didn’t think anybody
else would listen.”


Now they’re ready to make serious decisions. They feel relatively
confident about them, because they are continuing to digest a wide
range of data and collaboratively make sense of it. They know that
outlying views will be accepted. In a sense, in their conversation,
they’ve already tested their decisions against experience, as if the
scenarios had already taken place. (Indeed, the conversations are a
kind of modeling process for their decision making.)
The Question of Identity: Evading the “Official Future”
One issue that will come up, inevitably, in any strategic
conversation, is the question of the organization’s identity. This
issue, though it may seem abstract at first, lies at the heart of the
resistance people may feel to new ideas.
New strategy always implies change, and the potential of new
strategy is often threatening to the existing success formula.
Managers, like all human beings, are attached to their self-images,
which they see as the basis of their success. Any change of direction
or strategy signifies the desire to turn away not just from the
practices, but from the core of identity that made the organization
successful in the past. That identity is the core business idea that
propels an organization forward. A central part of the strategic
conversation is first articulating the business idea and then testing it
against the evolving realities of the business, especially its business
environment. The challenge to the identity is a challenge to the core
business 
idea. 
To 
fully 
embrace 
personal 
computer-based
workstations, IBM’s managers would have to move away from their
identity as “the people who controlled the design of the computers
that brought together the organization.” To fully embrace changing
roles of women, fashion industry managers would have to give up
their identity as “the people who anticipate trends.”
Until this identity shift takes place, many conversations about
scenarios seem to return, again and again, to the “Official Future”


scenario described on this page. This is a future based on the idea
that “things will work out okay tomorrow, because tomorrow will
basically continue the experience of today.” Most organizational
conversations encourage some form of the Official Future, as a kind
of built-in reinforcement of the company’s self-image.
Strategic conversations must perennially challenge the Official
Future. Even if it comes to pass, the organization will be stronger,
and more resilient, because it has considered alternatives. And in
the current global environment, very few organizations will enjoy a
long existence within their Official Future.
Strategic Conversation on a Small Scale
The method described here is well-suited to a large firm, where
subgroups can be formed. But it can also be adapted to a small-scale
company. We engage in exactly this type of process, for example, at
Global Business Network, which has about thirty full-time
employees.
As I write this, we are in the middle of a strategic conversation
initiative that literally involves everybody who works full-time in
the company. We aren’t aiming it at a specific product or decision;
our goal is to create a developmental learning process for the
organization. Because we’re small, we can’t afford to have only
some employees know what’s going on with our future. Everyone in
the office needs to understand the business deeply, from the
receptionist to the bookkeeper to the principals. Each person may
not be able to deliver every piece of the service, but they need to
understand how their part fits into the whole. And because our
services and customers are evolving constantly, that means everyone
needs to be a part of a conversation about our evolution.
We conduct part of our conversation in a private conference on a
computer conferencing system called The WELL (see this page of
this book), and part of the conversation in person. It had a


forerunner, in a sense, in our regular Wednesday morning meetings,
which we have held since we organized our company nine years
ago. We would sit in a circle and everyone would report, simply, on
what they were doing.
Those meetings, which still continue today (with ever-increasing
significance and sophistication), helped establish a climate in which
a strategic conversation could take place. The climate was also
abetted by a deliberate attempt to keep information open. For
example, the latest financial statistics are available in the
controller’s office. Everybody in the company knows how much
we’ve got in the bank, what we’re billing, what we’re owed, what
we owe, and how profitable we are.
But this openness, in itself, was not enough; there were still
concerns about the future that we left unspoken. Our current
strategic conversations began early in 1995, when Eamon Kelly, a
“scholar in residence” from Scotland, wrote a paper on the future of
GBN. “I’ve been watching things,” he said, “and here are my
thoughts.” Another staff member, Gerald Harris, reacted to the
paper by bringing it to other people’s attention: “Here’s how I think
we ought to carry these points forward.” Together, they took the
initiative to organize a series of conversations based upon the paper.
The conversations may continue indefinitely; they may evolve
into other collaborative, reflective activities. Perhaps the best aspect
of them is their emergent quality. No CEO or partner had to say,
“Here, you look at the future of the company,” to a staff member. In
a strategic conversation, the initiative stems from the commitment
that people hold to the organization as a whole. The conversation
channels and rewards that commitment by making the organization
more worthy of it; and it allows that commitment—and the
company’s environment—to evolve and develop.
OceanofPDF.com


APPENDIX: STEPS TO DEVELOPING SCENARIOS
Step One: Identify Focal Issue or Decision
When developing scenarios, it’s a good idea to begin “from the
inside out” rather than “from the outside in.” That is, begin with a
specific decision or issue, then build out toward the environment.
What will decision-makers in your company be thinking hard about
in the near future? What are the decisions that have to be made that
will have a long-term influence on the fortunes of the company?
Scenarios that are developed on the basis of differences in the
macro-economy—high growth versus low growth, say—may not
highlight differences that make a difference to a particular
company. To a movie studio different paths for the diffusion of new
distribution technology would generate more useful scenarios than
simple variations on economic growth. An automobile company will
want to see scenarios built around variations in energy prices. A
forest products company might want to look at scenarios that differ
around the number of housing starts. Like them, a person buying a
home will want to think about interest rates and the housing
market.
How can you be sure that the differences that distinguish your
scenarios will really make a difference to your business or your life?
The best way is to begin with important decisions that have to be
made and the mind-set of the management making them:
“Shall we build the major capital facility now on the drawing
boards?”
“Shall we launch a major new direction for R&D?”
“Shall we make an acquisition in a new industry?”
“Shall I change careers?”
