# Appendix: Steps to Developing Scenarios

Most of all, what is it that keeps me awake at night?
Step Two: Key Forces in the Local Environment
If the identification of a focal issue or decision is the first step,
then listing the key factors influencing the success or failure of that
decision is the second step—facts about customers, suppliers,
competitors, etc. What will decision-makers want to know when
making key choices? What will be seen as success or failure? What
are the considerations that will shape those outcomes?
Step Three: Driving Forces
Once the key factors have been listed, the third step involves
listing driving forces in the macro-environment that influence the
key factors identified earlier. In addition to a checklist of social,
economic, political, environmental, and technological forces,
another route to the relevant aspects of the macro-environment is
the question: What are the forces behind the micro-environmental
forces identified in Step Two? Some of these forces are
predetermined (e.g., often demographics) and some are highly
uncertain (e.g., public opinion). It is very useful to know what is
inevitable and necessary and what is unpredictable and still a
matter of choice.
It can be useful to imagine oneself in the future saying, “If only I
had known that” inflation would fall, or that a new competitor
would emerge from another country, or that regulations would
change drastically. It is not too hard to remember such comments in
the past. What guidance do they provide for the future?
This is the most research-intensive step in the process. In order to
adequately define the driving forces research is usually required.


Research may cover markets, new technology, political factors,
economic forces, and so on. One is searching for the major trends
and the trend breaks. The latter are the most difficult to find;
novelty is difficult to anticipate.
Step Four: Rank by Importance and Uncertainty
Next comes the ranking of key factors and driving forces on the
basis of two criteria: first, the degree of importance for the success
of the focal issue or decision identified in step one; second, the
degree of uncertainty surrounding those factors and trends. The
point is to identify the two or three factors or trends that are most
important and most uncertain.
Scenarios cannot differ over predetermined elements like the
inevitable aging of the baby boomers, because predetermined
elements are bound to be the same in all scenarios.
Step Five: Selecting Scenario Logics
The results of this ranking exercise are, in effect, the axes along
which the eventual scenarios will differ. Determining these axes is
among the most important steps in the entire scenario-generating
process. The goal is to end up with just a few scenarios whose
differences make a difference to decision-makers. If the scenarios
are to function as useful learning tools, the lessons they teach must
be based on issues basic to the success of the focal decision. And
those fundamental differences—or “scenario drivers”—must be few
in number in order to avoid a proliferation of different scenarios
around every possible uncertainty. Many things can happen, but
only a few scenarios can be developed in detail, or the process
dissipates.


While in the end one may boil the logic down to the directions of
a very few variables the process for getting there is not at all simple
or mechanical. It is more like playing with a set of issues until you
have reshaped and regrouped them in such a way that a logic
emerges and a story can be told.
Once the fundamental axes of crucial uncertainties have been
identified, it is sometimes useful to present them as a spectrum
(along one axis), or a matrix (with two axes), or a volume (with
three axes) in which different scenarios can be identified and their
details filled in.
The logic of a given scenario will be characterized by its location
in the matrix of most significant scenario drivers. For example, if an
automobile company determines that fuel prices and protectionism
are two of the most important scenario drivers, there will be four
basic scenario logics: (1) high fuel prices in a protectionist
environment—where domestic suppliers of small cars will have an
advantage; (2) high fuel prices in a global economy—where fuel-
efficient imports may capture the low end of the market; (3) low
fuel prices in a protectionist environment—where American gas
guzzlers will have a good market at home but not abroad; (4) low
fuel prices in a global economy—where there will be intense global
competition for fuel-efficient models, but larger cars may enjoy
strong foreign markets.
The scenario will usually want to be extended beyond such simple
logics to encompass, for example, more subtle issues like the
evolution of consumer markets or automotive regulation. Thus the
resulting scenarios may find their core of logic less in the variations
of the cells in a matrix and more in the themes and plots of a story.
In Chapter Eight we discussed the various types of plots that can
organize a scenario. The challenge here is identifying the plot that
(1) best captures the dynamics of the situation and (2)
communicates the point effectively. For example, one of the auto
scenarios above for a U.S. automaker might be built around the
logic of challenge and response: the challenge of foreign
competition and high gas prices.


Step Six: Fleshing Out the Scenarios
While the most important forces determine the logics that
distinguish the scenarios, fleshing out the skeletal scenarios can be
accomplished by returning to the lists of key factors and trends
identified in steps two and three.
Each key factor and trend should be given some attention in each
scenario. Sometimes it is immediately apparent which side of an
uncertainty should be located in which scenario, sometimes not. If
two scenarios differ over protectionist or nonprotectionist policies,
then it probably makes sense to put a higher inflation rate in the
protectionist 
scenario 
and 
a 
lower 
inflation 
rate 
in 
the
nonprotectionist scenario. It is just such connections and mutual
implications that scenarios should be designed to reveal.
Then weave the pieces together in the form of a narrative. How
would the world get from here to there? What events might be
necessary to make the end point of the scenario plausible? Are there
known individuals whose ascendency in the public eye might
facilitate or help to characterize a given scenario, such as Russian
Premier Boris Yeltsin or U.S. Senator William Bradley?
Step Seven: Implications
Once the scenarios have been developed in some detail, then it is
time to return to the focal issue or decision identified in step one to
rehearse the future. How does the decision look in each scenario?
What vulnerabilities have been revealed? Is the decision or strategy
robust across all scenarios, or does it look good in only one or two
of the scenarios? If a decision looks good in only one of several
scenarios, then it qualifies as a high-risk gamble—a bet-the-
company strategy—especially if the company has little control over


the likelihood of the required scenario coming to pass. How could
that strategy be adapted to make it more robust if the desired
scenario shows signs of not happening?
Step Eight: Selection of Leading Indicators and Signposts
It is important to know as soon as possible which of several
scenarios is closest to the course of history as it actually unfolds.
Sometimes the direction of history is obvious, especially with regard
to factors like the health of the overall economy, but sometimes the
leading indicators for a given scenario can be subtle. How, for
example, should one calibrate the speed of economic restructuring
from a smokestack economy toward an information-intensive
economy?—by help-wanted advertising according to different SIC
codes?—by union memberships?—by subscriptions to indicative
periodicals?
Once the different scenarios have been fleshed out and their
implications for the focal issue determined, then it’s worth spending
time and imagination on identifying a few indicators to monitor in
an ongoing way. If those indicators are selected carefully and
imaginatively, the company will gain a jump on its competition in
knowing what the future holds for a given industry and how that
future is likely to affect strategies and decisions in the industry.
If the scenarios have been built according to the previous steps,
then the scenarios will be able to translate movements of a few key
indicators into an orderly set of industry-specific implications. The
logical coherence that was built into the scenarios will allow logical
implications of leading indicators to be drawn out of the scenarios.
Additional Considerations for Creating Scenarios


Some rules of thumb have been gained from long years and much
experience with scenario development in many companies and
settings:
1. Beware of ending up with three scenarios, though in practice
we often do. People not familiar with scenarios or their use will be
tempted to identify one of the three as the “middle” or “most likely”
scenario and then will treat it as a single-point forecast, and all the
advantages of multiple-scenario methodology will be lost. But also
avoid having too many scenarios. When one is working with more
than four scenarios, they begin to blur and lose their meaningful
distinctions as decision tools.
2. In general, avoid assigning probabilities to different scenarios,
because of the temptation to consider seriously only the scenario
with the highest probability. It may make sense to develop a pair of
equally highly probable scenarios, and a pair of potentially high-
impact but relatively low-probability “wild card” scenarios. In no
case does it make good sense to compare the probability of an event
in one scenario against the probability of another event in another
scenario, because the two events are assumed to take place in
radically different environments, and the assignment of probabilities
depends on very different assumptions about the future.
3. Pay a great deal of attention to naming your scenarios. Names
should succeed in telegraphing the scenario logics. If the names are
vivid and memorable, the scenarios will have a much better chance
of making their way into the decision-making and decision-
implementing process across the company. Because the name
evoked such a powerful and evocative concept, Shell’s “World of
Internal Contradictions” (WIC) scenario survived for more than a
decade as a useful tool even as the world changed.
4. Selection of the scenario development team should be guided
by three major considerations. First, support and participation from
the highest levels of management is essential. Those who make and
implement decisions should be involved in the creation of these
tools for decision-making. Second, a broad range of functions and
divisions should be represented on the scenario development team.


Third, look for imaginative people with open minds who can work
well together as a team.
5. You can tell you have good scenarios when they are both
plausible and surprising; when they have the power to break old
stereotypes; and when the makers assume ownership of them and
put them to work. Scenario making is intensely participatory, or it
fails.
OceanofPDF.com


ENDNOTES
THE PATHFINDER’S TALE
The planner and the executive are partners in taking a long view.
1 Pierre Wack, “The Gentle Art of Reperceiving” (two-part article),
Harvard Business Review: “Scenarios: Uncharted Waters Ahead”
(September-October, 1985), pp. 73–89; “Scenarios: Shooting the
Rapids” (November-December, 1985), pp. 139–150.
“Unpredictability in every field is the result of the conquest of the whole
of the present world by scientific power.”
2 Paul Valéry, The Outlook for Intelligence. Translated by Denise
Folliot and Jackson Mathews. Edited by Jackson Mathews.
(Princeton, N.J.: Bollingen Foundation/Princeton University Press,
1962; New York: Harper & Row, 1963; paperback, 1989).
THE SMITH & HAWKEN STORY: THE PROCESS OF SCENARIO-
BUILDING
Paul had a varied background: he had founded the Erewhon natural
foods distribution company …
3 Paul Hawken, The Magic of Findhorn (New York: Harper & Row,
1975).
This phenomenon resonated with a trend we had been tracking, and
which Paul would later describe in his book …
4 Paul Hawken, The Next Economy (New York: Holt, Reinhart, and
Wilson, 1983).
There is a wonderful book by novelist John Gardner …
5 John Gardner, The Art of Fiction: Notes on Craft for Young Writers
(New York: Knopf: Distributed by Random House, 1983).
THE SCENARIO-BUILDING ANIMAL
